* 1754186
* The Origin and Survival of Chemical Heterogeneities in the Earth's Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Igor Puchtel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2022
* USD 306,456.00

Accurately determining the Earth's chemical composition has been and remains one
of the most fundamental challenges in Earth sciences. It has important
implications not only for the long-debated question of how terrestrial planets
form and evolve, but also for our understanding of the consequences of the
ongoing processes on our planet. The Earth's mantle is the largest of all
terrestrial reservoirs; it constitutes 83% of the Earth's volume and extends to
2900 km below its surface. The chemically and isotopically heterogeneous nature
of this vast reservoir has long been established as a result of previous
pioneering studies of the terrestrial rock record. Some of the heterogeneities
have been argued to be primordial, reflecting initial planetary
accretion/differentiation and magma ocean crystallization processes. Others were
likely created as a result of a protracted, violent terrestrial accretion
history, or to have resulted from later processes associated with the dynamic
regime of the planet, especially crustal recycling. Despite the long-term,
concerted research effort, the nature, origin, scale, and longevity of early
mantle chemical and isotope heterogeneities are still not well understood. This
project is aimed at filling the existing gaps in our understanding of these
fundamental issues by applying a carefully chosen, comprehensive set of state-
of-the-art modern analytical tools to a collection of unique 3.5 to 2.7 billion
year old komatiite samples from western Australia. These samples are especially
advantageous to study processes that occurred within the first 2 billion years
of Earth history, before the crust formation and recycling processes, similar to
those occurring today, took over as the main driver of chemical differentiation
of the Earth's interior and erased all the evidence of Earth's youthful
exuberance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is aimed at constraining
the origin and temporal evolution of chemical and isotopic heterogeneities in
the early Earth's mantle. The primary goals are to: (1) assess the magnitude of
chemical/isotopic heterogeneities recorded in the mantle sources of 3.52 to 2.69
Ga komatiites from Western Australia, (2) establish which of such fundamental
early Earth processes, as late accretion, magma ocean crystallization,
primordial crust extraction, and crustal recycling, were responsible for
creating these heterogeneities, and (3) integrate the new short- and long-lived
isotopic and trace element abundance data for these rocks with the existing data
for Archean komatiite systems into models for the origin and temporal evolution
of global chemical/isotope heterogeneities in the Earth's mantle. In order to
achieve these goals, the team will study isotope systematics, and lithophile
trace element and highly siderophile element abundances in diamond drill core
samples of the 3.5 to 2.7 Ga komatiite systems using the thermal ionization
mass-spectrometry and inductively-coupled plasma mass-spectrometry techniques.
These komatiitic systems are from the ancient Pilbara and Yilgarn Cratons of
Western Australia, and their formation spans a time interval of ca. 800 Ma of
Earth history. These localities were selected in order to cover the greatest
possible extent of temporal variations within spatially related Archean cratons,
because the selected samples are well preserved by Archean standards and are
expected to provide a window into the early terrestrial mantle, and because
limited existing data indicate that these komatiite systems record very early
mantle differentiation processes. The results are expected to allow us to assess
the possible effects of differentiation of a primordial magma ocean, late
accretion, and crustal recycling, as well as permit new constraints to be placed
on the mixing times of the mantle during the first half of Earth's
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.