* 1754199
* Collaborative Research:  RUI SG:  Evolutionary relationships and systematics of riverweeds (Podostemaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* C. Thomas Philbrick, Western Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 60,728.00

The riverweed family (Podostemaceae) is the largest entirely aquatic family of
flowering plants and provides important habitats and food sources for many
aquatic animals. Many of the estimated 300 riverweed species are narrowly
distributed and incompletely known, and genealogical relationships within the
family are uncertain. This project will produce the first family-wide estimate
of genealogical relationships among riverweeds using DNA sequence data, and a
better understanding of relationships, morphological variation, and will clarify
the number of different species that exist. This project will provide broad
training opportunities for undergraduate students in both field and laboratory
research, including molecular biology, plant structural analyses, database
development and management, and taxonomomy at two Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions located in Connecticut and Kentucky. DNA sequence data generated by
the project will be disseminated via publicly accessible databases, and newly
collected plant specimens will be deposited within natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a molecular systematic
and phylogenetic analysis of the flowering plant family Podostemaceae, and a
taxonomic monograph of the genus Apiniagia (Podostemaceae). Podostemaceae
species exhibit high phenotypic plasticity and have highly modified growth
forms, both of which contribute to taxonomic confusion. This project will
assemble a well-sampled and robust phylogeny of the family, with a focus on
neotropical taxa, using morphological data and molecular data obtained via high
throughput DNA sequencing. Molecular data will be collected from whole
chloroplast genomes and select mitochondrial and nuclear loci. This phylogeny
will be used to circumscribe all neotropical genera of Podostemaceae, understand
convergent patterns of morphological evolution, and test the hypothesis that the
distribution of the neotropical Podostemoideae clade is largely explained by
major river capture events during the Cenozoic. Using the results of the
phylogenetic analyses in combination with morphological investigations, a
taxonomic monograph for the genus Apiniagia will be produced. This genus is the
largest, most morphologically complex, and taxonomically difficult genus of
neotropical Podostemaceae. The monograph will include nomenclatural updates,
morphological descriptions, and taxonomic keys, in addition to newly developed
online resources to broadly disseminate the results. This project will also
produce a new, free tool for the systematics community, a Darwin Core Archive
export option for the Symbiota platform specific to monographic data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.