* 1754085
* CyberCorps(R): SFS (Scholarship Track): Renewal: An Interdisciplinary Cyber Security Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Cusick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,396,371.00

The State University of New York at Buffalo (UB), a designated National Center
of Excellence (CAE) in cyber security education and a CAE in cyber security
research (CAE-R) proposes to continue and expand its participation in the
CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified
cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce. The primary
goal of this project is to attract students from middle school through graduate
school to become information security problem-solvers and security
professionals. UB is uniquely positioned to build on an already successful
program and develop a comprehensive cyber security curriculum based on best
practices, experiential learning and grounded in research. The current
Information Assurance and Cyber Security (IA/CS) will be expanded to the
undergraduate level by developing suitable pathways to pursue IA/CS with the
goal of recruiting some of them for graduate studies. The SFS program funds
projects that address cybersecurity education and workforce development,
including funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to further develop the
broad-based Information Assurance and Cyber Security (IA/CS) program by
examining and building on existing research on the security of mobile devices,
computer forensics, and privacy in social networks. The educational plan is to
train scholars in both technical and managerial tracks, under one program. UB
leverages state-of-the-art resources: the Regional Computer Forensics Lab (RCFL)
located in Buffalo, and 15 NSA-accredited courses that include four new
offerings - an integrative course in IA, wireless networks security, e-commerce
security and digital forensics. The proposing team has active involvement with
underrepresented groups through the local Minority Management Society, the SUNY
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program, and the Women in
Management and Engineering and Science groups to recruit students and conduct IA
awareness workshops in Buffalo. Partnerships with local industries will allow
for educational opportunities and talent development on the emerging blockchain
technology. These opportunities for stakeholder engagement will serve to further
disseminate the efforts of the IA/CS community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.