* 1754078
* REU-Site: Regional Initiative to Promote Undergraduate Participation in Experimental and Computational Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Shane Catledge, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 324,975.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will
host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)-site in experimental and
computational materials research. This REU-site project plans to recruit
students from underrepresented groups and academic institutions where research
opportunities are limited. This project offers a broad range of
interdisciplinary materials research experiences to undergraduate students with
a diversity of backgrounds in physics, chemistry, applied mathematics, and
engineering. The undergraduate students will gain experience in materials
synthesis, materials characterization and computer modeling and simulations
during their ten-week research stay at UAB campus. The scientific research
projects have been specifically developed for undergraduate students by an
interdisciplinary team consisting of science and engineering faculty at UAB.
This project will continue to provide lecture series and workshops in materials
growth and characterization, research ethics and professionalism, innovation and
entrepreneurship and preparation for graduate school to all participants. Our
REU participants will publish their findings in peer-reviewed journals and/or
present at professional meetings leading to a broad dissemination of new
knowledge created in the undergraduate research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: REU-research projects are organized
in four research clusters: (1) materials under extreme conditions (2) materials
for energy applications, (3) materials for sensors and laser applications, and
(4) biomaterials for implants, tissue engineering and drug delivery
applications. The undergraduate research projects contribute to fundamental
understanding of phase transformations and degradation of materials under
extreme conditions, novel materials for fuel cells, materials for nanoscale
sensors and mid-IR lasers, and 3-D printed biomaterials and stimuli responsive
polymers. Some research projects will also involve the use of national x-ray
synchrotron facilities and neutron diffraction facilities in materials research.
The undergraduate student projects have short-term achievable milestones, while
simultaneously contributing to longer-term scientific goals and technological
applications. Our teaming arrangement of REU-participants with faculty and
graduate students, giving poster and oral presentations, writing a research-
style paper, and attending training seminars in scientific communications and
ethics will help REU students see the "big picture" of what it takes to develop
into a "research scientist" with the critical skills needed for analyzing,
interpreting and presenting scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.