* 1754211
* Visual Perception as Retrospective Bayesian Decoding from High- to Low-level Features in Working Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Ning Qian, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2022
* USD 513,163.00

When looking at a scene, we typically have a quick and accurate perceptual
understanding of its high-level category, for example, a home, office, street,
or jungle. We rarely pay attention to the scene's low-level properties such as
luminance values at various spots unless we are asked to report them, and even
then, we are not very accurate about them. The fact that higher-level properties
of a scene are more relevant to our behavior than low-level properties has
informed global precedence theories of perception. However, experimental studies
of the brain have established that lower-level features in a scene are detected
before higher-level features; this result somehow led to the commonly used, but
rarely tested, assumption that visual perception follows the same low-to-high-
level hierarchy of feature detection. This project attempts to resolve this
apparent contradiction by separating feature detection and perception, and by
integrating visual perception and working memory, the brain's short-term storage
of relevant visual information. The project will provide a new computational
framework for understanding perception and memory which challenges traditional
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, vision can be viewed as involving
both encoding and decoding. Encoding refers to how visual stimuli evoke sensory
responses in the brain whereas decoding concerns how these responses eventually
lead to the subjective perception of the stimuli. A common assumption of many
existing models is that decoding follows the same low-to-high-level hierarchy as
encoding, but this was never rigorously tested. Additionally, under natural
viewing conditions, the small fovea and frequent saccades introduce delays
between sensory encoding of different parts of a scene and perceptual
integration of the whole scene, suggesting that working memory must be involved
in perceptual decoding; yet previous decoding models do not consider working
memory. This project aims to address these issues using psychophysical and
computational methods, with the specific goal of elucidating the nature of
decoding hierarchy in light of working-memory properties. Specifically, compared
with lower-level stimulus features, higher-level features are more invariant and
categorical, thus requiring less information to specify and permitting more
stable maintenance in noisy working memory. The brain should therefore
prioritize decoding of reliable higher-level features and then use them to
constrain and improve the decoding of unstable lower-level features in memory
(when necessary). The project will test some surprising predictions of this
retrospective Bayesian decoding theory and develop a neural network
implementation of the theory.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.