* 1754205
* RR: Workshop on Robust Social and Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Joachim Vandekerckhove, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 02/28/2019
* USD 62,391.00

Psychological scientists have an impressive arsenal of research methodologies at
their disposal.  Many of the currently popular methods are tried and tested and
have been in use for 100 years or more.  Recently, however, exciting new methods
have been developed that make use of modern computing technologies, advances in
statistics, and big data. Because these modern methods often allow researchers
to process large amounts of data at once and ask very detailed questions, they
often give results that are robust (reliable and replicable). In order to bring
these robust research methods to the forefront of psychological and social
science, a "Workshop on Robust Social and Behavioral Sciences" will be held,
which will be attended by some of the world's foremost experts in this
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important "robust" methods are (1)
multifaceted randomized designs that enhance generalizability to a wider set of
conditions, (2) robust statistics that are less sensitive to common violations
of assumptions (including, notably, the assumption of random sample selection),
(3) alternatives to classical hypothesis testing such as parameter estimation,
process modeling, model selection, and Bayesian inference, and (4) collection of
intensive data such as data generated by social media, data collected via Amazon
Mechanical Turk, or data output by "many-labs" research consortia.  During the
Workshop, attendees will discuss the pros and cons of these research methods
that are adapted to the demands and affordances of our field in the present
day.  An interdisciplinary panel led by an expert in cultural and behavioral
change will evaluate the applicability of these methods to different subfields,
identify discipline-specific challenges, and prepare a "road map" document
outlining current such challenges for methodologists to address.  Attendees will
also produce video lectures on the topic of robust methods, and these lectures
will be informed by comments from the interdisciplinary panel.  All products of
the Workshop will be made public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.