* 1754909
* Collaborative Research:  Cognitive deficiency as a source of reproductive isolation between hybridizing species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Amber Rice, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2024
* USD 386,183.00

When different species breed with each other, or hybridize, the two original
species can lose their distinctiveness unless hybrids become disadvantaged and
less fit than their parents. Most research into hybrid disadvantage has focused
on hybrid sterility or embryonic developmental problems. However, reductions in
cognitive abilities such as learning and memory could also cause disadvantages
for hybrids. Learning and memory are important for many species, but whether
deficits in hybrids' learning and memory can function in keeping species
separate is unknown. This collaborative project will evaluate the possibility
that learning and memory deficiencies maintain the species boundary between
hybridizing chickadee species. This work will fill an important void in our
understanding of the development and maintenance of species, a fundamental
evolutionary process. It will inspire new avenues of research in evolution,
behavior, and neuroscience. The research also has important implications for the
conservation of biodiversity. With this project, the researchers will train
postdoctoral and graduate students. Additionally, underrepresented undergraduate
students will gain integrative training in research and science communication.
Students involved in mentored research at each institution during the academic
year will work on a different aspect of the project at one of the other involved
institutions during the summer. As a part of the summer experience, the students
will collaborate with the Bird Academy at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology to
develop a high-traffic online module on bird hybridization. They will therefore
learn to employ diverse research approaches to address a common question, and to
communicate science to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How learning and memory
function in hybrids is relatively unexplored. These traits have been shaped by
natural selection, but their role in the maintenance of species boundaries is
unknown. The overall objective of the proposed research is to integrate behavior
with neuroanatomy and genomics to evaluate the potential for hybrid deficiencies
in cognitive ability to contribute to postzygotic reproductive isolation. Using
naturally-hybridizing black-capped and Carolina chickadees, the proposed
research will test the central hypothesis that selection acts against hybrids
deficient in memory and learning, and that these deficiencies are reflected in
neuroanatomic and genomic variation. This system is well suited for testing the
role of cognition in postzygotic reproductive isolation because learning and
memory are important for fitness in both species. Preliminary data suggest that
hybrid chickadees have deficient memories and small hippocampal neurons, and
that genes linked to learning and memory are involved in reproductive isolation.
The research team will address the central hypothesis in an eastern Pennsylvania
hybrid zone transect. With behavioral tests of learning and memory, comparative
neuroanatomy, RNA sequencing, and whole-genome resequencing, the research will:
1) determine the relative learning and memory abilities of black-capped,
Carolina, and hybrid chickadees; 2) quantify neuroanatomic differences between
hybrid and parental-species chickadees; and 3) identify signatures of
reproductive isolation and misexpression in genes underlying cognition. Through
the completion and integration of these aims, this research will connect
cognition with speciation in the first test of hybrid learning and memory
deficiency as a postzygotic reproductive isolating
barrier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.