* 1755141
* Mechanism of trehalose control of shoot development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 683,784.00

How plants coordinate their growth and development according to the availability
of resources, including sugars produced through photosynthesis, is largely
unknown. The project will study a gene called RAMOSA3 that produces an enzyme
that can degrade a type of sugar called trehalose-6-phosphate (T6P). T6P is
thought to be an important hormone in plants, similar to insulin in animals. The
researchers have found unexpected properties of the RAMOSA3 enzyme, including
being present in the nucleus of cells, and interacting with a class of proteins
that bind to ribonucleic acids. These findings suggest that RAMOSA3 is doing
something different to its expected function as an enzyme, and the researchers
will explore the ways in which RAMOSA3 is able to control how plants grow.
Broader Impacts: Plants adapt their growth according to available resources, but
how crosstalk between metabolism and development is achieved is not well
understood, and the project outcomes will give a clearer understanding of
relevance to agricultural productivity. The researchers will also contribute to
outreach and education by training graduate and high school students as well as
a post-doctoral researcher. The investigator directs a program, which allows
local high school students, including minorities, to experience life in a
research lab. The investigator's lab will also develop an educational and
research exchange with a Middle School in Brooklyn, New York, with hands on
experiments used to confer the excitement of scientific research to students,
and discussions of how science benefits society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
disaccharide trehalose and its intermediate trehalose-6-phosphate (T6P) have
emerged as important regulators of sugar metabolism in plants, and trehalose
pathway mutants or mis-expression lines have specific phenotypes affecting
branching, flowering time and drought sensitivity. However, the molecular
mechanism by which T6P controls these processes is unknown. This research
project is to understand the mechanism by which RAMOSA3 (RA3), which encodes a
trehalose phosphate phosphatase (TPP) enzyme, controls maize shoot branching.
Preliminary results suggest that RA3 acts in the nucleus, where it is found in
sub-nuclear domains, and interacts genetically and physically with RNA binding
proteins. These findings suggest that RA3 may act in a gene regulatory network
with RNA binding proteins, to control expression of downstream genes in response
to metabolic signals. The discovery of RNA binding proteins that interact with
RA3 provides an opportunity to understand how a metabolic enzyme can control
gene expression necessary to direct plant development or other aspects of plant
growth. The research will build on these findings by elucidating downstream
factors and interacting proteins and RNAs that will lead to new emergent models
of how RA3 functions as an integrator across scales in metabolic and
developmental control. The project will also train students at multiple levels
and will contribute to public education of plant biology research at middle and
high school levels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.