* 1755118
* Collaborative Research:  The genetic basis of call diversity in acoustic insects
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Oliver Beckers, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/29/2024
* USD 171,244.00

The behavior of animals plays an important role in biological diversity. For
example, many insects have specific calls which are barriers to mating between
species. This diversity is in large part under the control of genes. Patterns of
gene expression and regulation during development can also result in specific
behaviors. However, it is unclear how differences in behavior relate to genetic
differences: what is the contribution of changes in the actual genes relative to
that of changes in gene regulation? This remains a fundamental open question of
general importance, far beyond the diverse calls of insects. In this research
this question is addressed in a katydid species that produces two alternative
calls in response to the environment experienced during development. The
differences between these calls within a population are due to differences in
gene regulation. Population-level differences also occur across the geographic
range of this insect, and this variation is largely caused by differences in
individual's genes. This allows the assessment of the contributions of both
genes and genetic regulation to the diversity of behavior in this species. This
project integrates genetics, neurobiology, behavior, and evolution. Its outcomes
contribute to the understanding of the genetic foundation of biodiversity and
are relevant in many areas outside of animal behavior, including medical
research. Broader impacts include training opportunities for students of diverse
backgrounds that prepare them for the challenges of careers in life sciences.
Outreach activities introduce the public to modern biology research in a
relatable study system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the genetic underpinnings of the call diversity in Neoconocephalus
katydids. The species Neoconocephalus triops undergoes developmental plasticity
(DP) that results in two alternative advertisement calls with species-level
differences in two temporal properties (pulse rate and verse pattern). DP can be
induced reliably by varying the photoperiod before sexual maturation. First, the
relevant developmental stages and tissues (central pattern generators, CPG) in
the CNS that contribute to the call pattern generation will be identified. Aim 1
identifies the location of the CPGs using lesion experiments, calcium imaging,
and selectively heating of individual ganglia. In aim 2, the investigators
identify the sensitive phase of phenotype induction by varying the exposure time
of short day conditions and analyzing adult call phenotypes. Aim 3 explores the
genetic underpinnings of the diversity of call patterns. RNAseq will be
conducted using tissues containing the CPGs collected at the relevant times
identified in aim 2. Correlations between phenotypes and differences in gene
expression patterns as well as genetic differences among populations will be
identified. Comparisons include two call phenotypes of three populations that
differ significantly in call pattern and extent of DP. In aim 4, the
investigators will manipulate the expression levels of candidate genes
identified in aim 3, using RNAi and examine the consequences for call
phenotypes, moving from identifying correlations to testing causation. The
outcomes provide testable hypotheses about the genetic control of call
variation, which plays a significant role in the diversification of this group.
Training and outreach activities are focusing on the public and students of
rural areas in MO, KY, and WV, which are traditionally underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.