* 1755587
* CRII: CHS: Developing Next-Generation Rapid Prototyping Tools to Catalyze Innovation in Smart Textiles
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Laura Devendorf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2020
* USD 189,686.00

This project works towards rapid prototyping smart textiles by generating the
core insights necessary to support broader participation in this unique domain.
This research will generate these insights through the design, development, and
systematic evaluation of a tool for designing smart textiles. Smart textiles
combine age-old processes of knitting and weaving with advances in fiber-based
smart materials to create soft and flexible circuits for a wide range of
applications. To date, smart textiles have been designed to do things like
harvest energy from body movement or integrate the display and sensing
capacities of a smartphone on the sleeve of one's shirt. While initial advances
in smart textiles reveal their potential to significantly benefit society, the
difficulty of prototyping smart textiles is limiting innovation in this nascent
but transformational design space.

This research will support innovation in smart textiles and advance the state of
the art in computer-aided design and fabrication by synthesizing the workflows
of textile and circuit design. Developing the prototyping tool will require the
following: (1) developing computational representations of smart textiles; (2)
developing and evaluating novel techniques for bridging textile and circuit
design, and (3) studying the unique forms of expressivity and engagement that
emerge from the tool. In the process, this research will produce a set of
generalizable data structures and user interface techniques to support broad
audiences in designing and fabricating smart textiles. Additionally, the
insights this research will produce on new forms of expression and engagement
that emerge from combining computation and craft are necessary to further
ubiquitous computing research, which seeks to integrate technology into the rich
material landscapes that characterize everyday life. While many will benefit
from exploring the applicability of smart textiles in their lives and work,
prior research suggests that the practices this research will make possible are
likely to resonate with under-represented groups in science and engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.