* 1755336
* Greater than the sum of its parts? The role of mechanical sensitivity and integration in the evolution of power-amplified systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Andrew Suarez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 613,182.00

Trap-jaw ants are renowned for their extreme ability to amplify power with their
mouthparts, which can generate forces hundreds of times greater than their body
weight and reach speeds over 60 meters per second (over 130 miles per hour).
Moreover, they do this using very simple, fracture resistant materials. The
research will combine high-speed videography, biomechanics, and mathematics to
characterize and model power-amplification in a diverse group of trap-jaw ants.
The findings will provide insight into the mechanisms animals use to achieve
extremely high speeds and forces with their limbs and to determine how variation
in these high-performance biological systems generates diverse animal forms. The
research also has the potential to inform biologically-inspired applications for
robotics and machinery. The project will provide interdisciplinary research
training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students, including those
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. The researchers will
also run robotics summer camps for children, exposing students to the many ways
insects can be used to provide inspiration for innovations in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to examine
the mechanical sensitivity and integration of power-amplified systems using a
combination of experimental data and computer-based biomechanical models. The
results of these mechanical analyses will be incorporated into phylogenetic
comparative analyses to test whether patterns of mechanical sensitivity
influence morphological and ecological diversification. Specifically, the
research will take advantage of repeated transitions to power amplification in
trap-jaw ants to explore how performance metrics (such as speed, force and
energy) respond to shifts in morphology. The power-amplified trap-jaw system is
composed of multiple components (i.e. muscle, latch, spring) all of which may be
important to several aspects of performance (i.e. speed, force). The specific
aims of the project are to 1) evaluate how various performance variables of the
trap-jaw system (speed, force, damage resistance) vary with morphological
changes in components of the system, 2) test multiple hypotheses for the source
of the power-amplifying mechanism in trap-jaw ants, and 3) determine how
patterns of biomechanical integration influence evolutionary patterns within and
among trap-jaw clades. The interdisciplinary research approach offers a
mechanistic framework for evaluating the integration and evolution of
biomechanical systems, and how ecological function can influence morphological
diversification. The research findings have the potential to provide
translational applications for the bio-inspired design of high-performance
robotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.