* 1755254
* Reserve Driver Online Scheduling for Transit Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Diwakar Gupta, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2019
* USD 201,753.00

The objective of this award is to develop randomized algorithms to improve
utilization of reserve drivers when transit agencies (e.g., bus, light rail,
subway, ferry) need to use them to cover work that arises from planned and
unplanned absences, bus breakdowns, weather, and special events. The developed
algorithms will maximize reward (amount of work assigned to on-call drivers) by
trading off the reward that would be realized if a job being considered were
assigned to a reserve driver against a potentially higher reward from a future
job, which could be rejected on account of the earlier decision. The algorithms
will achieve this goal by strategically assigning some work to overtime drivers
to improve the overall utilization of reserve drivers. Such decisions will be
based on the outcomes of random draws from probability distributions specified
by the algorithm. Because the job inter-arrival times and durations vary
significantly from one day to the next, average performance based algorithms can
perform poorly in many instances. Therefore, developed algorithms will aim to
achieve the best performance in the worst-case. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the research will produce a real-time solution to the reserve driver
work assignment problem that guarantees performance no worse than a certain
threshold of the best possible performance, where the latter is realized if all
pieces of work are known before making work assignments and such assignments are
made optimally. It will provide a proof-in-concept for a class of algorithms
that include a discretionary parameter, to be selected by the user, whose value
will serve to convey the degree of a user's preference for one of two
approaches: accept all jobs that can be scheduled, or deploy a randomized
algorithm whose recommendation depends on the job length. If successful, the
results of this research will serve to automate the reserve-driver dispatch
process and make work assignment more efficient, potentially saving transit
agencies thousands of dollars daily. Data show relatively poor utilization of
reserve drivers (50 to 60 percent range) and simultaneously high expenditures on
overtime (of the order of tens of thousand of dollars daily for large transit
agencies). More broadly, this work will also contribute to the development of
new scheduling approaches in highly random application domains.