* 1755943
* CRII: RI: Subevent Acquisition and Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Ruihong Huang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2021
* USD 173,140.00

Subevents that describe physical actions composing an event, widely exist in
event descriptions and provide the evidence that an event is occurring. For
example, if a person were to explain how he knew that the crowd gathered in the
street was rioting, he might point to the shouting of political slogans or tires
lit on fire. In this instance, the riot would be the event. The slogan-shouting
and tire-burning would be the subevents. Knowledge of subevents provides
important information for characterizing events, and has great potential to
benefit various event oriented applications, such as event detection, event
visualization, event summarization and extreme event management. This project
aims to acquire subevents from text corpora by recognizing various contextual
patterns that contain subevents. This research on subevent identification will
bring us one step closer to automatic event ontology construction, which
organizes events based on their relations (subevent, precursor, consequence,
cause, condition and purpose, etc.) with a central type of event. This project
will integrate research with education, train and prepare the future NLP
researchers as well as expose early undergraduate students and high school
students to NLP research, with a focus on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An initial subevent
extractor has been developed that leverages a specific type of sentential and
local context to recognize subevents. This project will extend the approach to
explore diverse types of contexts that suggest subevents, by incorporating event
coreference resolution into the learning loop. The task of event coreference
resolution aims to identify event mentions that refer to the same real world
event, and coreferential event mentions can appear in distinct contexts from the
same document or from multiple documents. In the proposed research, new contexts
identified through event coreference resolution that contain subevents will be
used to acquire more subevents from a text corpus. In addition, this project
will conduct extensive analysis of learned subevents. The project will apply
clustering algorithms as well as analyze document samples to understand the
usefulness of subevents in categorizing and identifying properties of the parent
event as well as in identifying causal relations involving the parent
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.