* 1755305
* Developmental Mechanisms of Scale Loss and Replacement in the Evolution of Catfishes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* David Stock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 587,962.00

It is generally thought that the loss of a structure in evolution is accompanied
by the loss of the genetic information needed to produce it, thereby preventing
its reappearance. An apparent exception to such irreversibility of evolution is
provided by the evolution of the skin covering of catfishes. A common ancestor
of this group lost its outer skeleton of scales, resulting in the "naked" skin
characteristic of most living species. An outer skeleton has reappeared in the
skin of several families of "armored" catfishes, however, in the form of bony
plates known as scutes. This project tests the hypothesis that the genetic
program for making scales is retained in a latent form in naked catfishes and
was reactivated in the origin of armored catfish scutes. Determining the extent
to which organisms possess a genetic "memory" of past adaptations will provide
insight into the ability of species to respond to environmental change with
evolution rather than extinction. The project will provide research
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral trainees, as well
as materials for enhancing the principal investigator's undergraduate courses in
genetics and fish biology. Fish colonies maintained for the work will be used to
introduce primary and secondary school students to a variety of unusual
reproductive behaviors employed by catfishes. Finally, an exhibit will be
prepared at the University of Colorado Natural History Museum on the structure
and evolution of fish scales (including relevant work by the museum's founder
conducted over a hundred years ago).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The degree and nature
of retention and reactivation of genetic programs for the trunk dermal skeleton
in catfishes will be investigated by comparison of gene expression and
regulation in the zebrafish (representing the ancestral scaled condition), two
species of naked catfishes and two species of armored catfishes. The hypothesis
that the expression of scale initiation genes was lost in naked catfishes and
regained in the scutes of armored catfishes will be tested by in situ
hybridization analysis. The hypothesis that cis-regulatory elements and/or
trans-acting factors regulating gene expression in ancestral scales have been
retained in naked catfishes and co-opted for the development of scutes will be
tested by reporter transgenic analysis of DNA flanking zebrafish and catfish
genes in larvae of multiple species. These reporter transgenic experiments,
combined with deletion of zebrafish cis-regulatory elements using
CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing, will also provide insight into pleiotropic
function of the elements, a feature likely to preserve them in the absence of
trait expression. Recurrent origin of complex structures using conserved genetic
programs, as hypothesized for the system under study, has been labeled "deep
homology" and its discovery represents one of the triumphs of Evolutionary
Developmental Biology. The proposed research will contribute to the
understanding of deep homology not only at the commonly studied level of gene
expression but at that of the underlying genomic elements as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.