* 1755330
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the molecular diversification of self recognition through ray-finned fish innate immune receptor families
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Jeffrey Yoder, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 524,897.00

The ability of an organism to recognize invading pathogens, infected cells, or
cancerous cells and kill them without causing excessive damage to itself is
essential for survival. From fish to frogs to humans, all of the ~60,000
vertebrate species on earth use sophisticated immune cells to "inspect" every
other cell in their body to determine if it is friend or foe. These immune cells
possess a large number of protein receptors on their surface that work to
maintain the peace. Many of these receptors are designed to recognize specific
types of pathogens, forming a front line of defense. However, pathogens
typically reproduce quickly, allowing them to evolve or change faster than most
vertebrates and thereby develop ways to escape detection. In response,
vertebrates have evolved a complex immune system that includes large groups of
receptors that evolve faster than most other proteins and are specialized for
anticipated as well as unanticipated pathogens. Fish represent half of all
vertebrates and, as a group, are a great model for studying the genetic basis of
these defenses. This project will use new and existing genomic data from
numerous fish species to determine the origins of these receptors and study how
these receptors have evolved to achieve the diversity observed today. Using fish
as a model, this work will reveal fundamental aspects of immunity in all
vertebrates. Data collected from this project will be incorporated into multiple
new exhibits at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ray-finned fish (Actinopterygii) constitute over
half of the extant vertebrates on earth, making them a powerful system for
understanding the genetic and functional evolution of immune genes. Fish not
only share certain immune gene families with mammals, but also encode a number
of highly diverse "fish-specific" immune gene families. Understanding the
factors that underlie the diversification of gene families involved in immunity
is critical for explaining the origins and sub-/neo-functionalization of new
genes and for understanding the molecular basis of pathogen recognition and
resistance. In order to provide an in-depth understanding of the origins of
vertebrate immune gene families and their diversification dynamics, this project
will integrate a phylogenetic comparative framework with new and existing
transcriptome and genomic sequence data from multiple ray-finned fish lineages
to determine how genomic architecture impacts the rate and mechanism of gene
family evolution. This project will also evaluate the interdependence between
genetically encoded markers of self and their candidate receptors. In total,
this project will illuminate the evolution of recognition mechanisms that
delineate self from non-self in all ray-finned fish, and reveal novel insight
into both conserved and divergent means of accomplishing this critical immune
function. Finally, this project will enable the creation of media content and
interactive exhibits at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences including
a virtual reality and augmented reality video-game that teaches visitors
fundamental aspects of how immune systems function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.