* 1755745
* Health Status of the Ecosystem, Biodiversity and Species Abundance along the Dakota Access Oil Pipeline.
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Gary Halvorson, Sitting Bull College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2020
* USD 304,815.00

The Tribal Colleges and University Program is designed to support improvements
in the science, math, engineering and technology (STEM) education and research
capacities of colleges and universities that serve significant numbers of Native
students in the United States. Strengthening these educational opportunities
serves to increase the number of Indigenous people attaining STEM degrees and
thereby diversify the STEM workforce in the United States. The Health Status of
the Ecosystem, Biodiversity, Water, Soil and Species Abundance Along the Dakota
Access Oil Pipeline project supports these outcomes through its study of the
ecosystems surrounding the pipeline. Led by an expert interdisciplinary team of
environmental science faculty members from Sitting Bull College on the Standing
Rock Sioux Reservation, the project focuses on gathering baseline data on
species diversity, water quality, and soil characteristics of the areas on the
reservation surrounding the pipeline. Faculty mentors also engage Native
undergraduate and graduate students as integral members of the project,
mentoring them in the design and conduct of the research and the presentation of
its findings. The baseline information gathered in the study is an invaluable
resource in helping further understanding of the environmental effects of
pipelines over time and in formulating strategies for managing those effects.
The ubiquitous presence of oil pipelines across the United States serving to
meet the nation's energy needs makes this work highly relevant and significant
to the American citizenry on a broad scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
the Health Status of the Ecosystem, Biodiversity, Water, Soil and Species
Abundance Along the Dakota Access Oil Pipeline is to conduct a baseline
inventory of the species composition, water quality, and edaphic factors of
various habitats surrounding the pipeline. Using sophisticated sampling
techniques and state-of-the-art laboratory equipment, the project engages an
interdisciplinary team of environmental scientists from Sitting Bull College in
documenting, quantifying, and deriving relative abundance estimates of keystone
species in the areas surrounding the pipeline on the Standing Rock Sioux
Reservation. The comprehensiveness and rigor of the data collection and analyses
enable the study of the ecosystem across spatial and temporal scales. These data
will be widely available and will be valuable in furthering current
understanding of pipeline impacts as well as informing future studies and the
formulation of remediation plans for this and other pipelines in the United
States. The collaboration of undergraduate and graduate level students with
faculty mentors in the research design, implementation, and presentation
contributes to the project?s broader impacts by developing the research capacity
of the tribal college and its students.