* 1755214
* Interplay of maternal transcription factors in endoderm specification
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Debra Mauzy-Melitz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 11/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Which came first: the chicken or the egg? This metaphor describes situations
where it is not clear which of two events should be considered the cause and
which should be considered the effect. There exists a similar question in
biology during early animal development. Animal development begins when a sperm
fertilizes an egg and the resulting fertilized egg creates a single cell with
enormous differential potential because it is able to develop into all cell
types. In frogs, within the first few hours after fertilization, a fertilized
egg divides several times and develops into three cell types with distinct
functions. These differentiated cells express different genes. The dilemma here
is - What regulates the gene expression to give the cell identity? One idea is
that DNA-binding proteins are the major drivers and these directly control gene
expression. In this scenario, the expression patterns of the DNA-binding
proteins are critical. Another idea is that the early embryonic DNA is very
restrictive and only limited regions of DNA are accessible to DNA-binding
proteins. Thus, the configuration of DNA is important. This project will address
which of these two models is important. A combination of cutting edge
technologies will be applied during the course of this research. In addition,
this project has an outreach component, and will train undergraduates to become
familiar with the latest science concepts and technology affecting biomedical
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activation of gene transcription in the
embryo relies on maternal transcription factors, which sit high in the
regulatory hierarchy to coordinate the gene regulatory cascades that lead to
stereotypical development of embryos. The goal of this project is to examine the
earliest lineage restriction events of germ layer specification (ectoderm,
mesoderm, endoderm) using Xenopus and to address how maternal transcription
factors regulate embryonic genome programming. Since transcription factors drive
gene expression programs by binding Cis-Regulatory Modules (CRMs) dispersed
throughout the genome, a major unanswered question is how maternal transcription
factors bind specific CRMs to endow the transcriptional responses. This
important question can be addressed by going back to the earliest stages of
embryonic development when transcription from the embryonic genome has not yet
begun, the number of different cell types is small, and the genome appears
relatively na?ve. Three maternal transcription factors (Otx1, VegT and Sox7)
were recently identified and shown to be involved in endoderm specification.
Using a combination of genomic approaches together with genetic methods, both
gain- and loss-of-function mutants of these maternal transcription factors will
be analyzed to determine the mechanisms by which individual CRM activities are
coordinately activated, and ensure subsequent epigenetic modifications of the
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.