* 1755004
* Wnt Signaling in the Mature Central Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Andres Barria, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Information transmission across synaptic connections between neurons is
fundamental to brain functions, such as perception, action, and cognition, and
changes in the strength of synaptic communication is widely believed to underlie
learning and memory. Wnt signaling is a group of highly conserved biochemical
signal transduction pathways known for their involvement in various embryonic
processes. The presence of Wnt signaling elements in the mature brain suggests
that Wnt signaling may also play a role in the regulation of brain functions in
the adult. This project examines the role and mechanisms of action of Wnt
signaling in the mature brain, from the receptors through which Wnt initiates
signal transduction to the targets of the transduction process, such as proteins
critically involved in synaptic communication and plasticity. The findings
provide insights into how signaling pathways involved in embryonic development
are re-deployed to effect lasting modifications in adult organisms. They also
inform the development of treatments for conditions in which synaptic
transmission is compromised. In addition, the project provides training
opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented
groups, with the goal of increasing their participation in science
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wnt signaling is a highly conserved signal
transduction mechanism that regulates embryonic development of metazoans;
however, the sustained expression of Wnt signaling components in the mature
central nervous system (CNS) of vertebrates suggests that Wnt signaling cascades
might also play a part in regulating brain function beyond embryonic
development. Recent findings by the investigator indicate that a non-canonical
Wnt ligand upregulates synaptic currents mediated by NMDA-type glutamate
receptors. This regulation requires Wnt receptor RoR2, an increase in
intracellular Ca2+, and activation of PKC and JNK. The objectives of this
project are to: (1) determine how the Wnt receptor RoR2 is activated and whether
it is sufficient to initiate the signaling cascade leading to regulation of
glutamatergic synaptic transmission, and (2) unravel the signaling cascade
triggered by activation of RoR2 receptors. To achieve these objectives, a range
of approaches are applied, including biochemical techniques, live fluorescence
FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (FRET), in some experiments combined with FRET
based biosensors, Ca2+ imaging, and electrophysiology. Understanding how RoR2
signals in the mature CNS of vertebrates provides insight into Wnt signaling in
general, contributes to better understanding of the regulation of synaptic
plasticity, and ultimately offers proof-of-principle evidence for a general
process by which biological mechanisms used early in an organism's life can be
coopted in the mature organism for homeostatic processes or new biological
functions. This project was co-funded by the Modulation Program in the Neural
Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and the Rules of Life Venture Fund in the Division of Emerging
Frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.