* 1755494
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Research Training Across Biology, Physics, and Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Lynne Regan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 295,350.00

This REU Site award to Yale University, located in New Haven, CT, will support
the training of 9 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. The REU
Site focuses on several interdisciplinary research areas, including: A) the
physical properties of cellular processes, B) the development of new
experimental methods at the interface of physics, engineering, and biology, C)
molecular engineering, and D) systems biology. By conducting research in one of
these focus areas, and being exposed to the other three, participants will gain
a deeper understanding of how interdisciplinary research is conducted and how
wet-lab experiments, computer simulations, and theory are combined to make rapid
progress in answering grand challenges in biology. Participants will receive
mentorship from REU faculty, as well as graduate students and postdocs. In
addition to conducting interdisciplinary research in Yale laboratories,
undergraduates will also participate in a variety of enrichment activities, such
as workships aimed at identifying ethical conflicts faced by scientists and at
clarifying the PhD admissions process. This REU Site seeks students with majors
in several disciplines, including but not limited to biology, biochemistry,
computer science, biomedical engineering, physics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 27 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Participants will develop their communication skills and will
present their research to a wide range of audiences, learning valuable
networking skills, and also participating in science outreach activities to
middle and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of this
training program. Students will be tracked after the program to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about this REU Site program is
available by visiting https://sackler.yale.edu/sackler-nsf-reu-site, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Corey O?Hern at corey.ohern@yale.edu) or the program
administrator (Dr. Dorottya Noble at dorottya.noble@yale.edu). This award is
supported by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (DBI Division) and the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.