* 1755970
* CRII: SCH: Analysis of Population-Based Image Metamorphosis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yi Hong, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,821.00

Uncovering brain development and disease progression can ultimately advance our
understanding of brain disorders, such as mental illnesses and brain cancer.
However, the analysis of early brain growth and pathological anatomy changes in
brain scans needs image metamorphosis that can jointly capture structural
changes occurring in a developing brain and appearance changes introduced by
brain myelination and tumor growth. This project aims to develop statistical and
computational models to summarize these metamorphic changes from image pairs, to
sequences, and to populations. By enriching our knowledge of the healthy brain,
psychopathologies, and brain pathologies, this research has the potential to
provide clues in devising treatment strategies for brain
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the development of
population-based image metamorphosis that accounts for brain structure and image
appearance changes simultaneously. The essential component of the developed
model is an advanced image-to-image metamorphosis that allows establishing brain
mappings between image pairs. This project develops a novel metamorphic
regression model to handle image sequences and estimate age-related brain
changes in image time-series. The population analysis component leverages the
regression model and statistical tools for classification and assessment of
typical and atypical brain changes. The primary applications of the developed
image metamorphosis models are studies of early brain development and brain
tumor growth. The resulting models could be applied to understand the etiology
of developmental disorders and psychiatric conditions, such as autism,
schizophrenia, and bipolar disease. They could also monitor brain tumor growth
through predicting tumor evolution and classifying tumor type and
grade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.