* 1755959
* CRII: AF: RUI: Explorations in the Self-Assembly of Distributed Biological Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jacob Hendricks, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,302.00

The process of self-assembly is observable in many natural phenomena. Through
this process, individual components (for example, molecules) that are guided
merely by local binding rules coalesce to form complex structures. This process
is integral to the formation of many vastly complicated structures such as
snowflakes and even biological organisms like viruses. Using self-assembly,
scientists are developing a bottom-up manufacturing approach to nanotechnology
where instead of starting with raw materials and extracting a desired structure,
molecular building blocks are designed so that these building blocks selectively
bind in such a way that the desired structure self-assembles with molecular- (if
not atomic-) level precision. While many mathematical models have been defined
to serve as a theory for the design and analysis of engineered self-assembling
systems, as self-assembly is also a naturally occurring phenomenon, models of
self-assembly are useful in modeling natural systems. A common important feature
of many naturally occurring examples of self-assembling systems is that these
systems are driven by the complex interaction of distributed components. In
order to describe the balancing act observed in the distributed components that
play a role in many biological functions, this project will use mathematical
models of self-assembly to study how complex sequences of communication between
self-assembled components can yield functionality that surpasses functionality
of a single self-assembled component. By supporting many undergraduate research
assistants, this project will impact the campus and departmental research
environment, as well as the quality of undergraduate education. Moreover, the
project will increase awareness of interdisciplinary research at University of
Wisconsin-River Falls by means of an interdisciplinary research seminar
targeting a general audience and advertised to undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes the study of fundamental questions
that initiate the development of rigorous frameworks for modeling systems which
exhibit distributed behaviors, leading to techniques that could directly be
applied in defining tile assembly systems which mimic biological functions.
Ultimately, studying distributed systems in models of self-assembly leads to
further understanding of the complex behaviors as well as potential novel uses
of distributed systems in self-assembly - uses that can be employed in
engineered self-assembling systems. The project will use active tile assembly
models such as the Signal-passing Tile Assembly Model (STAM) to define and
analyze systems, which overcome defined constraints to exhibit algorithmic
behavior, by necessarily relying on this behavior being distributed among the
individual assemblies of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.