* 1755220
* CSBR: Living Stocks, Operation of a Culture Collection of Algae
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* David Nobles, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 476,982.00

Algae are essential primary producers that profoundly affect the global
environment, ecology, and economy. The Culture Collection of Algae at the
University of Texas at Austin (UTEX) is one of only a handful of large
biodiversity collections of living algae. UTEX maintains more than 3,000
distinct algal strains and is among the most genetically diverse assemblages of
living organisms available to the public. Many of the algae in the UTEX
Collection are unique and irreplaceable. UTEX distributes thousands of living
algal cultures to scientists, educators, and students throughout the U.S. and
the world. Great interest in algae as sources of transportation fuels, human
food, animal feed, pharmaceuticals, and many other uses makes UTEX cultures and
services essential resources for researchers. Every year, several hundred
published research articles, many of which recognize NSF support, reference the
use of UTEX strains. UTEX provides extensive student training, hands-on
workshops on managing algal cultures, an informative interactive web site
(https://utex.org/), species identification services, chemical composition
analysis, and extensive correspondence with students engaged in algal research.
UTEX personnel give presentations at public schools, conduct tours of UTEX
facilities, assist teachers and students in conducting high school science
projects, and provide presentations on the scientific importance of algae to
hundreds of school children at local open house
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTEX is a public resource whose mission is to
promote, support, and enable the use of algae for research, education, and
practical applications. The primary goals of UTEX that fulfill this mission are
(1) maintaining a well-curated permanent repository for algal biodiversity that
insures the continuity and consistency of algal research; (2) providing living
algal cultures and related materials to the user community at a modest cost; (3)
acting as a source of information regarding algae to researchers, educators, and
the interested public; and (4) participating in outreach to the user community
through training, support services, and supplies. Additional goals of this
project are to (1) enhance the security of UTEX holdings through improved
culture maintenance techniques and expansion of the number of strains in
cryogenic storage, (2) increase the value of UTEX algal strains to the user
community by characterizing their genomic and metabolic diversity, (3) expand
interactions with K-12 and undergraduate education programs through the
development of teaching kits and online teaching tools, and (4) accession and
make available a greater diversity of strains that are of value for emerging and
expanding areas of pure and applied research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.