* 1755782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Computer Servers and User Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Evan Conaway, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Computer servers, the building blocks of internet connectivity, play a central
role in contemporary human interaction. Servers store information, permit
computing resource sharing, connect fax machines and printers over networks,
support digital video and audio file streaming, and much more. Physically, a
server may be a large single device or a collection of such devices that run
continuously without direct user input. At the other end of the scale are small
servers, computers that connect a network of users for a particular purpose,
such as a private email server. Server location, ownership, and operation are
critical to the privacy and security of the data they hold. But despite being
indispensable, servers work in the background of our lives and remain
essentially distant and hidden for the average user. In the research supported
by this award, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, the researcher investigates how users
understand this "invisible" but indispensable technology, and how that
understanding affects how users actively relate to, interact with, and protect
the servers on which they depend. The research is important for social
scientists wanting to understand how ideas of time and place are changed by
modern technologies, as well as for policy makers concerned to understand
technology's political and social effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be conducted by University of California, Irvine, anthropology doctoral
student Evan Conaway, who is supervised by Dr. Tom Boellstorff. Because there is
such a wide diversity of server types and users, the researcher has chosen to
focus on the servers used by one particular user community. This will allow him
to study the issues in greater depth than would be possible if he attempted to
cover all servers and all users. The community he has chosen are those who
employ servers for role-taking activities. The researcher will explore how and
to what extent a regionally stratified sample of these users experience servers
as places in and of themselves; as machines for the storage and practice of
memory; and as meaningful cultural objects. He will further examine how those
experiences affect how the users deploy servers as well as how they understand
time, place, and property. Mr. Conaway will conduct twelve months of
ethnographic fieldwork with three groups connected not by a direct network of
interest, but by this common engagement with servers. He will collect data
through participant observation, interviews, surveys, and archival research.
Findings from the research will address debates and controversies around the
location of internet infrastructure, data ownership and security, and emerging
issues in intellectual property law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.