* 1755527
* I-Corps:  Liquid organic fertilizer produced through anaerobic digestion of organic waste
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Zohrab Samani, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to promote a
liquid organic fertilizer (LOF) produced through a novel patented technology
which uses anaerobic accelerated bio-leaching of green plant material or green
plant waste. The synthetic free liquid organic fertilizer is a complex solution
that contains macro nutrients, micro nutrient as well as organic matter in
soluble form. The benefits of the proposed product include: (1) improvement of
soil biological activities by providing the soil with soluble organic matter;
(2) feeding the plants with soluble macro and micro nutrients; (3) ease of
transportation; (4) ease of storage; (5) easy adjustment of the nutrient content
through dilution; (6) easy application through irrigation systems and; (7)
environmental benefit of carbon sequestration. Since no synthetic chemical is
used for LOF production, it has the potential to be used as an economic
alternative for currently used organic fertilizers such as fish emulsion and
composts by the rapidly growing organic farming industry.

This I-Corps project enables the extraction of plants macro and micro nutrients
and organic matter from the body of green organic waste such as landscape grass
clippings. The proposed novel technology consists of two simultaneous processes
of anaerobic digestion and accelerated bio-leaching of organic waste to produce
liquid organic fertilizer (LOF). Historically, the use of organic waste for
production of organic fertilizer has been through composting. Research has shown
that the proposed technology will require less time, lower energy consumption
and easily available nutrients when compared to composting. In addition, LOF
returns the plant organic carbon back to the soil and contributes to carbon
sequestration. Previous studies have also shown that the use of LOF could lead
to higher yield in vegetables when compared to synthetic fertilizer.