* 1755106
* Collaborative Research: Network Sovereignty: A Comparative Study of Local Network Initiatives in Rural, Low-income Communities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Lisa Parks, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 444,534.00

This project will advance understanding of the importance of local ownership and
culture when developing telecommunication networks in rural, low-income,
indigenous communities. Using the concept of "network sovereignty" as an
analytical framework, the project investigates how varying degrees of network
ownership, design involvement, and technical knowledge can impact and empower
marginalized communities and result in networks that are more useable and
sustainable. By engaging with research in areas of critical infrastructure
studies and technological literacy and by leveraging strong local partnerships,
the project will build a model for understanding how telecommunication network
development can best be organized to support diverse, low-income, rural
communities. A particular contribution will be to convey the importance of local
cultural practices to network innovation and adoption, and to describe the
enabling conditions and long-term effects of such processes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;There is common assumption that low-income, rural communities can
benefit economically from their integration within telecommunication networks,
but there is a tendency to neglect how important issues of local community
deliberation, ownership, design, and culture are to such processes. When
telecommunication networks are extended to "last mile" communities, how involved
are members of these communities in such processes? How important is the local
ownership and control of network facilities? How do local community members
understand and make sense of their network integration? What do they hope to
gain from such technological developments? And how have communities addressed
these issues in different ways? To answer these questions researchers employ a
collaborative ethnographic approach and conduct fieldwork and interviews in
three diverse communities that have formed local network initiatives. Case
studies include Rhizomatica in Oaxaca, Mexico, Oki Communications in the
Blackfeet Indian community of Browning, Montana, and the Serengeti Broadband
Network in the Mara region of Tanzania. Researchers will partner with community
organizations to explore the emergence and relative success of these local
network initiatives and, at the end of the project, will provide an analytical
framework for evaluating such initiatives in other communities. The project also
includes a workshop that enables community partners to discuss and share best
local network practices with one another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.