* 1755922
* CRII: SHF: Supporting Domain-Specific Inquiry with Rule-Based Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Christopher Martens, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 177,142.00

Writing computer simulations of processes such as ecologies, economic models,
social dynamics, government procedures, and biological regulation, can lead to
greater understanding of these systems for novices and experts alive. Rule-based
modeling allows novice programmers to specify and run these simulations without
training in probability theory or traditional programming languages. The
proposed work extends a rule-based modeling language to support self-directed
learning of the language and domain-specific inquiry about the models. In the
long term, this work will enable cross-communication between experts in
different domains and will broaden participation in systems thinking skills
applicable across STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying rule-
based language, Ceptre, is based on a fragment of linear logic, enabling
compositional reasoning about programs. The proposed work entails developing a
structure editor for Ceptre designed to support the key principles of
discoverability, supporting new users to learn the language in a self-directed
manner, and correctness-by-construction, or the prevention of syntax errors
through an editing interface that maps between only meaningful edit states. This
part of the project will be rigorously validated with formal proofs of soundness
and completeness of the editing interface with respect to the underlying
language. The domain-specific inquiry component of the project will be
accomplished by developing a language and algorithms to support queries and
filters on simulation states, "Why" questions about program traces, statistical
analysis on sets of traces, and other means of understanding the emergent
behavior of simulations. These tools will be evaluated through user studies on
populations of domain experts and programming novices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.