* 1755673
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A mixed-methods study of vulnerability and social resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Janet McGrath, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

The stress caused by resource scarcity is known to impact people's health.
However, not all people and communities respond the same. In the research
supported by this award, the researcher investigates the processes that produce
these variable outcomes. Research in the United States and elsewhere has shown
that multiple factors, at the community as well as the individual level, work
together to produce health outcomes. Therefore, it is not surprising that
policies that focus only on individual economic challenges may miss the positive
and negative effects of community-level buffers already in place. This research
project, which also trains a graduate student in the collection of empirical
scientific data, seeks to answer the questions: How do communities respond to
economic stress? How do communities buffer against it, and do these mechanisms
unintentionally facilitate unhealthy behavior? The answers to these questions
are of critical importance to U.S policy makers committed to improving local
health outcomes.

The research will be undertaken by Case Western Reserve University anthropology
doctoral student, Megan M. Schmidt-Sane, under the supervision of Dr. Janet W.
McGrath. The research will be conducted in two communities in Kampala, Uganda.
Uganda was chosen for the research because recent changes in local government
labor policies have put many people out of work. Therefore, because the
researchers have access to baseline health data, the situation is a natural
experiment in how people respond to sudden economic stress, how traditional
buffering mechanisms are put into play, and whether these mechanisms prevent or
increase poor health outcomes. The researcher will collect data over one year
using a mixture of qualitative and quantitative anthropological methods,
including: community censuses, surveys, in-depth interviews, and participant
observation. These data will allow her to assess specific pathways between the
larger socio-economic context, individuals, and risk, resilience, and
vulnerability. Findings will facilitate integrating these concepts as well as
scientific understanding of the mechanisms by which economic stress affects
health. This can then become the basis for improved policy in the United States.
Results will be disseminated widely in academic and public health settings,
providing insight into the factors that are simultaneously resilient and
vulnerable, and the potential pathways to resilience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.