* 1755561
* REU Site: Mathematical Modeling in Environmental, Biological and Other Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Yungkul Kim, Bethune-Cookman University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 02/28/2022
* USD 304,080.00

Mathematical Modeling in Environmental, Biological and Other Sciences (MMEBS)
Program is an eight-week research experience for undergraduate students hosted
by Bethune-Cookman University (B-CU). The Program recruits heavily from
underrepresented minorities (URMs), women, and those individuals with limited
STEM and research opportunities in their home institutions. The Program faculty
has extensive experiences in mentoring these types of students, in helping them
develop research projects, and in guiding these research projects. The overall
objectives of this REU Site are to promote early engagement of undergraduate
students in research, to expose students to interdisciplinary modeling and data
analytic resources, to foster active learning through hands-on experiences in a
collaborative research environment, and to inspire students to pursue advanced
STEM education and research careers. The Program also fosters long-term
mentoring relationships between participating students and faculty through
intensive collaboration and interaction. The Program looks for at least 80% of
URM participants to increase diversity in future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With mathematical modeling as the main precept,
a multidisciplinary team of science, mathematics, and computer science faculty
will provide to participating students research-learning experiences in the data
analytic aspects of multiple scientific disciplines including mathematics,
chemistry, computer science, biological and environmental sciences. Instructions
include introduction to modeling; data analytic software training; LaTeX
document preparation training; research paper writing and poster design; Excel
modeling (spreadsheet modeling) tutorial; and working on cutting-edge research
projects in different areas on mathematics, biology, chemistry, environmental
science and computer science. Students will work in groups. Students and faculty
will be encouraged to continue their work during the year and submit their
research papers to professional journals. Students are also encouraged to
present their work at conferences throughout the year. Participants and involved
faculty will stay connected to form research and professional networks that will
remain after the Program. The participants will be well prepared for graduate
studies in STEM fields and various careers that will have positive impact on our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.