* 1755385
* The regulation of male mating behavior in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Brigitte Dauwalder, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2024
* USD 732,750.00

How the brain works is an important and complicated question. One of the many
functions of the brain is to regulate behavior, such as social interaction among
individuals, which, in turn, determines success in courtship and mating. It is
known that behavior is guided by both genes and the environment, and that the
influences interact closely. Brain function also is regulated by hormones in
ways that are not well understood. This project studies such hormone-like
factors and their influence on the behavior of fruit flies, a model organism for
which there exist superb genetic and molecular tools. The genetic and molecular
accessibility allows for easier examination and manipulation of these factors.
As part of this project, flies that lack genes hypothesized to code for specific
hormone-like factors are generated, and the effect on the fly's behavior is
documented, to elucidate the relation between the hormone-like factors and
behavior. The project also examines another important question: How do these
factors pass through the blood-brain-barrier, a cell layer that protects the
brain in most higher organisms, including humans. These studies will give new
insight into the ways by which hormones circulating in blood communicate with
the brain, and how this specific route of blood-brain communication influences
behavior. Ultimately, they will help to better understand how the brain works.
These studies are being performed at one of the most diverse universities in the
United States with a large student body, a large fraction of which comes from
underrepresented groups. Both undergraduate and graduate students participate in
the research and receive intensive training in the scientific process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of these studies is to examine how
complex behaviors are regulated on a molecular level using the well-defined
courtship behavior of male Drosophila as a model organism. It is known that
gender-specific brain circuits are required for male courtship; however,
successful execution of the behavior also requires modulation of these circuits.
Circulating factors and hormones are an important part of this modulation. The
present studies are based on the recent discovery that the blood-brain-barrier
plays an active role in this process. The studies described here explore how
specific signaling at this humoral-brain interface modulates courtship.
Specifically, the focus is on a nuclear receptor expressed preferentially in
males as a link between the action of the two major insect hormones Ecdysone and
Juvenile Hormone. Conditional genetic manipulations are used to manipulate
signaling through this protein-hormone network exclusively in the blood-brain-
barrier. Findings that blood-brain-barrier cells are a site where integration of
hormonal effects occurs have the potential to extend in significant ways
appreciation of this tissue beyond its barrier
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.