* 1755449
* GLOBE Learning Expedition and Annual Meeting 2018
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2019
* USD 341,145.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
(GLOBE) Program, an international educational and citizen science program,
provides students and the public worldwide with the opportunity to participate
in data collection, analysis, and the scientific process, while contributing
meaningfully to our understanding of the Earth system and global environment.
The 6th GLOBE Learning Expedition (GLE) and the 22nd GLOBE Annual Meeting will
be held in Killarney Ireland July 1-6, 2018. The theme of the GLE meeting is
Connecting Mountain, Woods and Lake Biomes: Developing a Special Sense of Place
for the GLOBE Community. The GLEs are organized every four or five years in
order to provide students from around the world the opportunity to present their
research projects to their peers, to GLOBE scientists, and to the wider GLOBE
community. GLEs also provide students with the opportunity to participate in a
collective place-based research experience, learn about each other's cultures,
and to develop collaborative partnerships that will enhance their future GLOBE,
academic and career experiences. The GLOBE Community consists of students,
teachers and scientists in over 100 U.S. Partnerships and 100 Partner Countries.
The GLOBE Implementation Office will arrange all the logistics. Over 250 adult
participants and 150 students are expected to attend the week-long
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Concerns over the number of
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics(STEM) graduates has been
mounting for decades, and has risen to a new level with the publication of
recent reports. These reports all point to the lack of qualified STEM graduates
to meet short and long-term workforce needs of the nation's economy. The
previous two federal administrations have touted the need for more emphasis on
STEM education. In addition, GLOBE is an excellent vehicle for making
connections between formal and informal environments (through public
participation in science) and for creating and sustaining STEM interest in
students in all levels of the educational system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
objectives for this meeting include:&lt;br/&gt;1) Students share their
learning/experiences related to GLOBE-based research to peers;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Students participate in science and motivate each other through real-time
interactions;&lt;br/&gt;3) Participants (scientists, teachers, Country
Coordinators, US Partners) share experiences, collaborate in&lt;br/&gt;doing
science and celebrate accomplishments;&lt;br/&gt;4) Participants learn more
about GLOBE and how students from different backgrounds can contribute
to&lt;br/&gt;science and understanding about our planet;&lt;br/&gt;5) Teachers
and students share how GLOBE activities are being conducted in their schools;
and&lt;br/&gt;6) Students collaborate with each other through using protocols to
study the local environment during the&lt;br/&gt;GLOBE Games.