* 1755773
* CRII: CIF: Model-based Compression of Biological Sequences
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Farzad Hassanzadeh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2022
* USD 175,000.00

With the increasingly widespread use of high-throughput genome sequencing, the
amount of biological sequence data is growing at a rate much faster than the
decrease in the cost of storage media. To avoid saturating available storage
capacity, such data must be compressed at a high ratio. Biological sequences are
created over the course of evolution by mutation processes, including
substitution, insertion, deletion, and duplication. While these processes shape
the statistical properties of genomic sequences and play a critical role in
determining which compression approaches will provide improved performance, they
are not taken into account by current methods. The goal of this project is to
provide a principled approach to biological data compression by developing and
leveraging mutation models that approximate the generation process of genomic
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research thrusts of the project are: 1)
determining the fundamental limits of the compressibility of biological
sequences; and 2) developing and evaluating encoding and decoding algorithms
that approach these limits. Identifying the limits of compression relies on
developing combinatorial and stochastic string-editing models that represent
sequence generation through genomic mutations. These models are then studied
from an information-theoretic point of view to determine their combinatorial and
stochastic capacities, thus providing bounds on the compressibility of genomic
sequences. The second thrust leverages the statistical properties arising from
mutation models, such as repeat structures, to develop efficient compression
tools. In addition to improving compression methods, the success of these
research directions will enhance our understanding of complex sequence
generation processes, enable the generation of faithful synthetic data, and
facilitate the quantitative study of the role of mutations in generating novel
biological functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.