* 1755507
* Collaborative Research: The Extension of a Dendrochronological Sequence to northern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Carol Griggs, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 132,905.00

Drs. Paula Turkon, Sturt Manning, and Carol Griggs, along with colleagues from
Mexico, will conduct research to provide a high-resolution absolute tree-ring
chronology for Northern Mesoamerican archaeological sites using a combination of
tree-ring and AMS radiocarbon data. This project extends their preliminary
research both geographically and chronologically, with the goal of linking the
existing Epiclassic chronology from Northwestern Mesoamerica that ends in the
8th century A.D., to the regionally extensive, calendar-dated chronologies from
living and relic trees in the same region. The dendrochronological results will
offer dating precision to archaeologists working in these regions for time
periods that do not have written sources of chronological data. It will also
establish the foundation for climate reconstruction studies that, in the future,
will help clarify the long-term relationships between the magnitude of climatic
change and human response. In fostering close collaboration between
archaeologists, dendrochronologists, graduate, and undergraduate students from
multiple institutions throughout Mexico and the United States, this project's
mission is to encourage the application of dendroarchaeology [=archaeological
dendrochronology], currently not part of archaeological fieldwork or analysis in
Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoamerican archaeologists have long acknowledged
the need for precise dating methods in order to understand cultural change,
particularly in the region north of the core of Mesoamerican culture. Yet
despite tremendous success in the development of tree-ring dating of
archaeological sites just north in the American Southwest, and the more recent
development of long tree-ring chronologies in Mexico that cover the past 1300
years, dendroarchaeology has been virtually absent in Mesoamerica. The first
stage of this NSF funded project demonstrated the availability, measurability,
and similarities in growth patterns ("crossdatability") of archaeological tree-
ring samples in Northwestern Mesoamerica from the 5th to 8th centuries A.D. In
this second stage, the researchers will incorporate archaeological samples from
Postclassic and historic sites located in a broader geographic region in
northern Mesoamerica. Because the new archaeological collections of wood will
likewise be from a time period for which there are no well-established master
chronologies, the tree-ring sequences produced from the prehispanic sites will
be initially anchored in time by "radiocarbon wiggle-matching." This method fits
a known relative sequence of radiocarbon dates from specific tree-rings against
the radiocarbon calibration curve to achieve a precise fit and thus calendar
placement with minimal error. Ultimately, we intend to create a continuous tree-
ring record from the present back to the Classic period, using both the
archaeological and historic collections, as well as existing calendar-dated
chronologies. The resulting data will not only fill a significant gap in our
knowledge of the chronology of Northern Mesoamerica, but help address broader
questions such as the rate, timing, and directionality of cultural influences
with the Mesoamerican cultural core. Since dendroarchaeological methods are
cumulative and iterative, the chronologies will gain in length, sample depth,
and robustness, and will become increasingly useful to archaeologists working in
broader geographic regions and time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.