* 1755452
* Role of TCP transcription factors on the regulation of the circadian clock function in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jose Pruneda-Paz, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2024
* USD 776,868.00

Agriculture intensification and expansion of production areas are expected to
provide higher crop yields needed to accommodate future demands of food and
energy. To achieve optimal growth performance, plants strongly rely on their
ability to properly interact with their environment. In fact, most plant
responses exhibit circadian rhythms (oscillations repeated every 24 hours) that
are in synchrony with daily rhythms in environmental cues, such as light and
temperature. A timekeeping mechanism, known as the circadian clock, is critical
to maintain the pace of circadian responses according to oscillations in
external cues. Notably, fine-tuning the clock pace was suggested to allow
adaptation of crop species to grow at different latitudes. The plant clock
function is regulated by multiple environmental cues, which in nature are
present simultaneously. However, in most studies the role of different cues was
investigated in isolation. Thus, how combined signals modulate the plant clock
remains a largely unexplored area that could provide critical insights to
understanding how plant responses are regulated in a natural setting. This
project aims at filling this gap-in-knowledge by exploring novel mechanisms of
clock regulation in plants grown under combined light and temperature cycles. In
particular, the role of previously unrecognized clock components that
differentially respond to these environmental cues will be investigated.
Furthermore, this project will implement a systematic training program that will
offer exceptional student research opportunities. Finally, given the conserved
clock architecture among plant species, results from this project could also
illuminate novel approaches to improve crops in future agricultural
settings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the molecular level, the clock function
relies on a heavily integrated transcriptional network. The transcription
factors (TFs) CCA1 and LHY are core components of this network and the timing of
CCA1 and LHY expression is critical to set the clock pace. Despite their
important role, the mechanisms that regulate CCA1 and LHY expression by
environmental signals other than light cycles have remained elusive. By
developing a pioneering strategy, the principal investigator identified a TF
from the TCP family, called CHE, that regulates the CCA1 promoter activity and
plays an important role for the clock function. Preliminary results indicate
that other TCPs interact with the CCA1 promoter and CHE protein, as well as the
LHY promoter. Furthermore, some of the identified TCPs exhibit a differential
expression pattern when plants are grown in combined light and temperature
cycles. Thus, the overall hypothesis of this project is that the plant clock
function relies on the coordinated role of TCP TFs to regulate CCA1 and LHY
expression. The proposed studies are expected to reveal novel mechanistic
insights of the clock regulation in plants and, by including combined light and
temperature cycles, to provide an unprecedented assessment of how the plant
clock functions in nature. Finally, this research will provide proof of
principle for the power of improved TF screening approaches that could be used
to understand transcriptional mechanisms not only in plants but also other
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.