* 1755429
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of long-distance communication in vocal rodents
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bret Pasch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 422,811.00

Vocal communication is fundamental to the fabric of social life. Animals produce
a wide variety of sounds to mediate critical interactions, including
advertisement to potential mates and competitors. But why and how do distinct
species sound different and what factors contribute to such differences? The
widespread importance of acoustic signals in mate recognition and speciation
requires a deeper understanding of the causes and consequences of signal
divergence. In this project, the physiological mechanisms underlying sound
production across an ecologically diverse group of vocal rodents will be
studied. The researchers will test the hypothesis that changes in sound
production mechanisms are mediated by variation in social organization and
spacing. These studies promise to provide important insights into the
evolutionary interplay between the physiology of senders, receivers, and their
socio-spatial ecologies. The proposal provides training opportunities for a
postdoctoral scholar, research technician, and student participants who are
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematical sciences.
In addition, the work develops inquiry-based learning modules that equip middle
school classrooms with animals, microphones, and sound analysis software to
foster critical thinking skills. The research will be supplemented with outreach
at regional events and virtual live streaming of experiments in an indoor
animal-tracking arena to allow the public to engage in scientific discovery.
Digital audio, video, and morphological specimens will be permanently archived
for open access in public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge
in the study of behavior is connecting functional and mechanistic explanations
for the evolution of complex phenotypes. Advertisement vocalizations used in
reproductive contexts are among the most diverse and elaborate displays in the
animal kingdom, yet understanding of the physiological mechanisms driving
acoustic divergence is lacking. The goal of the proposed research is to
integrate functional and mechanistic perspectives in senders, receivers, and the
environment to understand the evolution of acoustic signals in relation to
variation in social organization. Rodents represent over 40% of mammalian
diversity and exhibit extreme variation in social structure and space use, even
among closely related species. Investigators will leverage the exceptional
divergence in social organization and acoustic behavior found in one clade to
dissect the sound production mechanisms underlying signal diversification. The
work integrates approaches from the field, laboratory, and mesocosm, including
high-resolution acoustic recordings and laryngeal morphometrics, auditory
electrophysiology, sound propagation experiments, and animal tracking studies to
evaluate the socio-spatial context of vocal production. The findings will
provide a rich dataset to investigate the evolution of communication systems in
relation to variation in social organization, with broad implications for other
taxa across all signaling modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.