* 1755348
* A portal into the brain: olfactory crypt neurons modulate brain viral immunity in teleost
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Irene Salinas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 10/31/2021
* USD 549,993.00

The interactions between the nervous system and the immune system determine the
interactions between animals and their environment and, therefore, the survival
and success of any animal species. Previous work has demonstrated that neurons
can regulate immune responses, and that if neurons are infected with pathogens,
they will also mount their own immune responses. The central idea of this
project is that, given their direct exposure to external microorganisms,
olfactory sensory neurons are able to sense infection and initiate immune
responses in very rapid ways, by using electrical signals. The work focuses on
one type of olfactory sensory neuron, the crypt neuron, which is unique to
fishes. The hypothesis being tested is that by expressing a tyrosine kinase
receptor, crypt neurons interact with proteins present in fish viruses. This
interaction results in neuronal electrical signals that travel fast to the
olfactory bulb in the central nervous system of the fish. Consequently, very
fast (within minutes) antiviral immune responses are mounted in the nasal
epithelium via cells that migrate from the olfactory bulb to the nose. The work
has broad implications, including for society, because it will reveal a new
mechanism by which bony fish recognize external microbial signals in the water.
Understanding of this mechanism has impacts in the field of fish biology and
conservation as well as aquaculture and nasal vaccine development for fish.
Additional broader impacts of this project include outreach to rural schools in
New Mexico and workshops to broaden participation of women in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Olfactory organs detect environmental chemical
signals and send them to the central nervous system (CNS) via the olfactory
bulb. At the same time, olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) are in direct contact
with microorganisms present in the environment including viruses. Teleost fish
have olfactory organs that resemble those of mammals, yet they have a unique
type of OSN named crypt neurons. Crypt neurons express only one type of
olfactory receptor, ORA4, and the tyrosine kinase receptor TrkA. Although the
function of this unique OSN subset has attracted the attention of many
investigators, crypt cell function remains a mystery. The goal of this project
is to test a new function for crypt neurons in teleost fish. The central
hypothesis is that crypt neurons detect viruses in the environment via the TrkA
receptor and oversee immune responses in the CNS to avoid inflammation-induced
damage. This hypothesis is being tested in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
crypt neurons exposed to the salmonid virus infectious hematopoietic necrosis
virus (IHNV). The investigators use their pre-established trout in vivo model
and pharmacological and molecular approaches to determine how crypt neurons
modulate CNS innate immune responses, as well as how TrkA-viral interactions
play a role in this process. Additionally, electrophysiological approaches and
nerve sectioning serve to shed light on the mechanisms by which the cross-talk
between the olfactory organ and the olfactory bulb occurs. The findings will
elucidate an important but overlooked neuroimmune interaction in teleosts by
which CNS immune responses are orchestrated from the periphery via OSN
electrical signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.