* 1755327
* Personality drive: broad behavioral mechanisms as a substrate for variation in mate choice
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Alan Pepper, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 949,135.00

This project uses a powerful animal model, swordtail fish, to understand how
learning and personality shape how individuals choose their mates. Conventional
wisdom holds that animals - from humans to fruit flies - choose the "best"
partner based on that partner's vigor and health, but more and more work has
shown that reproductive decisions are heavily shaped by one's own personality,
psychology, and experiences. In particular, people and animals who are bold and
extroverted tend to seek different mates and act differently during courtship
than those who are shy and introverted. Part of this may have to do with
learning - extroverts learn better from positive rewards, introverts learn
better from negative experiences. This project explores the genetic and
behavioral connections between personality, learning, and mate choice. This is
done by testing mate preferences, shyness and boldness, and learning ability in
the same individuals, and by using genomic technology to search for a common
genetic basis underlying these features. This work will help us understand how
reproductive decisions change with the environment and drive the origin of new
animal species. The project will support graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups. A main focus is to expand an ongoing mentorship
program focused on community outreach and high-impact learning experiences for
high school students. In this project, high school and college-age students will
be trained during the school year as counselors for an elementary-level STEM
summer camp focused on animal behavior and local natural history, applying their
science knowledge towards engaging younger
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses about the origin and maintenance of
mating preferences have focused on their adaptive value with respect to mating
decisions. A growing body of work has shown that biases unrelated to mating,
notably at the sensory periphery, can shape mating preferences. If these biases
are under divergent ecological selection, this can facilitate reproductive
isolation. This project focuses on whether interspecific differences in mating
preferences can emerge from personality, an ecologically important suite of
behavioral traits. The swordtail fish species Xiphophorus malinche and
Xiphophorus birchmanni diverge in both mating preferences and personality
traits. The proposed project seeks to unravel the common mechanisms underlying
personality, preference development, and mating decisions. This will be
accomplished by (1) measuring phenotypic correlations between non-sexual
exploratory and risk-avoidance behavior, mate-sampling patterns, and mating
preferences; (2) using aversive and appetitive conditioned-response paradigms to
evaluate the relationship between personality and learning mode; (3)
characterizing the relationship between learning in sexual and non-sexual
contexts; and (4) using hybrid genetic lines to elucidate genetic covariance
between personality and preference and identify candidate genomic regions. The
project will support graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups. A primary objective is expansion of an established mentorship program
out of the CICHAZ field station in central Mexico, which currently focuses on
community outreach and high-impact learning experiences for high school
students. Under the current proposal, high school and college-age students will
be trained during the school year as counselors for an elementary-level STEM
summer camp focused on animal behavior and local natural history, applying their
science knowledge towards engaging younger students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.