* 1755286
* Collaborative Research: Tradeoffs between specialist and generalist strategies for host immune evasion in a vector-borne bacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yi-Pin Lin, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 192,000.00

This research addresses a unique example of how the environment can impact human
and animal health by shaping bacterial communities in nature. Microbes causing
human or animal disease differ in the number of hosts they can infect; while
some specialize on a single animal/plant, others are able to infect a wide
range. Specialist organisms may be better able to escape the host immune system
and thus survive, but they risk becoming extinct if the host becomes rare.
Pathogens with wide host ranges are often better able to 'jump' to new hosts,
driving epidemics. This award will investigate how Borrelia burgdorferi - the
bacterium that causes Lyme disease - escapes killing by the immune system of its
natural host and whether different genetic types of this bacterium are uniquely
adapted to mammals versus birds in nature. This award will also investigate
whether Borrelia diversity is explained by adaptation to different hosts or,
alternatively, by the targeting of the most common strains by host antibodies,
allowing coexistence of rarer strains. Borrelia diversity directly impacts human
health because strains cause differential disease severity. This award will
increase knowledge about how ecology and evolution of microbes impacts human
health. It will develop educational materials and expand outreach into
communities about the links between the environment and human health. In
addition, it will provide extensive and interdisciplinary training, at all
educational levels, in the fields of disease ecology, molecular ecology and eco-
epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will determine the extent of
specialization and immune-mediated competition among strains of B. burgdorferi
in different ecological contexts and test the hypothesis that these phenotypic
traits are important drivers of B. burgdorferi diversity, community structure
and host specialization evolution. While there is evidence of differential B.
burgdorferi host association which could drive genetic polymorphisms ('multiple
niche polymorphism'), other studies claim that immune-mediated balancing
selection acting on one or more B. burgdorferi outer surface proteins can
maintain the observed polymorphisms without invoking directional processes
('negative frequency-dependent selection'). This award will disentangle the
contribution of multiple mechanisms to B. burgdorferi diversity by assessing
strain prevalence in multiple host species by applying deep amplicon sequencing
to data from a 6-year-long study in a simplified host community. The
physiological basis of host specificity will be explored by evaluating in vitro
survival of B. burgdorferi strains when exposed to immune components in serum of
different local hosts. Host-specificity related fitness and immune-mediated
competition between strains will be assessed with in vivo transmission
experiments. The processes by which host specialization and immune-mediated
competition determine strain diversity and evolution in different ecological
contexts will be examined using novel mathematical models. This study will
provide strong evidence of the nature of B. burgdorferi adaptations to avoid the
immune system of its natural hosts. It will determine whether these adaptations
are species-specific and identify the consequences of host specificity on the
structure and diversity of B. burgdorferi strain community. The award will
provide multi-disciplinary training to graduate students, including under-
represented minorities, and postdoctoral fellows in disease ecology and
modeling. To broaden the impact of the work, researchers will leverage contacts
with local environmental groups to conduct outreach within the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.