* 1755378
* Neural Basis of Sun-Compass Navigation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Michael Dickinson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2021
* USD 699,999.00

Navigation is a fundamental behavior for nearly all animals and has long
fascinated human observers both in terms of its physiological and behavioral
virtuosity. Long-distance migrations of arctic terns flying pole-to-pole or
monarch butterflies crossing North America capture the imagination, but even the
common fruit fly can travel 20 kilometers across over open desert, a feat that
requires navigational cues. Many insects, including honey bees and monarch
butterflies, are known to use the position of the sun to navigate; however, by
studying fruit flies the large number of genetic tools available to understand
the neurobiology underlying this behavior can be brought to bear. This research
will employ state-of-the-art neuroscience techniques to identify neurons that
allow fruit flies to orient using the sun and test laboratory findings under
natural conditions. The research will provide many opportunities for the
training and mentorship of a diverse pool of students. Working with local high
school students, lab members will study the dispersal abilities of fruit flies
at a field site in the Mojave Desert, focusing on determining how far and fast
they fly and in which directions. Laboratory aspects of the research will train
undergraduates in a wide-range of cutting-edge techniques. This integrative
approach will further the understanding of how brains can process visual
information in an ancient and ecologically important behavior. A better
understanding of the computational strategies underlying navigation may be
important for the design of autonomous robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine the neural basis of sun navigation in fruit flies
(Drosophila melanogaster) by employing behavioral, genetic, physiological, and
ecological approaches. Although previously not considered a model for navigation
research, laboratory experiments suggest that fruit flies can use the sun as a
long distance orientation cue. In a closed-loop flight simulator, flies will
actively hold a small, bright spot at a fixed angular location. Each fly adopts
a different heading when they initially take off, and individuals will remember
this orientation preference if flight is interrupted for short intervals. Using
this flight simulator, the role of prior experience on subsequent heading
preference will be tested by attempting to train flies to prefer particular
headings. To explore the roles of specific neurons, genetic approaches will be
used to silence cell classes while measuring the effect on sun navigation in a
flight simulator. Two-photon imaging and electrophysiology will also be employed
to study the circuits responsible for sun-compass navigation and investigate the
functional role of individual cells. To relate these mechanistic investigations
to natural behavior, a series of field experiments will be conducted, which will
be coordinated with outreach efforts, to investigate the role of sun-compass
navigation in dispersal. Collectively, these complementary approaches will yield
a mechanistic understanding of animal navigation that ranges from cell
physiology to ecology. Results will shed light on fundamental questions of
systems neuroscience, such as how sensorimotor experience shapes future
behavior, while also forwarding the understanding of fly natural
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.