* 1755089
* Selection for general intelligence in carnivores by novel environments
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 815,567.00

Understanding how and why intelligence has evolved in humans and other animals
is a grand challenge in biology. Animal intelligence is composed largely of
specialized abilities that respond to specific pressures in the environment.
However, many recent discoveries suggest that non-specific, general
intelligence, similar to IQ in humans, also evolves. Most hypotheses about the
evolution of intelligence suggest that general intelligence evolves as a side
effect of selection for more specialized cognitive abilities. In contrast, the
Cognitive Buffer hypothesis suggests that general intelligence is directly
favored by natural selection when animals are coping with novel environments.
Urban environments are evolutionarily novel to most animals today, and present
them with many new cognitive challenges. This work tests predictions of the
Cognitive Buffer Hypothesis by presenting wild spotted hyenas living in rural,
urban, and transitional habitats in Africa with a battery of simple tests, much
like IQ testing in humans. Performance on each specific task in the test battery
will be compared among hyenas in the three habitat types, but a general
intelligence measure will also be calculated from the individual test scores,
and related to the strength of natural selection acting in each habitat. This
work will permit determination of whether or not the strength of selection on
general intelligence varies among ancestral, historically urban and rapidly-
urbanizing environments. Broader impacts include international training of
students, working closely with film crews to create television documentaries,
and production of a children's book on hyena research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of intelligence represents one of the greatest challenges in biology.
Animal intelligence is composed largely of specialized abilities evolving in
response to specific selection pressures, but recent work suggests that domain-
general processes also evolve. The Cognitive Buffer hypothesis posits that
general intelligence is favored directly by natural selection to help animals
cope with novel environments. Urban environments are evolutionarily novel to
most animals, presenting them with many new cognitive challenges. Here,
predictions of the Cognitive Buffer hypothesis will be tested in the context of
urbanization by presenting a test battery, focusing on seven elementary
cognitive abilities, to 175 wild spotted hyenas occupying rural, urban, and
transitional habitats in Africa. Performance on each specific task will be
compared among the 3 habitat types, but a psychometric factor-analytical
approach will also permit statistical derivation of a general intelligence
measure, g, for individuals within each habitat type, and elucidation of the
structure of hyena intelligence. Because data are available in each habitat on
survival and reproduction, the strength of selection on g can be compared among
the three different environments. Comparing selection gradients on g among
habitat types permits assessment of the strength of directional selection acting
on general intelligence in each environment. This work permits determination of
whether the strength of selection on g varies among ancestral, historically
urban and rapidly-urbanizing environments. Broader impacts include international
training of students, working closely with film crews to create television
documentaries, and production of a children's book on hyena
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.