* 1755033
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Mechanisms of Astrocyte Neuron Interactions in the Development of Synchronous Activity in Neuronal Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Rhonda Dzakpasu, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 107,234.00

Brain cells are of two types. Neurons are the most well-known; they communicate
with each other by generating spikes of electrical activity. The second cell
type, glial cells, play a variety of roles that are less well understood. In the
awake adult brain, the overall spiking activity of neurons appears random.
However, in deep sleep or under anesthesia, the spiking activity pattern becomes
synchronized within and between various brain regions. During brain development,
this type of synchronous spiking is thought to be necessary for the circuit
maturation, and the establishment and maintenance of the functional organization
of the brain. The focus of this research is to understand the role of one type
of glial cell (astrocytes) in the emergence of synchronous spiking activity
patterns in the developing brain. The main hypothesis is that astrocytes play a
decisive role in the synchronization of neuronal activity in the brain.
Preliminary data has demonstrated that astrocytes are necessary for
synchronization of spiking activity; the proposed research will elucidate the
molecular pathways within astrocytes that control the synchronization of spiking
in surrounding neurons. The results of this research will identify fundamental
mechanisms of astrocyte-neuron interactions that shape synchronous activity
during brain development. This project is conducted at a Historically Black
University, and will immerse minority students in cutting edge neuroscience
research, and foster peer-mentoring based on interactions between undergraduate
and graduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data using mixed
neuron and astrocyte cultures on multi-electrode arrays (MEAs) showed random
spiking activity which synchronized over time, in comparison to astrocyte-free
neuronal cultures, which only show random activity without synchronization. The
main hypothesis of this research is that astrocytic release of glutamate
mediated by the mGluR1 G-protein-coupled-receptor (GPCR) pathway mediates the
effects of astrocytes on the development of neuronal synchronous activity. A
model for the mechanism by which the astrocyte mGluR1 pathway mediates neuronal
synchronization will be tested using several different dominant negative
constructs. A dominant-negative mGluR1 receptor that blocks downstream signaling
will be used to understand this signaling pathway's role in both population
synchrony, and in the temporal relationship between calcium oscillations within
astrocytes and the development of neuronal synchronous bursts. A dominant-
negative SNARE protein Vamp2/Syb2 will be used to block glutamate release from
astrocytes. The role of the mGluR1 pathway and mGluR1 mediated glutamate release
in the development of synchrony will also be examined in vivo. The strength of
this project is the combination of multi-electrode electrophysiology, molecular
dissection of the mGluR1 pathway in astrocytes, and computational
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.