* 1755475
* Antarctic Broadcasts: Broader Impacts Through Telepresence (ABBITT)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Gail Scowcroft, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 159,715.00

The Antarctic Broadcasts: Broader Impacts Through Telepresence (ABBITT) project
is a pilot project that has the potential to greatly improve education
activities related to NSF-funded Antarctic research. The project will test
technologies that have been developed for ship to shore transmissions in a
region where they have not been used - extreme southern latitudes - and test the
delivery of broader impact activities using this technology while at-sea onboard
the R/V Lawrence M. Gould (LMG) and from the U.S. Palmer Field Station, located
on the Antarctic peninsula. The LMG has a new ship's satellite antenna that
should be capable of the broadcast quality service, but it has not been tested
for this use. The Inner Space Center (ISC) at the University of Rhode Island's
Graduate School of Oceanography is a leader in developing ship-to-shore
telepresence technologies - communications technology that optimizes live video,
audio, and data transmissions via advanced satellite and terrestrial networks
that link remote locations to the rest of the world. The ISC serves research
expeditions aboard several ships in the U.S. research fleet, as well as several
privately owned research vessels. The ISC facility includes a fully equipped
broadcast studio that allows for the production of professional quality
programming and live, interactive broadcasts. The PIs propose to test this
equipment aboard the LMG and at Palmer Station. They will test the system and
produce live interactive broadcasts from the ship that will be delivered to the
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) during the
testing phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new combination of technologies that have
not been previously used in the Antarctic will be tested, including a Mobile
Telepresence Unit (MTU) and a new shipboard antenna on the LMG. University of
Rhode Island scientists will configure the MTU for the ship and install it in
the shipboard laboratory. This system will integrate with the new Fleet XPress
satellite telecommunication system and should be sufficient for video
broadcasting and sending produced video clips ashore to be cut in during the
outreach programs. Broadcasts will be conducted from the ship and from Palmer
Station in Antarctica when weather and satellite footprints allow connection to
the U.S. These broadcasts will be aired in the Q'rius Center auditorium at the
Smithsonian NMNH, which has seating for about 100 museum visitors. The new
capability supported by this award will expand options for communications from
the Antarctic and Southern Ocean, providing additional capacity for both
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.