* 1755184
* Collaborative Research: Structure and function of Reelin in brain development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Gabriella D'Arcangelo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2022
* USD 272,000.00

Brain development is regulated by a variety of molecules that are used both to
build the brain and to help it function normally after it is built. This project
focuses on Reelin, a large molecule that critically controls the embryonic
formation of brain structures that contain different cell types organized into
layers. Reelin also affects brain development after birth by promoting the
maturation of cells, and the formation of connections that nerve cells make with
each other (called synapses). Finally, in the adult and in old-aged brains,
Reelin modulates the transmission of information at synapses, influencing
cognitive brain function. The molecular mechanisms that underlie these diverse
biological functions of Reelin are not well understood. The purpose of the
present project is to address this knowledge gap by advancing the scientific
understanding of the mechanisms through which Reelin affects mammalian brain
development and function. The knowledge and materials generated by this study,
including novel purified protein reagents and structural models, will be made
available to the broad research community, accelerating the rate of discovery
and promoting new scientific advances. This work will also benefit society by
providing research training for undergraduate and graduate students, including
women and other groups of people who are currently under-represented in science,
fostering the development of a more diverse and globally competitive S.T.E.M.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reelin is a large, modular secreted glycoprotein
that controls many aspects of brain development and function, from neuronal
migration at embryonic ages, to dendrite development, synapse formation,
plasticity, and learning at postnatal ages. The mechanisms that mediate these
biological functions are not well understood. A major obstacle that hindered
progress in the field is the lack of availability of purified Reelin. This stems
not only from the difficulty of expressing such a large glycoprotein, but also
from the challenges associated with proteolytic cleavage events, which generate
multiple protein isoforms. Through collaborative efforts and the establishment
of novel protocols, the present research team was able to overcome this
limitation, and has obtained large amounts of highly-purified, bioactive Reelin
protein. The goals of the project are to: 1) characterize the three-dimensional
structure of Reelin proteins by Cryo- Electron Tomography (Cryo-ET), protein
crystallography and small angle X-ray scattering; 2) ; identify and characterize
novel receptor(s) by a combination of biochemical and proteomic technologies
such as ELISA and mass spectrometry; 3) and identify signal transduction
mechanisms that are elicited by these new receptors in distinct neuronal
populations, including excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons and astroglia.
Together, these experiments will either validate or rule out the main hypothesis
guiding the work, that full-length Reelin and its physiological proteolytic
fragments are bioactive ligands that affect brain development and function by
engaging a variety of cell-surface receptors expressed by different cell types,
and activating multiple signal transduction pathways. The approach followed here
with Reelin may also provide a paradigm for gaining a deeper understand of other
molecules that play a variety of roles in the brain from early development
through adulthood and senescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.