* 1755098
* Extrinsic neuromodulation is a general mechanism to stabilize neural network function during temperature changes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Wolfgang Stein, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

How nerve cells in the brain deal with temperature changes is not well
understood. The electrical activity that nerve cells produce rely on a well-
balanced flow of ions across the cell membrane. It is this balance that is
critically altered by temperature, leading to failures in neural activity and
accordingly severe consequences for vitality. Many animals have evolved
compensatory mechanisms allowing their brains to function over a wider
temperature range. This research elucidates such evolutionary conserved
mechanisms with a novel approach by studying the same nerve cells in several
different species of crustaceans. Crustaceans are ideal systems to address these
issues because of their large and identified nerve cells and they live at a
variety of temperatures. Recognizing evolutionarily conserved mechanisms for
temperature compensation is not only crucial for understanding how animals
survive in continuously changing environments, they are ultimately also a
prerequisite for the investigation and treatment of hyper- and hypothermia. This
project will provide comprehensive training in identifying temperature effects
on nerve cell physiology and in cutting-edge electrophysiology for all levels of
students. Results will be disseminated publicly through Youtube and a variety of
public outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possessing compensatory
mechanisms that maintain vital neuronal activity when temperature changes is
critical for animal survival. Recent data from central pattern generators in the
crustacean stomatogastric nervous system have shown that descending projection
neurons that provide extrinsic neuromodulation to motor networks can
counterbalance detrimental temperature effects in these networks. Compensation
is achieved by counterbalancing temperature-dependent increases of ionic
conductances, allowing for a quick and flexible response to temperature
influences. Descending projection neurons are universal building blocks in the
motor circuits of many taxa, and the goal of this project is to test the
hypothesis that temperature compensation via neuromodulation is a widespread
phenomenon and evolutionarily conserved. Experiments will be carried out on
several closely and distantly related crustaceans with various evolutionary
backgrounds and temperature tolerances. Specifically, extra- and intracellular
recordings, including voltage- and dynamic clamp, from identified modulatory and
pattern generating neurons in the stomatogastric ganglion will (1) determine
temperature compensation in related species with similar temperature tolerance
and (2) determine temperature compensation in distantly related species with
different temperature tolerance. This study will show that neuromodulation is
more than a means to increase flexibility in the nervous system in that it
stabilizes neuronal activity in a functional context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.