* 1755111
* RUI:  Perceptual and Mnemonic Functions of the Perirhinal Cortex in Stimulus Representation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sharon Furtak, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2023
* USD 465,041.00

All animals possess the ability to form memories. In mammals, the hippocampal
memory system is a conglomerate of brain structures that function together to
support memory formation. In doing so, this memory system associates, or binds
together, people, items, and places into what are known as episodic memories.
Episodic memories afford species the ability to remember vital information that
increases the likelihood of survival, such as securing long-term food sources.
In this example, the animal must remember "what" was stored, "where" it was
stored, and "when" it was stored to retrieve the food before it spoils and avoid
illness in the process. Within the hippocampal memory system, the predominant
role of one structure, called the perirhinal cortex, is to supply a
representation of "what" information (e.g., what food item was stored). The
perirhinal cortex also appears to be involved in complex stimulus
representations outside of its role in episodic memory; however, how and under
which circumstances the perirhinal cortex is involved in stimulus representation
is currently under debate. This project assesses how the perirhinal cortex
functions in a perceptual-specific versus a memory-specific manner in its
representation of item information. In addition, the project examines whether
the role of the perirhinal cortex in stimulus representation involves
connections with structures outside of the hippocampal memory system. Results
will furnish significant insight into the contributions of the perirhinal cortex
to stimulus representation and how it may differ or complement its well-
established role in episodic memory within the hippocampal memory system. All
components of the research program provide training opportunities to students at
California State University-Sacramento, a minority serving and primarily
undergraduate institution. Additionally, outreach events provide students with
opportunities to increase STEM-awareness in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, it is debated how the perirhinal
cortex may function in stimulus representation, and if this function is
independent from its mnemonic role within the hippocampal memory system. This
project uses an associative learning paradigm (Pavlovian fear conditioning) in
combination with an innovative inactivation method, Designer Receptors
Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs, and cross-lesion techniques to evaluate
the functional role of the perirhinal cortex in stimulus representation.
Specifically, using the laboratory rat as a model system the project aims to: 1)
examine the characteristics of stimuli that require the perirhinal cortex for
stimulus representation; 2) determine whether the role of perirhinal cortex in
stimulus representation is perceptual, mnemonic or a combination; and 3)
determine whether in stimulus representation the perirhinal cortex relies on
direct connections with structures outside of the hippocampal memory system. The
research project provides extensive training opportunities to students at
California State University-Sacramento, which is a minority serving and
primarily undergraduate institution. Further, community outreach, which includes
events that expose elementary school girls to science, promote university-wide
brain awareness and present research findings to the local community, provide
students with opportunities to increase STEM-awareness in the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.