* 1755419
* Systematizing Connective Labor
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Allison Pugh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 205,000.00

This research investigates connective labor, a novel concept of service work,
and examines the impact of contemporary trends in standardization and
automation. Some jobs have relationships with people at the core of their work
where these relationships require an emotional connection between workers and
their charges. Teachers, therapists, primary care physicians, even prison guards
each depend on relationships in service to a larger goal: children learning,
patients healing, prisons secure. Connective labor captures the relational work
between practitioner and recipient, using their emotional connection to produce
an outcome. Existing research documents the importance of work involving
relationships for valuable outcomes in arenas from schools to hospitals; these
proven impacts of connective labor make its scarcity, uneven distribution or
unreliable performance a social problem. Yet its emotional nature resists
efforts to make it more systematic or automated. This research will provide new
information to policymakers and the public about connective labor: its
variation, its value, and the costs and benefits of making it more systematic,
scaling it up, or delivering it by non-human agents. The project will also
contribute to ongoing public debates and policy deliberations about automation
and work involving relationships, by providing a new visibility for connective
labor and the kind of standards and technology that support its excellence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are: to distill the common
practices and principles that comprise connective labor, for practitioners as
well as the program administrators and artificial intelligence (AI) engineers
who would systematize their work; investigate how workers experience different
kinds of systematization, from checklists to robotics; and evaluate how such
systematization affects connective labor. Research includes 95 in-depth
interviews and ethnographic observations with connective laborers in fields
focused on security and/or control, e.g. police; with low-wage workers in home
health care; and with what might be called systematizers, e.g., administrators.
The results of the study will document characteristics of different kinds of
connective labor, outline the risks and rewards of the various ways these are
systematized, and explain differing stances towards this work.