* 1755099
* Synergistic Relations Between Theories of Visual Perception and Iconoclasm
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Mary Quinlan-McGrath, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 213,877.00

This award supports history of science research at the interface of science and
religion. The research explores the relationships between the science of vision,
images, and the optical-psychological practices with images at a critical
juncture of western civilization. Specifically, it focuses on relationships
between understandings of optics and violent European religious iconoclasms that
occurred during the early modern period. The researcher will show that common
beliefs about the ways vision and visual psychology worked, and the different
uses of that knowledge by artists on the one hand and theologians on the other,
set religious art on a collision course with the Reformation understandings of
the image. The connections between science, religion, and society that are to be
revealed in this study will serve to create scholarly exchanges among those in
the natural sciences, social sciences, visual arts, and several fields within
the humanities. The results of this study will be integrated into curricular
development at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and they will be
disseminated in professional journals and conferences. Finally, there will be a
conference to extend the trajectories of the main lines of inquiry of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research question of this study
addresses what the science of vision can teach us about iconoclastic violence.
The researcher will engage in this study first setting out the understandings of
optics in this period among different levels of society, then comparing textual
evidence in Latin and vernacular religious texts alongside visual and text
evidence from the artists. Scientific understandings today recognize vision,
perception, and memory storage as physical processes that create both temporary
and long-term changes to the brain. Early scientists also recognized the power
of vision, especially when focused on images, to alter the mind physically.
Those who urgently called for immediate destruction of religious images
repeatedly point to the fact that the devout had confused the material image
with the holy figure portrayed, and were treating the material object as though
it were alive. As the Reformers point out, the optical habits of daily
meditation on images, especially on images that appeared alive, caused the
images to become physically part of the person's memory, and shaped the person's
identity. The iconoclasts understood their image destruction to be destroying a
deeply ingrained psychological part of the individual that was considered
religiously pernicious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.