* 1755501
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Low-Latitude Ionospheric Irregularities in the Upper E-Region Valley Using Observations, Theory, And Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Erhan Kudeki, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 06/30/2023
* USD 309,013.00

This proposal combines modeling tools with incoherent scatter radar measurements
to investigate the sources of radar echoes scattered from the equatorial
ionosphere near 150 km. When plotted in the altitude-time plane, these echoes
resemble a "necklace". Intricately structured backscatter first appears at dawn
near 150 km, descends to ~130 km by midday, lofts to150 km by late afternoon,
and disappears at sunset. The cause of these echoes remained largely unknown
until 2016, when the PIs plausibly argued they were manifestations of
photoelectron-driven electron waves. The goal of this work is to build a
cohesive, physics-based, system-science understanding of the 150-km echoes.
&lt;br/&gt;Under this new award, the PIs will continue their theoretical and
experimental investigations by incorporating additional processes into their
model, and comparing with Jicamarca radar and ionosonde data. Broader impacts
include mentoring of graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students.
Advancing understanding of ionospheric physics, and being able to interpret
ionospheric radar signatures and ionospheric structuring benefits space weather
modeling and prediction. The 2016 work received much attention in the popular
press, and thus stimulated public interest in plasma physics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.