* 1755771
* CRII: CPS: Bilateral Adaptation Between Models for Human-Perceived Safety/Comfort and Autonomous Driving Controllers
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Yunyi Jia, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,989.00

This project addresses perceived safety within the context of autonomous
driving. Self-driving cars have great potential to transform our transportation
system, but their technical safety does not necessarily indicate how a human
will perceive the safety of autonomous driving, especially if the driving style
of the passenger is less aggressive than that of the self-driving car. The goal
of this research is to change the car's controller when a human shows discomfort
with respect to safety. The approach is to measure physical data from passengers
in simulators and in real cars, compare these to expected levels of comfort, and
update the controllers using novel algorithms. The project's results will
improve user acceptance of autonomous vehicles, as well as produce new
curriculum and outreach programs related to autonomous driving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand human perceived
safety and comfort in autonomous driving and examine and bilaterally adapt the
interactions between humans and autonomous vehicles in order to enhance the
human perception (i.e., perceived safety and comfort) while simultaneously
enhancing the vehicle performance (i.e., technical driving safety and comfort).
In particular, the proposed research will (a) understand the factors affecting
the human perceived safety and comfort and investigate how to quantify human
perceived safety and comfort using physiological signals, (b) investigate
general human and autonomous driving models and online bilateral adaptation
strategies to improve the driving safety and comfort, and (c) evaluate the
research outcomes using both simulated and real autonomous vehicles. The
research will contribute to improving the safety and comfort of autonomous
driving and is scalable to other human-autonomy interaction contexts as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.