* 1755874
* CRII: SHF: A Memory-Centric Hardware Accelerator for Large Scale Data Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Mahdi Nazm Bojnordi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 190,918.00

Clustering is a crucial tool for analyzing data in virtually every scientific
and engineering discipline. The U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) has
recently announced "the seven giants of statistical data analysis" in which data
clustering plays a central role. This report also emphasizes that more scalable
solutions are required to enable time and space clustering for the future large
scale data analyses. As a result, hardware and software innovations that can
significantly improve energy-efficiency and performance of the data clustering
techniques are necessary to make the future large scale data analysis practical.
To this goal, the proposed research demonstrates a radically different vision of
solving data clustering problems in the future, where large-scale clustering
problems are mapped onto a memory-centric, non-Von Neumann computation substrate
and solved in situ within the data arrays, with orders of magnitude greater
performance and energy efficiency than contemporary computer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will leverage recent
developments in resistive random access memory (RRAM) and algorithmic approaches
for reformulating clustering problems within massively parallel frameworks, such
as bit serial rank order filters, to build an extremely low power and fast
memory substrate for future clustering applications. At the software level,
novel algorithms will be developed to map different types of heterogeneous data
clustering problems (including numerical and non-numerical data points) from
scientific and engineering domains onto the proposed memristive accelerator.
Programming models, software modules, and application libraries for hardware-
software co-design, dynamic resource management, and memory allocation will be
developed to give the user control of the data clustering process at runtime. At
the hardware level, we will investigate techniques for optimizing power and
performance of the memory modules constructed from novel resistive cells and
interconnection networks. Architecture and software innovations will be
disseminated to the broader research community through published papers, as well
as tutorials on the emerging in situ computing platforms and software-hardware
interfaces in non-Von Neumann computer systems. The educational component of
this project will involve integrating the cell structure, the interconnection
networks, the hierarchical software interface, and the control policies into the
syllabus of an advanced computer architecture course.