* 1755721
* CRII: SaTC: GEMINI: Guided Execution Based Mobile Advanced Persistent Threat Investigation
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Brendan Saltaformaggio, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Advanced persistent threat (APT) campaigns are increasingly targeting mobile
devices deployed across corporations, governments, and financial institutions.
Unfortunately, prohibitively slow responses to even high-profile APT attacks
have shown that authorities lack the capability to quickly investigate ongoing
attacks (in a matter of hours or days rather than months). To address this
challenge, this research draws inspiration from recent developments in memory
image forensics (in particular a recently introduced technique called guided
execution), which has provided rapid evidence collection and crime investigation
capabilities currently unparalleled in APT investigation. This research is
developing an integrated framework, called GEMINI, which shifts the goal of
modern memory forensics from the investigation of physical-world crimes to APT
campaigns. Based on the analysis of only a single memory image --- collected
from an Android device after an attack is suspected --- GEMINI provides the
following set of APT investigation capabilities: (1) Based on exploratory guided
execution techniques, GEMINI can search for and re-create previously enacted APT
attack stages. (2) Beyond investigating prior attack execution, GEMINI enables
the revelation of hidden/potential future attack behaviors by 'puppeteering'
their executing with pre-staged memory image data. (3) After exploring future
payloads, GEMINI can further leverage its guided execution capabilities for the
remediation of the observed attack strategies.

This work directly contributes to national security by advancing research in and
developing techniques for the investigation of APT campaigns targeting mobile
devices. In addition, the results of this research are being made publicly
available with the goal of enhancing discovery and empowering future research in
this area as well as contributing to the development of new curriculum materials
focused on malware analysis and reverse engineering.