* 1755921
* CRII: AF: Linear-Algebraic Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Michael Forbes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Error-resilient communication lies at the backbone of modern computer networks
and storage systems. Such schemes have the property of being pseudorandom in
that they are explicitly constructed without randomness (which can be important,
such as for efficient decoding), and yet (almost) share the error-resilience
afforded by truly-random communication protocols.  The construction and analysis
of such schemes often uses linear algebra, and recently it has been shown that
one can improve such schemes (in particular, list-decodable codes) by
constructing certain pseudorandom linear-algebraic objects. Such linear-
algebraic pseudorandom notions have turned out to be interesting independent of
their coding-theoretic applications, as they mirror many well-studied notions in
statistical (min-entropy) pseudorandomness, have applications to improving the
time- and randomness-efficiency of linear-algebraic algorithms, and have
connections to the polynomial method in mathematics.  This research will study
the foundations of linear-algebraic pseudorandomness by attacking its main open
problems, strengthening known connections, and discovering new connections. This
project also has a broader impact through course design, organization of
workshops, and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main focuses.  The first is
on explicit constructions of linear-algebraic pseudorandom objects. In
particular, this project studies rank extractors (a small collection of
dimension-reducing linear maps that will preserve the dimension of a linear
space on average), subspace-evasive sets (a large set which has small
intersections with any small-dimensional linear space), and dimension expanders
(a small collection of linear maps which increase the dimension of any small-
dimensional linear space). While rank extractors and dimension expanders now
have good constructions known, they lack optimality in several parameter
regimes, and this project seeks to close these gaps, for example by tightening
current analyses.  In contrast, all known explicit constructions of subspace-
evasive sets are far from optimal, and this project seeks new avenues of
construction.  Further, the project will explore the many relationships of these
objects, such as with recent work on two-source (min-entropy) extractors, and
known applications of expander graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second focus on
this project is on the polynomial method, a method in mathematics which has
yielded dramatic solutions to problems in combinatorics and number theory.  It
turns out that the linear-algebraic tools used in the analysis of the above
pseudorandom objects has a natural phrasing in the language of the polynomial
method. This project will sharpen these linear-algebraic tools to obtain new
results via the polynomial method.