* 1755544
* CRII: CHS: Robust Algorithms Modeling Frictional Contact with Industrial, Medical and Computer Graphics Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Chenfanfu Jiang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Visual simulation methods for natural phenomena involving complex solid and
fluid dynamics have been widely applied in digital animation and effects.
Computer graphics and computational mechanics have also proved to be a powerful
combination for pushing the boundaries of science and engineering in diverse
fields such as soil mechanics, geophysics, biomechanics and engineering design.
The current research aims to both alleviate existing computational bottlenecks
and improve simulation resolution, with an emphasis on interacting coupled
virtual materials with elaborate geometry and intricate frictional contact.
Project outcomes will include algorithms with broad impact in various
applications such as the analysis of geo-mechanical phenomena (landslides,
debris flows, avalanches), the simulation of fully coupled human body parts for
medical training (skin, muscle, organ, bone), and the design of granular
material processing (in food, agriculture, mining, and the pharmaceuticals
industry). The project will collaborate with researchers from these related
science and engineering fields, and will advocate for interdisciplinary
collaborations among undergraduate and graduate students and researchers. It
will take steps to engage and attract both design and medical science students
and will encourage the research careers of women and minority students through
educational events, exchange programs, and other social activities. The project
will focus on the development of highly robust and efficient new algorithms for
modeling frictional contact under complex settings through innovative numerical
discretization schemes and continuum elastoplastic models. The work will utilize
the proven hybrid Lagrangian / Eulerian Material Point Method (MPM). A primary
focus will be on the simulation of granular materials with nontrivial geometries
in multi-physics settings. The methods will leverage spatial / temporal
adaptivity, multiscale modeling, novel discretization schemes, efficient data
structures, and low-level optimization exploiting hardware architecture. The
techniques developed in this work will offer seamless coupling between rigid
bodies, granular materials, deformable objects, and fluids; they will establish
a solid foundation for a unified, versatile multi-material physics solver to
handle complex phenomena in a way that requires minimal user interference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.