* 1755130
* Genetic Accommodation of Nutritional Plasticity in a Socially Polymorphic Fire Ant
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Kenneth Ross, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 394,710.00

The co-occurrence of multiple, genetically-specialized populations of a species
can increase the species' success by maximizing efficient use of resources.
Because of their specialization, individuals in this scenario are adapted to
utilize resources in different ways. However, matings between individuals from
differently specialized populations are expected to produce intermediate forms
that may not be able to survive well in any environment. One solution to this
problem is achieved when variation within a species becomes completely
associated with variant, or altered, forms of a chromosome. When variant forms
of a chromosome contain multiple genes that are inherited as a single unit, this
chromosome region is known as a "supergene". A growing body of evidence suggests
that supergenes play key roles in innovation across the tree of life. Under the
influence of a supergene, the fire ant Solenopsis invicta displays two social
forms that differ in how many queens inhabit the ant colony and many other
individual, colony, and life-history traits. Many of these differences relate to
distinct strategies of colony founding by young queens. This research program
will assess how variation in diet, nutrition, and supergene presence shape
variation in behavior and reproduction in fire ant queens. This will shed new
light on supergene origins and function in fire ants, a model for how supergenes
can mediate variation in behavior and reproduction in this and other species as
well. Broader impacts of the program include partnering with a local high school
to offer experiential learning modules and summer research assistantships,
integration of resulting data into undergraduate coursework, and providing new
insights into the reproductive biology of an economically important invasive
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the extent to which
gene expression differences between queens of alternate social forms in
Solenopsis invicta reflect convergence with nutritional plasticity, and thus
implicate genetic accommodation. In other words, the research will test the
hypothesis that a nutritional ground plan played a key role in the origin of
queen polymorphism (and, hence, colony social polymorphism) in S. invicta. This
work will provide important insights into the proximal basis of queen
polymorphism (i) by decoupling gene expression differences due to variation in
nutrition and supergene genotype in individual tissues of S. invicta and (ii) by
decoupling the effects of queen genotype (endogenous genetic effects) and colony
worker genotypes (indirect social genetic effects) on the mediation of queen
polymorphism. Taken together, this work will greatly improve our understanding
of how phenotypic plasticity and supergenes mediate a complex behavioral
polymorphism important in ant social evolution. Broader impacts of the research
program include providing fundamental new information on the genomic and
epigenomic factors that regulate the reproductive biology of an important
invasive pest species, partnering with a local high school biology teacher to
develop new experiential learning modules and to provide summer research
assistantships for students in the investigator's laboratories, and integrating
the data generated by the project into undergraduate
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.