* 1755522
* REU Site:  Research Training in Place-Based Field Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,011,532.00

This REU Site award to the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory located in
Gothic, CO, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2018-2022. Resesarch is conducted throughout the Gunnison Basin. The
theme of the program is the Ecology of Place, or using a deep understanding of a
place to generate general scientific insights. Students design and implement a
field research program and present results orally and in writing at the end of
the summer. Students also participate in professional development opportunities
throughout the summer, such as discussions of scientific and non-academic
careers, as well as responsible conduct of research topics such as sexual
harassment and the ethics of research. The program recruit students nationally,
building on established collaborative relationships with the Los Angeles
community colleges. Students apply online, and submit essays and letters of
reference. Students for whom the program will have a large impact, including
students who would be unable to participate in summer research without financial
support, are encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a
total of 50 students primarily from schools with limited research opportunities,
will be trained in the program over five years. The goal is that 70% of the
participants will be minority students and at least 35% of the students will
have a community college background. Students will learn how research is
conducted, many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Approximately one-third of the students will publish results in
scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system as well as RMBL surveys. More information about the
program is available by visiting rmbl.org/education , or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Ian Billick, director@rmbl.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Jennifer Reithel at
sd@rmbl.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.