* 1755071
* Adaptive Rewiring of a Sensory Network through Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Bruce Carlson, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Behavior in all animals, including humans, depends on detecting external sensory
stimuli and responding appropriately. There are a variety of mechanisms by which
sensory systems maximize the detection of stimuli that are important to the
animal. However, the sensory environment is constantly changing. How can animals
reliably detect behaviorally relevant sensory stimuli while also retaining the
flexibility to adapt to changes in the sensory environment? One possible
mechanism is synaptic plasticity in which the strengths of the synaptic
connections between neurons are adjusted based on past experience. The central
hypothesis of this project is that the intrinsic dynamics of neural networks
induce synaptic plasticity that results in increased sensitivity to frequently
encountered stimuli. Synaptic plasticity is found throughout the brain, but it
is generally challenging to study directly in a living animal. The researchers
capitalize on the unique experimental advantages of electric fish, in which it
is possible to manipulate precisely and monitor the electrical activity of
sensory neurons in an awake, behaving animal. In the context of social
communication behavior, the researchers study how plasticity alters responses to
sensory input, whether natural patterns of sensory input can induce this
plasticity, and how this plasticity impacts the behavioral detection of stimuli.
This research has broad implications by elucidating how sensory systems adjust
to changing external conditions. In addition, electric fish are excellent tools
for public outreach in neuroscience and behavior. As exotic animals, they
attract a wide audience. The project includes ongoing outreach and education
activities to teach K-12 students in the St. Louis region about hypothesis-
driven science and the importance of brain plasticity in sensory perception and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporal codes have been implicated in sensory
processing, cognition, and motor control. Recent studies reveal several
mechanisms by which central sensory pathways decode temporal patterns. However,
the sensory environment can change. A fundamental problem in sensory
neuroscience is understanding how central circuits can robustly detect
behaviorally relevant stimuli while retaining the flexibility to adapt to
changes in the sensory environment. Spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), in
which synaptic strength is adjusted as a function of the relative timing of pre-
and postsynaptic spiking, is found in several brain regions across a wide
diversity of species. However, its role in the processing of behaviorally
relevant stimuli remains controversial, largely because it is inherently
difficult to link changes in synaptic strength at the cellular level to effects
on behavior. The central hypothesis of this project is that STDP provides a
mechanism for modifying network connectivity to adapt information processing to
a changing sensory environment. The researchers address this hypothesis by using
an integrative approach that capitalizes on the unique experimental advantages
of electric fish, in which temporal patterns of spiking are themselves the
behaviorally relevant stimulus. Using a combination of neurophysiology, imaging,
and behavior, the researchers are determining how STDP alters responses to
sensory input in awake and behaving animals, how natural patterns of sensory
input can elicit STDP, and how these changes impact behavioral stimulus
detection. The project includes outreach and education efforts that target K-12
students in the St. Louis region to teach them about brain plasticity and how
the scientific method can be used to address questions about how brains control
behavior. As part of the outreach, researchers lead hands-on activities that
include experiments with freely behaving fish, psychophysical experiments on
participants, and multimedia demonstrations to illustrate brain plasticity and
its role in modifying behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.