* 1755659
* CRII: CSR: Mobile-Aware Resource Management in Geo-Distributed Multi-Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Tian Guo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,960.00

Modern mobile applications are increasingly relying on cloud data centers to
obtain both compute and storage capabilities. To guarantee good performance for
customers, cloud platforms usually provision resources dynamically in order to
meet the demand of the fluctuating workload. Cloud providers also price their
services dynamically to meet variable demand. Mobile workloads exhibit three
distinct characteristics: geographic or spatial fluctuation, rapid changes
characterized by a shorter time scale of fluctuation, and more frequent
fluctuations, which make current resource provisioning approaches less
effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MOBILESCALE project proposes new research
on resource management for mobile workload to address dual objectives of
handling fluctuations and optimizing cost and performance by leveraging
application-specific optimization approaches, acknowledging the cost anomalies
of cloud transient servers, and unifying resources from multiple cloud
providers. The proposed work will involve the design and implementation of a
mobile-aware resource management system, a set of mobile application benchmarks,
and experimental evaluation of the proposed mobile-aware provisioning algorithms
using home-grown mobile apps developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will open doors for research on making modern cloud platforms more
intelligent with tailored application-specific optimizations. The MOBILESCALE
project can be used and integrated with current general-purpose resource
management systems to reduce manual intervention from operators and to mask
operational complexity. The broader impacts of the project will include graduate
and undergraduate courses that incorporate research results, outreach to expose
undergraduates, high school and K-12 students to research in computer systems,
and the release of MOBILESCALE source code to the research community through the
project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.