* 1755187
* Collaborative Research:  Effect Of Developmental Hypoxia On Juvenile Cardiac Function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Dane Crossley, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 775,000.00

This collaborative project will investigate the outcome of low environmental
oxygen levels (hypoxia) experienced during early development on the
cardiovascular system of the American alligator, a species that naturally
experiences low oxygen during embryonic life. The cardiovascular system is
essential for the distribution of oxygen and metabolic fuels to active tissues.
In some developing vertebrates, including humans, the function of the immature
cardiovascular system can be negatively affected by environmental challenges
such as low oxygen, and these changes can adversely affect the health of the
adult. By contrast, species that naturally experience low oxygen during
development, such as alligators, can benefit later in life from the changes to
the cardiovascular system resulting from developmental hypoxia. Cardiovascular
function will be assessed in two-year-old juvenile American alligators that were
exposed to hypoxia as embryos, under active conditions (while exercising and
after feeding). An integrative assessment will be conducted from the level of
individual proteins to that of the whole animal. The broader impacts of the
project include a significant number of opportunities for training students at
multiple education levels in skills relevant to biomedical research, which will
have a direct impact on the future work force, and training and practice in
communicating science to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental
plasticity is a phenomenon that enables multiple environmentally mediated
phenotypes to be generated from a single genotype. This plasticity, which is
present in all multicellular taxa, can result in beneficial or adaptive changes
that enhance function during juvenile and adult life. Hypoxia is an ecologically
relevant environmental condition that, if encountered during embryonic life when
organ systems are developing, can result in altered juvenile phenotypes that can
impact organismal performance and affect animal fitness. Despite the important
role hypoxia plays in causing phenotypic change, fundamental questions remain
regarding the long-term effects of developmental hypoxia in vertebrates. This
project investigates the impact of hypoxia experienced during a critical period
of development on cardiovascular function of juvenile alligators at multiple
levels of biological organization: from whole-animal performance, to functional
studies of the cardiovascular system, to the organ, cellular, protein, and gene
levels of organization. Alligators will be studied because they can naturally
experience hypoxia during development and as adults. This approach will
establish links between molecular and cellular traits, including changes in
expression of genes involved in calcium dynamics and in cardiomyocyte
contractility that underpin differences in cardiac output at the whole organism
level. This multi-level approach will provide a comprehensive understanding of
how embryonic hypoxia impacts cardiovascular function, with applicability to
other vertebrate systems. The research findings will provide basic information
that will be needed to make informed animal management decisions in the era of
global climate change, and could lead to future treatment options for
cardiovascular disease states. The project involves research training of
graduate students and undergraduate students recruited from groups under-
represented in science, as well as outreach to K-12 students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.