* 1755498
* The Microphysics of Plate Boundary Formation: Dynamic Recrystallization and Phase Mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Mark Zimmerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 369,999.00

The modern theory of plate tectonics explains much about the structure and
workings of our planet from sea-floor spreading to subduction and mountain
building. Although this powerful theory tells us so much about activity on the
surface of our planet, relatively little is known about how plate tectonics
starts and the underlying physics that allows it to continue over time. There is
little doubt that convection of the mantle drives the motion of these plates.
However, the details of how this process occurs and how it originated are far
from complete. Plate tectonics is defined by special boundaries, namely
subduction zones, ridges, and strike-slip fault margins at the edges of
continents. These boundaries are formed at the top of the mantle, which requires
some special physical properties that localize deformation through certain
mechanisms. Thankfully, the Earth has provided an important clue through the
abundance of rocks called mylonites that are found at plate boundaries. These
fine-grain rocks provide evidence of the physics that might tell us how plate
tectonics started and how it persists today. The investigator's research
captures the essential physics of the mechanisms that lead to development of
mylonites that persist as weak zones and ultimately develop as plate boundaries.
This work is the primary focus of the doctoral dissertation project of a
graduate student in the PI's lab and will help develop the student's skills as a
scientist in addition to providing fundamental research necessary for the future
progress of our understanding of the generation of tectonic plates. The
experimental techniques developed in this research will be applied to new
undergraduate lab exercises that demonstrate complex processes involving
feedback between microstructural development and mechanical properties of the
material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth is unique in the solar system in that
it displays plate tectonics. The physical explanation for this behavior remains
a major challenge. This research focuses on the influence of (i) a secondary
solid phase and (ii) localized deformation on lithospheric strength with
implications for plate tectonics. The project emphasizes a transformative
approach to laboratory experiments designed to investigate the role of a second
phase in the deformation of olivine, the primary phase in Earth's upper mantle.
To achieve steady-state microstructures and thus steady state creep rates, the
team will fabricate two-phase samples with grain sizes significantly larger than
the steady-state grain size. They will then deform these samples in torsion to
large shear strains, such that dynamic recrystallization produces a steady-state
grain size. The dependence of strain rate on stress is determined through rate
or load steps. Some samples will be annealed after large strain to measure grain
growth in thoroughly mixed, dynamically recrystallized samples. Grain-size
reduction due to dynamic recrystallization of coarse-grained rocks is well
established both experimentally and in observations of natural shear zones. This
process leads to a grain-size sensitive process and associated strain weakening.
However, without continued deformation and dynamic recrystallization, grains
will grow and ultimately lead to hardening that makes reactivation of a shear
zone difficult. In polyphase materials, pinning of grain boundaries by a
secondary phase inhibits grain growth, allowing localization to persist or to be
more easily reactivated. For this process to be effective, the phases must be
thoroughly mixed. Understanding both the chemical and mechanical processes that
lead to phase mixing and localization is the primary goal of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.