* 1755708
* CRII: SaTC: Towards the Development of Stronger Memory-Hard Functions for Secure Password Hashing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jeremiah Blocki, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2020
* USD 183,000.00

Recent data breaches have exposed billions of user passwords to the dangerous
threat of an offline password attacker who attempts to guess each user's
password by brute force. Because an offline attacker can validate each password
guess by itself using stolen password hashes from a data breach it is not
possible to "lock out" an offline attacker after several incorrect guesses. The
attacker is limited only by the computational resources necessary to mount a
brute-force attack. To mitigate the risk of an offline attack the goal of a
secure password hashing algorithm is to ensure that a brute force attack is
prohibitively expensive even if the attacker has access to customized hardware
such as an Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) that is optimized for
password cracking. Memory hard functions (MHFs), functions whose computation
require a large amount of memory, are a crucial cryptographic tool to achieve
this goal since memory is expensive even on an ASIC. This project advances
scientific understanding of memory hard functions and will directly impact
future cryptographic standards for password hashing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is developing improved cryptanalysis techniques to evaluate the security
of an MHF resulting in a deeper understanding of currently deployed MHFs. A main
goal of this work is to design practical constructions of MHFs with provably
optimal memory hardness in terms of bandwidth hardness, sustained space
complexity, and amortized area-time complexity. Furthermore, the project focuses
on establishing a scientific basis for tuning the parameters of an MHF to ensure
that brute-force attacks are prohibitively expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.