* 1755268
* Nuclear action of a novel fish kisspeptin receptor isoform
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Cunming Duan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 924,354.00

The project addresses the interesting topic of proteins that take on additional
roles after a gene duplication event. It focuses on the kisspeptin hormone and
its receptor, a hormonal signaling pathway that plays key roles in the control
of reproduction. The kisspeptin receptor is a member of the G-protein coupled
receptor (GPCR) family, the largest protein family. The textbook view of GPCR
signaling is that hormone binding at the cell surface causes a conformational
change in the transmembrane receptor protein and promotes its interaction with G
proteins to alter the activity of enzymes and ion channels inside the cell or in
the cell membrane, leading to specific cellular responses. There is increasing
evidence that this view may be too simplistic, because a number of GPCRs have
been found to be located not only on the cell membrane but also in various
compartments within cells. The researchers have discovered that the zebrafish
kisspeptin receptor b gene encodes several proteins, one of which is located in
the nucleus and has nuclear activity. These findings present the exciting
possibility of a previously unrecognized nuclear function of a GPCR. This
project is designed to test this hypothesis. The results will provide new
insights into the understanding of how the kisspeptin pathway regulates fish
reproduction, and should lead to applications in the aquaculture industry. This
project will provide training opportunities for a diverse group of students at
all levels, and will benefit society by engaging K-12 students and the general
public in educational outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The kisspeptin
ligand (KISS1) and receptor (KISS1R) hormonal pathway plays key roles in the
neuroendocrine control of reproduction in mammals. The mammalian KISS1-KISSR
pathway also has non-reproductive functions with poorly understood mechanisms.
Recent studies suggest that the zebrafish has two kisspeptin receptor genes.
While the zebrafish kiss1ra gene encodes a single G-protein coupled receptor
(GPCR) expressed in the brain, the kiss1rb gene encodes a full-length GPCR as
well as four alternatively spliced isoforms. These truncated isoforms, termed
kiss1rb-derived proteins (KRBDPs), are expressed in the brain and in many
peripheral tissues. Functional analysis results suggest that these KRBDP
transcripts can be translated into protein products, but none are located on the
plasma membrane. Intriguingly, KRBDP3 is detected in the nucleus and possesses
ligand-independent transactivation activity when tested in vitro. This project
will test the hypothesis that KRBDP3 is localized in the nucleus and regulates
gene expression in the brain and/or peripheral tissues. The results will
elucidate the functions of a novel GPCR isoform in the nucleus and identify its
target genes. This project will also uncover the in vivo functions of the
duplicated Kiss1-Kiss1r pathway in the brain and peripheral tissues in a fish
model. This project contains technical innovations that will make it possible to
dissect the functions of different alternatively spliced gene products and to
visualize their expression and subcellular localization in vivo. It will provide
high-quality research training for a diverse group of students at all levels,
and public educational activities in partnership with the University of Michigan
Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.