* 1755197
* Collaborative Research: Immune mechanisms and epidemiological consequences of tolerance in a naturally occurring host-pathogen system
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2019
* James Adelman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 10/31/2019
* USD 607,185.00

Nearly every organism has to cope with harmful infections from pathogens.
Organisms can respond by either killing invading pathogens ('resistance') or by
reducing the damage caused by pathogens ('tolerance'). Among animals, resistance
has been well studied, but relatively little is known about the causes and
consequences of tolerance. This project focuses on a bacterial disease that
emerged in the mid-1990s in a common backyard songbird, the house finch, causing
rapid population declines. This infection causes severe tissue damage, in the
form of conjunctivitis (pink-eye). 'Tolerance' is likely an important way to
mitigate this harmful infection. Because the disease reached parts of the house
finch range at distinct times, the proposed work uses comparisons among
geographically separated finch populations to uncover 1) how quickly 'tolerance'
evolves in response to a novel pathogen, 2) the gene expression mechanisms
important for tolerance, and 3) the consequences of 'tolerance' for disease
spread within flocks. This project also crafts innovative means to communicate
its scientific findings with the public. The researchers have joined a global
network of science enthusiasts by founding a program that hosts monthly public
events where short presentations by scientists or other experts are separated by
musical or artistic interludes. Multiple events will feature results from this
project. In addition, through a graduate-level course at Virginia Tech this
project will train young scientists and educators to design their own programs
that enhance public engagement with science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infectious
diseases are among the most powerful and pervasive selective forces on the
planet. Because vigorous resistance mechanisms, such as inflammatory immune
responses in vertebrates, can reduce host fitness by damaging an animal's own
tissues, selection should favor some degree of tolerance of infection across
diverse hosts. To date, however, work on animals has focused almost exclusively
on resistance. By combining molecular techniques and inter-population
comparisons, this project directly advances our knowledge of three of the most
critical, open issues in the study of animal tolerance: how selection shapes
this host strategy following disease emergence, the immune mechanisms underlying
tolerance, and the consequences of host tolerance for pathogen transmission. The
work utilizes a number of techniques to assess immune responses rarely tested in
non-model organisms (e.g., expression of songbird cytokine genes through qPCR
and expression of myriad other host genes through RNA-seq). In addition, this
project uses experimental epidemics to link differences in individual host
responses with pathogen transmission dynamics. Through this combination of
comparative, molecular, and experimental techniques, this project integrates the
concept of tolerance across levels of biological organization, linking the
causes and consequences of this defense strategy from molecules to populations,
all in a naturally occurring host-pathogen system. Ultimately, this work will
significantly advance knowledge of how tolerance of infection arises in animals
and how this host response impacts the dynamics of pathogen
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.