* 1755757
* Cortical Representations for Value-Based Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Samuel Ling, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 339,610.00

Making good decisions -- in domains such as diet, finances, educational
attainment, and public policy -- requires evaluating and comparing options that
may be complex and multifaceted. Previous brain imaging research has shown that
a frontal region called the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) has an
important role in producing subjective value estimates for individual options
during decision making. Activity in this region varies with the subjective value
of the options under consideration. However, vmPFC also participates in many
other cognitive functions, and its internal functional organization is not yet
understood in detail. In particular, it is not yet known whether valuation
signals originate from the same parts of vmPFC that have been implicated in
processes such as memory, planning, and self-referential thinking. The present
research will compare the patterns of vmPFC activity associated with valuation
and non-valuation processes in individual brains. The results will help develop
improved methods for measuring the engagement of specific cognitive processes
from brain imaging data. Because vmPFC is thought to encode variables akin to
economic utility, this work will contribute to the growing interdisciplinary
dialogue between neuroscience and economics. The project will enhance the
usefulness of neuroscience methods for understanding economic decision making
and thereby contribute to the advancement of societally relevant economic goals.
The interdisciplinary nature of the project will create rich educational
opportunities for students and trainees involved in conducting the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to test whether valuation effects in vmPFC can be topographically
segregated from default-mode-network (DMN) effects when examined at the level of
the single individual. The project involves a collaboration between researchers
with expertise in neuroeconomics and vision science, as a means to import high-
fidelity data analysis techniques from visual neuroscience to studies of
decision making. Valuation tasks will be interleaved with manipulations of DMN
deactivation in a test-retest protocol. Valuation and DMN effects have been
shown to be diffusely co-localized within vmPFC in existing meta-analyses, but
it is unknown whether they originate from the same or different cortical parcels
in individuals. A test-retest design will allow comparisons of activation
patterns within and across tasks. One possible outcome is that valuation and DMN
effects may turn out to be associated with segregable patterns of cortical
engagement. Such a finding would drive the development of sensitive and specific
methods for reading out valuation-related activity, and would provide new tools
for studying how the brain's valuation system is modulated by learning, context,
and the engagement of control processes. An alternative outcome is that
valuation and DMN effects may exhibit high topographic correspondence. This
outcome would motivate new theoretical models of shared neural operations
between these seemingly disparate cognitive processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.