* 1755955
* CRII: AF: Practical Auction Design Using the Deferred-Acceptance Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Vasilis Gkatzelis, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2020
* USD 182,930.00

As the world grows increasingly interconnected, a more effective utilization of
its scarce resources becomes possible through an unprecedented number of
auctions. On a daily basis, human and software agents compete for an extremely
diverse set of resources, ranging from the advertising space on web sites and
the goods sold on online auction sites, to the electrical power supply that
supports large cities and the landing slots of the world's busiest airports.
Were it not for the auctions that regulate these resource allocation processes,
massive amounts of social utility would be wasted; hence, it is imperative that
these auctions are designed to the highest standard. Some of the optimization
problems involved in designing such resource allocation mechanisms can be highly
demanding from a computational standpoint. In reality, the design process is
even more challenging, as the agents competing for these resources may be
strategic and have their own interests at heart.

This project approaches resource allocation problems from the perspective of the
designer who chooses the rules of the auction aiming to maximize her own
objectives, such as efficiency, revenue, or fairness, despite the strategic
behavior of the participants. The long literature on game theory and mechanism
design has produced several celebrated auctions that maximize these objectives
while at the same time providing attractive theoretical guarantees regarding the
incentives of the participating agents, but many of these auctions are rarely
used in practice. Two important drawbacks that render these auctions impractical
are that: i) it may be non-trivial for the participating bidders to verify these
auctions' incentive guarantees, and ii) these auctions often require that the
bidders reveal their private preferences to the auctioneer and trust the
implementation of the auction.

The long-term goal of this project is to develop a deeper understanding of the
performance guarantees that an auction designer can achieve using practical
auctions that avoid these drawbacks. Recent work by economists has proposed
refined incentive properties that even non-experts can verify, as well as a
framework for designing auctions that satisfy these incentive properties. This
project aims to evaluate the performance of these auctions, and to extend the
auction design framework to capture a much wider family of problem instances. As
a result, it can lead to the design of novel and practical auctions that
maximize the desired objectives, while contributing the algorithmic perspective
of computer science to a line of research initiated by economists.

The proposed research combines techniques from both approximation algorithms and
mechanism design. Specifically, the auction design framework that this project
aims to analyze and generalize crucially depends on the design of backward
greedy algorithms for deciding how the available resources should be allocated.
Unlike forward greedy algorithms, the approximation guarantees achievable by
backward greedy algorithms are not well understood even within the computer
science literature, so this project will also contribute toward a deeper
understanding of this interesting class of algorithms.