* 1755401
* Collaborative Research: Root-to-Shoot Communication via the bps Signal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brian Dilkes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,700.00

Drought causes dramatic reductions in agricultural yields. An important step
toward mitigating drought-associated losses is to fully understand how
perception of drought causes reduced growth, and its associated impacts on
agricultural production. The earliest perception of drought occurs as roots
encounter dry soil, and the resulting whole-plant responses are believed to
arise from a mobile chemical signal that moves from roots to shoots. The
Sieburth lab has discovered a highly conserved gene family that regulates
production of a root-to-shoot signal that is sufficient to induce drought
responses. The goal of this research is to identify this signaling molecule. The
Sieburth and Dilkes labs will use metabolomic, genetic, and gene expression
based approaches. This combination of strategies should chemically identify the
mobile signal and establish its relationship to other known components of root-
to-shoot signaling. Knowing the chemical identity of the root-to-shoot signal
could lead to development of new agricultural practices that promote greater
food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants drought responses include synthesis
of abscisic acid (ABA) in the shoots, and decreased growth rates. Because most
drought responses are measured in shoots, whereas the plant root is believed to
initially detect drought conditions, scientists have long postulated a mobile
root-to-shoot chemical signal that coordinates drought responses. The bypass1
(bps1) mutant of Arabidopsis has a growth-arrest phenotype caused by a graft-
transmissible signal over-produced in bps1 roots. Transcriptomics and hormone
measurements demonstrated that this mobile compound is sufficient to induce ABA
synthesis in wild-type shoots, and genetic analyses demonstrated that growth
arrest is independent of ABA. This project's goal is chemical identification of
this over-produced compound. Experiments will use previously established
extraction methods, fractionation by Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography,
and analysis by mass spec. Other experiments will use a labeled precursor and
precursor analogs; these will clarify the structural components of the precursor
that are required in the active product, and time-resolved assays using the
labeled precursor should prove informative for its biosynthetic pathway. In
addition, bps1 and wild type root transcriptomes will be compared, and reverse
genetic analyses will be carried out to test whether differentially expressed
genes are necessary to produce the mobile compound. Finally, bps1 mutants will
be generated in another plant species, and its metabolome analyzed; this
experiment will test the hypothesis that this drought-induced root-to-shoot
compound is the same in different plant species. Diverse undergraduates and
high-school students will be trained through this grant; broad outreach to
under-represented groups includes interaction with local community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.