* 1755340
* Collaborative Research:  Specification of Excitatory Fates in the Spinal Cord
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Santanu Banerjee, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2024
* USD 137,000.00

This project examines how appropriately-functioning neuronal circuits are made
as embryos develop and grow. The work focuses on circuits in the spinal cord of
zebrafish embryos, which develop early in life and are simpler and more
experimentally-tractable than neural circuits in the brain. The goal is to
identify key regulatory genes that instruct cells to grow into one particular
population of nerve cells (interneurons) with specific functions in controlling
precise body movements. The outcomes of this project will be widely applicable,
because these types of nerve cell exist in all vertebrates (including humans).
The genes identified in this study and the ways that they influence nerve cell
and circuit development are likely to be similar in many different species. This
project will significantly increase understanding of how genes instruct cells to
develop with particular characteristics, and the roles that specific genes play
in the construction of neuronal circuitry. The principal investigators will
incorporate this research into their university teaching and presentations made
to the general public. This research will contribute to the diversification of
the scientific workforce through the active participation of both women and
under-represented minorities. The principal investigators will also perform
outreach to local city high schools and develop teaching modules for both
9th/10th grade and advanced placement high school Biology students. The aim of
these activities is to significantly impact the lives of traditionally under-
served high school students and enthuse under represented minority high school
students about science and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential first
step in understanding how neuronal networks are generated is determining how
distinct interneurons (INs) are specified with particular functional properties.
One key property that helps to define INs is which neurotransmitter they use to
communicate with other cells. Neurotransmitters can be excitatory or inhibitory
and INs utilizing inappropriate neurotransmitters form malfunctioning circuits.
Therefore, determining how IN neurotransmitter properties are specified is
crucial for understanding both IN and circuit development. Relatively little is
known about how excitatory spinal IN properties are specified. This proposal
will characterize a gene regulatory network (GRN) that specifies spinal IN
excitatory properties, using zebrafish as a model system. The investigators have
identified genes that encode for 11 different DNA-binding proteins as candidate
members of a GRN that specifies V0v IN excitatory (glutamatergic) properties.
V0v INs reside in the middle of the spinal cord and have crucial roles in
locomotor circuitry. The research team has already shown that four of these
genes, evx1/2 and lmx1ba/b are required for correct excitatory fates of V0v INs.
In addition, in evx1/2 double mutants V0v INs lose expression of both lmx1ba/b
and the other 7 genes, suggesting that all 9 of these genes may act downstream
of Evx1/2 in specifying V0v glutamatergic properties. The specific objectives of
this proposal are to test if any of these 7 other genes are required for correct
V0v neurotransmitter properties and determine the epistatic relationships among
all of these Evx1/2-regulated genes. Single and compound zebrafish mutants will
be used to answer these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.