* 1755408
* RUI:  Antifungal protection of eggs by maternal cloacal microbiota
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Stacey Weiss, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 731,647.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Among egg-laying animals, parental care is
often important to egg survival. For instance, egg-tending behaviors can reduce
growth of pathogens on eggshells and thereby reduce egg mortality. However, many
egg-layers lack parental care and instead leave eggs unattended and exposed to
environmental pathogens. The PIs are interested in how such animals prevent egg
loss in the absence of parental care, and propose a novel source of protection,
protective microbes that passively transfer from the reproductive system of the
mother to eggshell surfaces during egg-laying. A collaborative team centering on
behavioral ecology and microbiology will examine maternal and eggshell
microbiome and their interactions with soil pathogens utilizing lizards as a
model system to test the hypothesis that the microbiome affects reproductive
success, signaling, and behavioral interactions of lizards. The PIs will mentor
undergraduate and high school students in research, especially women and STEM
underrepresented minorities. They will provide high-quality interdisciplinary
training to the next generation of scientists by involving students in all
aspects of their research and by translating their work into class-based
projects. The proposed research has the potential to shed light on the role of
the microbiome on animal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research group will investigate the
novel hypothesis that vertically-transmitted cloacal microbes function in egg
protection. Preliminary data from Sceloporus virgatus (a phrynosomatid lizard
with no parental care) suggest that mature eggs have more bacteria, less fungal
growth, and higher hatch success when oviposited than when surgically removed
without cloacal contact. The team will: 1) quantify temporal variation in
cloacal microbiomes of S. virgatus to test whether females? microbiota change in
preparation for egg-laying; 2) use both experiments and observational study to
characterize vertical transmission and the role of transmitted microbes in
reducing egg infections; 3) relate cloacal microbiota to female reproductive
success and signals/cues of reproductive value; and 4) conduct comparative
studies across Sceloporus spp. to examine the relationship of reproductive mode
(oviparous vs. viviparous) and infection risk on antifungal capacity of cloacal
microbiota. Vertical transmission during oviposition is expected to be a general
phenomenon, so results should be broadly applicable to other oviparous taxa. The
proposed work includes training in sequencing and bioinformatics for the PI, who
is based at an undergraduate-serving institution. These methods will be
implemented, along with culture-based techniques, in vitro analyses, and field
study, in collaboration with carefully mentored undergraduate and high school
students. The research will be foundational to the integration of microbiology
and behavioral ecology, contributing to long-standing theoretical questions
about costs and benefits of parental care (or lack thereof) and sexual
signaling, expanding knowledge of microbial diversity and composition in an
understudied host lineage, and potentially identifying new antifungal
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.