* 1755788
* CRII: CSR: RUI: Mobility Coordination of the Crowds in Mobile Crowd Sensing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Christine Bassem, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 12/31/2022
* USD 154,434.00

Mobile Crowd Sensing (MCS) seeks to achieve sensing tasks by recruiting
individuals who are already roaming in the target mobility field. A crowd-
assisted system eliminates the need for a dedicated physical infrastructure,
thereby reducing the cost of sensing. Moreover, the use of crowd-sourced
resources as part of the system allows for the development of new smart services
and applications that would not have been possible otherwise. If MCS
participation is purely voluntary, task coverage may be unpredictable. However,
with incentive, recruitment of human agents may be improved. This project seeks
to coordinate the mobility of participating human agents, and to optimize
incentives to achieve sensing goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
techniques from optimization theory and approximation algorithms will be used to
optimize task allocation in a Coordinated-MCS platform while developing
efficient routing. These mechanisms are coupled with incentive-compatible
payment models to maximize agent participation. Moreover, a backend service will
be developed to integrate these mechanisms within Coordinated MCS applications,
to evaluate their performance on real crowd.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated
mobility depends on, and hence requires research in, two areas; the mechanisms
via which tasks/routes are assigned to agents, and the mechanisms via which
agents are compensated for conformance, creating a rich set of problems in the
fields of optimization problems, graph and data mining, and crowd economics.
This project contributes towards the advancement of mobile crowd sensing for
solving larger problems, with a great impact on smart cities initiatives, and
the advancement of Internet of Things solutions. Moreover, as Wellesley College
is a women's college, this project contributes directly to increasing the
participation of women in computer science, allowing multiple undergraduate
female students to perform advanced research in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All code developed in this project and collected data will
be stored on a private directory dedicated for the project on the Computer
Science department server for the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.