* 1755230
* RUI: Mechanisms of specificity and tolerance in a nematode-bacterial symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Michael Wollenberg, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,156.00

Many organisms form symbiotic relationships. In some symbioses, each partner
improves the well-being of the other partner. For example, some bacteria that
reside in the human gut provide a benefit to humans through vitamin production,
keeping out harmful bacteria, or fortifying the immune system. In turn, humans
provide gut bacteria with a place to live and food. Animal-bacterial symbioses
are fascinating not only because they are widespread and seem to play critical
roles in human biology, but also because these relationships generate tremendous
complexity at the molecular level. Each partner must recognize, and then
continue to tolerate, a specific associate. How is this delicate balancing act
of specificity and tolerance achieved? This award will study the mechanism of
this symbiotic balancing act in a model symbiosis, between a nematode
(roundworm) and bacteria. To better understand specificity in this symbiosis,
researchers will use microscopy and genetics to identify relevant molecules and
mechanisms. To better understand tolerance in this system, they will define
genes that generate an appropriate response to the partner. Overall, by studying
mechanisms that govern specificity and tolerance in a specific symbiosis, the
work will generate testable hypotheses for how animal/bacterial relationships
are regulated more generally. Finally, because the award funds research at an
undergraduate-only institution, it will positively impact many young scientists.
They will learn experimental techniques, data analysis and strategies for
communicating their results to the public via an online writing program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award studies partner specificity and tolerance
mechanisms in the model symbiosis between Heterorhabditis nematodes and
Photorhabdus bacteria. Together, these partners infect and kill insect larvae;
the nematode serves as a delivery vector while the bacteria produce insecticides
and antibiotics. The symbiosis is very specific. Not every Photorhabdus strain
can colonize every Heterorhabditis strain. It is also a remarkable example of
tolerance. Photorhabdus is a powerful pathogen, capable of killing not only
insects but also multiple genera of nematodes while sparing its Heterorhabditis
host. At different stages of the nematode life cycle, the bacterial symbiont
either stably colonizes, or is digested by, the nematode. The award will
determine how specificity and tolerance of the Hetorhabditis/Photorhabdus
symbiosis are achieved at a molecular level. Specifically, it will test the
hypothesis that genetically encoded regulatory mechanisms, in both symbiont and
host, shape the symbiosis at two levels: (1) over evolutionary time -
determining which specific relationships endure; (2) over a single host's
lifespan - maintaining tolerance without compromising self-defense. The proposed
research will identify specificity and tolerance mechanisms in both host and
symbiont, using microscopy, forward genetics, gene expression analysis, and
nematode lifespan/fitness assays. Projected outcomes include enhanced
understanding of regulatory mechanisms in this system and expanded knowledge of
nematode-bacterial interactions in general. Furthermore, this work has the
potential to improve understanding of how symbiotic/antagonistic relationships
evolve and persist. The awards enhances scientific education at an undergraduate
institution and promotes both research and scientific communication skills of
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.