* 1755244
* Mechanisms of sensory control of developmental rate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ilya Ruvinsky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 803,473.00

Social interactions among members of the same species are important in the lives
of animals. Whereas it has long been known that these signals could alter
behavior, the effects on physiology and development are less well understood.
This project focuses on a particular chemical signal that is produced by males
of a nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and has the effect of speeding up
development of hermaphrodites. Similar phenomenon has been previously described
in mammals, whereby unknown signals produced by males accelerate development and
maturation of females. The implication is that male-induced acceleration of
female development may be a feature found in multiple animal species. Leveraging
the strengths of C. elegans as a model system, this project will investigate the
mechanisms by which this newly-discovered chemical signal alters the progression
of development. The focus will be on identifying specific developmental
processes that accelerate, how acceleration is coordinated among different organ
systems, and how the signal is sensed by the recipients. The proposed
experiments, which primarily involve C. elegans, are expected to offer insights
into how the rate of development is controlled and how social signals alter
development in other species, possibly including mammals. Through engagement
with high school science teachers and students, the investigators aim to
increase participation of individuals from communities currently
underrepresented in STEM fields. Additional activities are planned to
disseminate results of the project to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various environmental conditions can alter the
orderly unfolding of developmental programs in animals. One of the less
understood sources of signals that could affect development are social
interactions among conspecifics. The goal of this project is to investigate the
mechanisms by which one such signal alters the rate of development.
Specifically, C. elegans males were found to produce a diffusible compound(s)
that accelerates larval development in hermaphrodites. This project will explore
the mechanisms of this phenomenon along three broad Objectives. First, to define
which aspects of development are accelerated, to understand how acceleration is
coordinated, and to assess organismal consequences of this developmental
acceleration. Second, to investigate the roles of the heterochronic pathway and
transcription factors in regulating the acceleration. Third, to elucidate the
mechanisms required for sensing the signal by the recipients. In addition to
improving the understanding of how social signals affect developmental
plasticity, this project is expected to contribute to the knowledge of general
mechanisms that control the tempo of development. Broader Impact activities will
improve STEM education and promote diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.