* 1755132
* Tempo and Modes of Cultural Evolution in the Complex Display of the Superb Lyrebird
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Irby Lovette, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 642,235.00

Australian lyrebirds are the most accomplished mimics of all animals. Wild
lyrebirds learn to sing near-perfect renditions of the calls of other birds and
many other natural sounds, while lyrebirds that live near people are exact
mimics of car alarms, chainsaws, and even camera shutters. Yet lyrebirds do not
learn only from their environment; they also learn sounds from other lyrebirds.
This ability to first learn and then produce a great variety of sounds has many
parallels to the ways that humans learn language and other components of our
cultures, making lyrebirds an excellent species on which to conduct experiments
about the basics of cultural learning and information exchange that would be
impossible with human subjects. The Cornell University scientists leading this
project will study lyrebirds across their range in Australia to document their
learning ability and track the learned components of their songs. The scientists
will conduct a series of experiments in which they 'seed' a new song into a
group of lyrebirds and track how it is passed from one lyrebird to another, to
better understand what kinds of factors are important in cultural learning. They
will also take advantage of a historical experiment using a population of
lyrebirds that was introduced into Tasmania in the 1930s, tracking how these
lyrebirds retained their original songs while learning new ones. The team will
generate a variety of public outreach materials using videos of lyrebird
displays, and engage groups of US college students through a summer research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cultural evolution shapes the behavioral
repertoires of many non-human animals, but the associated interactions among
culture, genetics and ecological context remain poorly understood. Socially
transmitted, multicomponent communication systems are of particular value for
testing questions about the tempos and modes of cultural evolution. This project
leverages the spectacular display behavior of a well-known vocal mimic, the
superb lyrebird, to test a series of hypotheses about the tempos and modes of
cultural evolution, using complementary comparative approaches and field-based
experiments. Like humans, lyrebirds are excellent vocal mimics. In addition,
they communicate using multi-component signals made up of both mimetic and non-
mimetic song, and perform a complex dance display. Combined with limited
dispersal and a large but patchy distribution, these attributes foster the
development of diverse lyrebird 'cultures'. This project will first characterize
geographic variation in audiovisual repertoires and compare this with genomic
variation and divergence from local to metapopulation scales, accounting for
ecological context. A temporal analysis of changes in acoustic displays, using
archived recordings (1932-present), will complement the spatial analysis and
strengthen conclusions regarding the tempo and mode of lyrebird cultural
evolution. The project further capitalizes on a serendipitous experiment in
which lyrebirds were introduced to an island (Tasmania) where they did not occur
previously. Comparisons of lyrebird displays in translocated versus source
population will be used to test the cultural lability of different display
components. Finally, mechanisms of social transmission, and the cultural
lability of lyrebird displays, will be tested directly using innovative field-
based cultural transmission experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.