* 1755769
* CRII: III: Theory and Practice of Learning on Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Zhenming Liu, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,983.00

Learning on graphs plays a key role in digital communications. Tech companies
(social media, etc.) rely on social network analysis in their core services.
Financial services (proprietary trading, funds, etc.) use interaction networks
of on-list companies to "beat the market". Intelligence agencies analyze the
interactions between terrorists to understand the structure of terrorist cells.
However, there is a gap between the theory and practice of designing graph-
learning algorithms. On the theory side, substantial progress has been made to
design learning algorithms for stylized models, but the practical impacts are
limited. On the practice side, efficient heuristics have been developed to
analyze real-world graphs, but they often lack theoretical guarantees in terms
of running time or accuracy. To bridge the theory-practice gap, this project
will draw upon techniques from theoretical computer science, machine learning,
and high-dimensional statistics to design theoretically sound, graph-learning
algorithms that can (i) automatically choose the most suitable statistical
network, (ii) leverage node-level information (e.g., users' profile in a social
network), and (iii) properly handle the serial correlations in a graph. The
algorithms will help practitioners to build more accurate network models at
reduced cost, and have beneficial economic and social impacts on downstream
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, this research
program will study the design of statistically sound, computationally tractable,
and practically relevant algorithms for inferring latent structures in graphs.
It consists of two thrusts: (i) Realistic interaction models. The project will
use random graph theory and kernel learning to develop data-driven procedures to
automatically select the most suitable assortative graph models, and introduces
and analyzes a semi-adversarial model that can analyze more realistic
interactions than those captured by real-valued weighted graphs; (ii) Time-
evolving statistical models. The project will study how tools from property
testing results in theoretical computer science can detect change-points in a
network evolution process, and then merges the spectral methods and tools from
high-dimensional statistics to build new inference algorithms for serially
correlated graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.