* 1755910
* CRII: III: Modeling Student Knowledge and Improving Performance when Learning from Multiple Types of Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shaghayegh Sahebi, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,029.00

As the national interest in higher and professional education has been
increasing, interest in online learning systems has also grown rapidly. Online
learning systems, such as Massive Open Online Courses and Intelligent Tutoring
Systems, aim to contribute to the society by providing high quality, affordable,
and accessible education, at scale. They highly impact advancement of the
national prosperity by preparing skillful professionals for high-demand jobs.
Delivering such high-impact goals requires automatic tools that can help us
understand students' learning process and answer questions such as what
knowledge is gained by watching a video lecture (domain knowledge modeling),
what is a student's state of knowledge (student knowledge modeling), and how a
specific student would perform on a test (predicting student performance).
Ideally, these tools should model student's learning from various learning
material types (such as problems, readings, and video lectures) and capture the
knowledge span offered by combinations of gradable and non-gradable learning
resources. However, the current tools are limited to a single type of learning
material (typically, "problems"), ignoring the heterogeneity of learning
materials from which students may learn. This project aims to achieve a better
understanding of students' learning process in online educational systems by
presenting an integrated research and education plan (1) to model student
interactions with both gradable and non-gradable learning material types, (2) to
integrate the proposed models with learning material content, and (3) to
evaluate the proposed models by experimenting with real-world online educational
datasets. The project will provide learning and research opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of
improving students' learning process in online educational systems, the
researchers develop multi-view machine learning algorithms that minimize the
error of student performance prediction while maximizing the correlations among
multiple views of the learning data. In the first year of this project, using
activity sequences of students a model will be built that can capture a shared
latent knowledge space among sets of gradable learning material and non-gradable
ones. During the second year of this project, content information of learning
materials, including expert labels, will be included in the learning model in
order to improve it. This model aims to discover the relationship between
content information and the shared latent knowledge space. The project results
are evaluated using the task of predicting student performance. This project is
at the intersection of domain adaptation, sequence modeling, and educational
data mining. The model is inspired by Canonical Correlation Analysis as an
approach for transferring information and adapting various views to student
activity data, while modeling student learning process as a sequence of
knowledge acquisitions. This is a novel treatment of the student modeling
problem, with a sequential domain-adaptation view, that facilitates future
research directions, such as personalized education and improved student
retention in online learning environments. This work contributes novel
sequential and content-aware domain adaptation and multi-variate analysis models
that combine information from multiple sequential data sources and time-
invariant content resources at the same time. While motivated by the task of
student knowledge modeling, the models are general and can be applied to a broad
spectrum of research including domain adaptation problems and recommender
systems. The developed solutions will be presented in journals and conference
venues, and the project website will provide access to the results, with
references to code for the developed and evaluated models that will be available
at GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.