* 1755427
* Understanding how glucocorticoids interact with neuromodulators to facilitate life-history transitions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Deborah Lutterschmidt, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 05/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

All organisms must choose between investing resources in producing young or
maintaining self through feeding, growth, and repair of tissues. Each time an
organism makes this choice, it must also cope with the associated trade-offs
that directly impact both its survival and reproductive fitness. Despite the
critical importance of choosing between self-maintenance and reproduction, the
mechanisms that shape these decision-making processes is not yet understood. In
addition, it is not clear how resource availability, such as the quantity of
body fat stores and the presence of mates and food, influences the motivation to
pursue one opportunity over another. The goal of this project is to understand
if and how glucocorticoid hormones interact with specific neuropeptides in the
brain to regulate the behavioral switch between reproduction and feeding. This
project provides outstanding opportunities for student involvement, with hands-
on training in techniques that integrate neuroendocrine methods with behavioral
analyses in the field. All project participants receive training in effective
science communication techniques using a teaching module that includes
participation in a community-based workshop on the "Neurobiology of Decision-
Making." The proximate goal is to broaden the participation of diverse students
in science education and community outreach. The researcher also incorporates
project results into inquiry-based learning modules for use in the classroom,
thereby exposing many more students to scientific discovery than is typically
achievable in the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project merges field
and laboratory studies to better understand the neuroendocrine basis of
decision-making. Because the decision to pursue reproductive versus foraging
opportunities occurs on a short time scale (minutes to hours) in many animals,
it is often difficult to disentangle the mechanisms that regulate both the
individual behaviors and the transition between them. In this context, organisms
that exhibit seasonal transitions between temporally distinct life-history
stages can illuminate the mechanisms that regulate the underlying behaviors in
all animals. Red-sided garter snakes (Thamnophis sirtalis) are a phenomenal
vertebrate model in this regard because reproduction and foraging are relegated
to temporally distinct life-history stages, and snakes undergo dramatic changes
in hormone-brain-behavior relationships during the transition to foraging. Based
on extensive preliminary data from the investigator's laboratory, this project
tests a model in which glucocorticoids interact with the neuromodulators
arginine vasotocin and neuropeptide Y to facilitate life-history transitions.
The investigator uses a combination of pharmacological manipulation,
immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and behavioral assays to achieve the
following aims: (1) Determine the function of elevated glucocorticoids during
life-history transitions; (2) Determine how glucocorticoids interact with
neuromodulators to induce life-history transitions; and (3) Determine if and how
neuromodulators are associated with altered sensitivity of the hypothalamus-
pituitary-adrenal axis. Results from this project will provide a framework for
understanding the neuroendocrine basis of decision-making and the mechanisms by
which neuroendocrine signals reconfigure regulatory
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.