* 1755375
* Collaborative Research:  Social brains and solitary bees: A phylogenetic test of the effect of social behavior on brain evolution across multiple gains and losses of sociality
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Adam Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 351,266.00

How do social interactions drive brain size? Living in a social group with other
animals may require a bigger brain in order to deal with the cognitive challenge
of maintaining social relationships. Alternatively, animals in social groups may
have smaller brains because members of social groups can work together, thus
reducing the cognitive challenge faced by each individual. This research will
measure brain size in closely related species of social and solitary bees.
Social cooperation has evolved many times in bees, and has also been lost many
times: some solitary bees evolved from social ancestors. This project will also
measure levels of neurotransmitters and hormones in bee brains that are
associated with aggression and reproduction. Scientists still do not have a
clear understanding of how even relatively simple brain differences are
associated with the evolution of complex behavioral traits. This research will
use the small brains of bees and the multiple comparisons between many different
social and solitary species to investigate how living in a cooperative social
group affects the brain. The scientists involved in the project will mentor
students through internships in their labs, and will write versions of their
research publications aimed at middle- and high-school aged students that will
be made freely available on the web for education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that the evolution of
social cooperation leads to increased brain size. This research focuses on
measuring changes in the volume of the mushroom body (an area of the insect
brain), and biogenic amines of the brains of social and solitary bees. The
researchers focus on the sweat bees (Halictidae) because this group is
ancestrally solitary with three evolutionary origins of sociality and multiple
evolutionary losses from within the social clades. Also, many species are
socially polymorphic, exhibiting both social and solitary behavior. This allows
for multiple phylogenetically independent social-solitary comparisons. The
researchers focus on mushroom body volume because this area of the brain is used
for learning, memory, and sensory integration. They measure biogenic brain
amines because these chemicals are involved in regulating aggressive, social,
and reproductive behavior, and thus likely involved in the evolution of social
cooperation. Lastly, they test whether changes in levels of brain amines are
mechanistically linked to changes in brain size, and also measure changes in
amine receptor density associated with social behavior. This work uses a
phylogenetic comparative approach, confocal microscopy measurements of brain
volume, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) measurements of amine
titers, and antibody staining of amine-reactive neurons to test how evolutionary
gains and losses of social cooperation affect the brain. This work addresses
issues of broad public appeal - brain evolution and cooperation. As part of the
broader impacts of this project, researchers will work with professional editors
to create open-access adaptations of their studies for use in classrooms or
other educational or outreach purposes. They will also train graduate and
undergraduate students across five different
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.