* 1755024
* An Analysis of the Discovery of RNA Splicing with a Focus on Epistemic and Social Justice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* PNINA ABIR-AM, ABIRAM                  PNINA          G
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 212,550.00

This award supports a research project that will provide a history of the
discovery of RNA splicing. The researcher will address a lacuna in the
historiography of molecular biology by increasing its analytical content on RNA,
which has long remained overshadowed by a preponderance of historical and social
science research on DNA, genomics, and proteomics. In doing so, she will examine
the impact of gender, ethnicity, and age bias thereby offering further
clarification of the persisting underrepresentation of women and minorities in
science; she will do so by documenting how those participants were deprived of
epistemic justice, even when they played an indispensable role in a major
discovery in one of four key labs. Project results will be disseminated via
presentations at pertinent professional society meetings. They will also be the
subject of a monograph which documents and compares the actual history of those
who participated in the discovery as co-authors (whether woman, foreign, junior,
or senior scientist) in one of the four labs. Results will also be posted on a
blog, which provides crowd sourcing opportunities and links to high traffic
websites. In addition, the researcher will collaborate with a playwright to
write and produce a play inspired by her research results; the play will
articulate the intertwined moral dilemmas of scientific progress and social
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will use historical and
sociological methods including archival research on the personal papers and
institutional records of deceased co-authors, in-depth oral history with
surviving co-authors, sociological analysis of collaborative publication
patterns pursued by various co-author categories, historical ethnography of
anniversary events (such as conferences held to mark the 40th anniversary of
this discovery), and content analysis of scientific publications (largely though
not entirely from the 1970s).The project further utilizes the 40th anniversary
of this discovery to collect new sources of historical value including
manuscripts, correspondence, photographs, and autobiographical reflections. The
project will stimulate STS scholars to engage in refined studies of power
relations in science, while empowering policy makers in their efforts to ensure
greater transparency in the reward system of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.