* 1755733
* CRII: SaTC: Robust Design-for-Security (DFS) Architecture for Enabling Trust in Integrated Circuits (IC) Manufacturing and Test
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Ujjwal Guin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 03/31/2022
* USD 176,759.00

Due to the prohibitive costs of semiconductor manufacturing, most computer chip
design companies outsource their production to offshore foundries. As many of
these chips may be manufactured in environments of limited trust, problems of
the piracy of intellectual property (IP) and the overproduction of integrated
circuits (ICs) have emerged in recent years. This project focuses on designing a
secure logic locking technique to enable protection against untrusted IC
manufacturing. The developed solution is resistant to all known
attacks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Logic locking is a promising solution for
enabling trust in outsourced IC manufacturing, where a design is obfuscated by
modifying the functionality. A locked chip will produce incorrect results unless
activated by an obfuscation key. However, Boolean satisfiability (SAT)-based
algorithms have been shown to effectively determine the obfuscation key and
break the locking mechanisms. In this work, a novel secure cell (SC) is
designed, which prevents the obfuscation key from being captured in internal
flip-flops of a chip and disables scan dump after functional mode. The SC
provides a complete protection against SAT-based and other existing attacks that
utilize scan data. In addition, SC provides support for commercial tools to
generate test patterns without having the obfuscation key. This will help
perform the manufacturing test before the activation of chips, and thus
preventing IC overproduction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
serve a critical need for the industry and government by working to support
trust in the semiconductor manufacturing and test process. The integration of
education and research is a key objective of this project. This research is
multidisciplinary, linking the fields of IC design, simulation and test,
hardware security, and embedded systems. The graduate and undergraduate students
working on this project will receive interdisciplinary training across diverse
areas of electrical and computer engineering. A novel upper-division course on
hardware security for the graduate and undergraduate students will create a
next-generation cybersecurity workforce for the government and commercial
sectors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The artifacts expected as outcomes from this
project will be publicly accessible during the period of performance and
afterwards. All peer-reviewed publications will be accessible through the link
http://www.eng.auburn.edu/~uguin/publications.html. All raw input data, derived
data and code versions needed for reproduction of results will be stored with
the sources for the articles, so that third parties can reproduce the results.
This will be maintained for all publications. If the data are large, a secure
alternative means for sharing will be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.