* 1755836
* CRII:SCH:Computational Methods to Mine Multi-omic Data for Systems Biology of Complex Diseases
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Jingwen Yan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,831.00

Recent advances in high throughput technologies have led to a substantial
increase in multi-omic data characterizing various levels of molecular changes
in the progression of disease, including genome, transcriptome, proteome and
metabolome. The availability of computational methods that are sufficiently
powerful to handle the high dimensionality and heterogeneity of multi-omic data
is still very limited. In addition, major findings generated from current -omics
studies have been largely restricted to relatively simple patterns, e.g.,
individual biomarkers, possibly with few functional interactions, which present
difficulties for validating these findings and relating them to downstream
biology. This project, by coupling the multi-omic data and the systems biology
networks, will develop novel computational methods to explore the functional
network modules associated with disease quantitative traits. By enabling both
strategic and efficient knowledge extraction from the vast biological landscape
represented by multi-omic data, this research has may lead to unprecedented
discovery of disease mechanisms and suggest surrogate biomarkers for therapeutic
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop new computational methods to
enable the integration of large scale heterogeneous multi-omic data with rich
domain knowledge for better biomarker and association discovery. Two
interrelated tasks will be performed: 1) Develop a novel biological knowledge
guided structured sparse learning model together with large-scale optimization
methods to integrate -omic data and biological networks from multiple sources
and discover -omic modules involving heterogeneous biomarkers for accurately
predicting outcomes of interest; and 2) Couple multi-task learning with
structured sparse association models to jointly learn the bi-multivariate
associations between imaging phenotypes and -omic features with dense functional
connections for multiple groups. The project will contribute to a new solution
framework spanning the areas of machine learning, data mining and network
science, and also provide novel perspectives as to how to effectively integrate
the large-scale and heterogeneous -omic data for a systems biology of complex
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.