* 1755841
* CRII: SaTC: New Side-Channel Techniques in Support of Global Monitoring for Network Disruptions
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Roya Ensafi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

The Internet's size and complexity make it difficult to understand what happens
to network packets as they travel from source to destination. Internet service
providers and governments sometimes interfere with users' online activities,
further complicating this task. This project advances the scientific
understanding of network interference detection by developing new methods to
remotely measure the manipulation of Internet traffic, such as attempts to
censor, tamper with, and monitor users' online activities. The newly proposed
techniques can achieve an unprecedented level of detail about network
manipulation around the world. Network interference and censorship harms U.S.
economic interests, national security, and the human rights of citizens in
censored countries. By working towards a better scientific understanding of the
techniques used for detecting and monitoring such interference, this project can
defend Internet users from unwarranted network manipulation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Past research has used resources such as PlanetLab, Virtual Private
Networks (VPNs), and end-user machines to measure network disruptions. These
vantage points scale poorly and have limited geographical coverage. They are
difficult to deploy in practice and are unable to continuously collect data. In
contrast, systems such as Spooky, Augur, and Iris (developed in the principal
investigator's preliminary work) allow measurement systems to infer whether a
remote system has network connectivity to another remote system without needing
control of either. To do this, these systems exploit features in existing
Internet protocols and infrastructure to interact with remote systems, and learn
from their responses whether or not they were able to interact with other
targeted hosts. These techniques overcome the problems of vantage point location
and of recruiting participants.