* 1755379
* Structure, Function, &amp; Evolution of a Novel Sperm Competition Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Eric Haag, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 10/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Shifts in reproductive mode are among the most striking events in the recent
evolutionary history of animals and plants. In Caenorhabditis round worms
(nematodes), self-fertile hermaphrodites have repeatedly evolved from female
ancestors by acquiring the ability to make sperm in an otherwise female ovary.
This developmental novelty radically alters how genes flow through populations,
and greatly reduces male-male competition, with many potential downstream
consequences. This project is motivated by the observations that self-fertile
species have lost thousands of genes (many with roles in male reproduction), and
that ancestral reproductive traits are degraded. It examines the male secreted
short (mss) gene family, which appear to connect these two phenomena. MSS
proteins are small, cell surface factors with an ancient role in mediating
competition between sperm of different males, and were consistently lost when
selfing evolved. This research serves as a case study for two relatively common
phenomena in evolution. One is simplification and loss of ancestral traits. As
the research unfolds, the PI will partner with informal science education
professionals to bring this often counter-intuitive process to the public in two
different forums. The other is the rapid evolution of genes that function in
reproduction. As the sperm of both parasitic nematodes and of humans have
analogous, fast-evolving proteins on their surface, the research may have
eventual implications for medicine, agriculture, and human fertility.
Undergraduates from groups underrepresented in science will be involved in the
research and educational goals of the project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI and
his colleagues hypothesize that relaxed selection, and possibly selection for a
hermaphrodite-biased ratio, promote the loss of formerly important reproduction-
related genes in self-fertile species. They also hypothesize that the MSS
glycoproteins function via interactions between their post-translational
carbohydrate modifications and female tissues. Four aims together will clarify
the structure, function, and evolution of this intriguing family:&lt;br/&gt;Aim
1. Characterize the structure-function relationships of MSS proteins. Post-
translational modifications of MSS proteins will be characterized, and both
natural alleles and mutated transgenes will be used to infer the features of MSS
proteins that are essential for their function. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 2. Investigate
the role of MSS in sperm-sperm and sperm-female interactions. Genetics, vital
dyes, and live imaging will be used to clarify how MSS proteins influence sperm
competition. Attempts will also be made to identify female tissues and molecular
factors that may interact with MSS. &lt;br/&gt;Aim 3. Characterize reproductive
roles of MSS-related proteins (MSRPs) in selfing species. MSRPs are structurally
similar proteins to MSS, but are found in all Caenorhabditis, regardless of
mating system. MSRPs will be deleted from selfing species (which naturally
already lack MSS) to determine whether they are necessary for normal fertility.
&lt;br/&gt;Aim 4. Characterize how mss fitness interacts with mating system. We
will test the hypothesis that loss of mss genes in selfing species is driven by
selection for rapid population growth through experimental microcosms employing
mss+ and mss- C. briggsae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.