* 1755513
* CEDAR: High Speed Spectroscopic Studies of lightning bolts: Starters, Jets, and Gigantic Jets
* GEO,AGS
* 05/12/2017,01/31/2021
* Ningyu Liu, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 01/31/2021
* USD 298,371.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program, a
broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program, seeks to
understand the behavior of atmospheric regions from the lower atmosphere upward
through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere. Of particular interest is
the question of the scale of coupling of the lower atmosphere, where phenomena
such as thunderstorms exist, to the ionized layer near 100-120 km. The physics
of lightning phenomenology within thunderstorm events are very complex and
highly time-dependent with complex morphology characterizing the coupling of
lightning bolts to the ionosphere with consequential significant temporal
behavior of the ionized density of the lower ionosphere region. These electrical
discharges are initiated inside thunderstorms and are rooted in one of the main
thundercloud charge layers. This award would study the physical processes
underlying the particular transient lightning bolt structures referred to as
blue starters, jets, and gigantic jets, which are the upward electrical
discharges from thunderstorms that terminate at 20-30 km, 40-50 km and 70-90 km
altitude, respectively. These are generated suddenly within a fraction of a
second from thunderstorms. The research supported by this award would examine
the energetics and dynamics of these TIL (Transient Luminous Event) phenomena.
Typically, the initial vertical development has a speed of ~100 km/s, but after
100-300 ms, the upward discharge leading to gigantic jets suddenly accelerates
to reach the lower ionosphere with a speed greater than 1000 km/s. The funded
research would be primarily observational involving the construction of a high-
speed (5,000 frames per second) spectrograph that can analyze the energetics of
the jets and starters through the fast acquisition of visible atomic and
molecular spectra allowing high-speed measurements of the relative intensities
of the red-to-blue colors emitted by the lightning bolt along its path between
the storm and the ionized layer. Analysis of these spectra would provide the
time variations of the vertical temperature profile within the ionized air
pathway of the lightning bolt. This information about the temperature profile
would be used to quantify the energetics underlying the formation of these
morphological features of the lightning bolt. This award has the potential of
transformative research that would provide a major advance in the knowledge and
understanding of the physics of transient plasma discharges which should prove
to be extremely valuable and of high importance to the study of laboratory
electrical discharges and tropospheric lightning investigations; such findings
would be of great value to other disciplines such as power transformers, laser
fusion research, and plasma discharge systems. The award would support
significant activity in STEM education and student training similar to that
recently conducted by the PI and his group. Finally, this award has a strong
potential of attracting public attention via local TV and newspaper interviews.
The grant awardees indicated also that they would provide the public with
excellent public access to the research with frequent open lectures that would
generate strong interest by the public in lightning
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award represents a strong potential for
exciting and transformative science. The proposed research would examine in
detail fundamental science questions that are related to jet and starter
dynamics and their electrical coupling between the lower atmosphere and
ionosphere. Moreover, the proposed observational approach is sophisticated
providing critical high-time resolution spectral information on the spectral
properties of starters and jets that would be studied to produce height profiles
of temperature along the path of the conductive path between the top side of the
thunderstorm and the lower ionosphere region established by the lightning bolt.