* 1755746
* CRII: CHS: Bridging the Age-Related Performance Gap: Multimodal Interfaces to Support Older Adults in Transitioning to Manual Control in Autonomous Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Brandon Pitts, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Advanced autonomous systems have the potential to significantly reduce workload
and extend human capabilities in a number of safety-critical transportation and
work environments, such as driving, medicine, and manufacturing. However, even
the most sophisticated systems are often constrained by design limits and/or may
experience occasional malfunctions requiring human-in-the-loop manual
interventions. To date, there is no consensus on how best to assist operators of
varying age and ability levels in noticing, diagnosing, and recovering manual
control across a wide range of autonomous systems. Adults 65 years and older are
now the fastest growing age group, and are expected to encounter systems with
increasing levels of automation throughout later stages of life, yet perceptual
and cognitive challenges often prevent their effective use of such technology.
The goals of this project are to better understand age-related differences in
human-automation interactions, and to begin the development of methods and tools
that support the manual recovery of older adults for various automated
technologies. Combined sensory feedback will be explored as a potential
technique to these ends, as it has been shown to improve attention management
and benefit older individuals. Project outcomes will contribute to a more in-
depth understanding of the capabilities and limitations of different operator
demographics, and will help guide the development of next generation human-
machine interfaces. The work has broader implications for enhancing safety in
many complex operations, such as autonomous driving and automated process
assembly. Public educational activities will include community and study
population (senior) focused workshops, pre-college and summer outreach, and
undergraduate research programs for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multimodal interfaces present information to the
visual, auditory, and tactile sensory channels. By manipulating signal
parameters, these interfaces are able to capture attention, inform operators of
system status, and provide decision aids to perform needed actions. However, the
extent to which this approach can effectively communicate to a range of
operators with considerable variability in sensory and cognitive abilities in
the context of transfer-of-authority has not been quantified. Given the rapid
development of advanced autonomous technology and the projected population
changes expected within the next decade, it will be critical to fill these
research gaps. This project will generate age-related empirical data on complex
interactions within autonomous systems. A series of experiments will be
conducted using semi-autonomous driving simulations and involving subjects from
different age groups. The research will quantify age-related time differences in
noticing multimodal transition (takeover) requests, determine age-specific
transition times as a function of lead time and sensory modality notification,
and investigate the effectiveness of various tactile signals to support
situation awareness and reduce transition times. Results are expected to inform
quantitative and qualitative models of human perception, information processing,
and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.