* 1755995
* CRII: SHF: Quantifying the Impact of Poor Quality Lexicon on Developers' Cognitive Load.
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Venera Arnaoudova, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 171,634.00

Software pervades everyday activities (e.g., computers, phones, games) as well
as safety critical industries (e.g., transportation, medical, power): software
is everywhere. When software engineers build software they use variable names
and comments to embed domain concepts and to communicate with other software
engineers. Thus, the quality of those names and comments, i.e., the software
lexicon, is of paramount importance for understanding what the software does and
how it does it. Researchers have previously identified a set of practices that
lead to poor quality lexicon. The speculation is that such practices will
possibly impair software understanding and might cause misunderstandings and
eventually software bugs. However, there is no objective evidence to support
this apparent causal relationship. Thus, this project seeks to characterize the
impact of the quality of the lexicon on software understanding by measuring the
change of cognitive load when software developers are trying to understand
software that contains poor lexicon. The proposed research is expected to
contribute in-depth understanding of the so far speculated impact of software
lexicon on cognitive workload during program comprehension. A better
understanding of how poor lexicon can affect software understanding will,
ultimately, positively impact developers' productivity, the cost of software
development and maintenance, and the quality of the software. The outcomes of
this research will also have a significant positive impact on STEM education as
the project will allow us to provide guidelines for students how to write
software lexicon that minimizes the cognitive load during program comprehension.

The overall objective of this project is to characterize the impact of the
quality of the lexicon on program comprehension and on software maintenance. The
central hypothesis is that a low-quality lexicon correlates both with high
cognitive load of developers while understanding source code and with poor
software maintenance. To this end we will: 1. Identify direct and objective
measures to quantify the impact of lexicon quality on developers' cognitive
load. The working hypothesis here is that physiological measures, known to
relate to cognitive load, will correlate with self-reported difficulty/inability
to understand the software lexicon. 2. Identify which of the practices that are
documented in the literature to lead to low-quality lexicon are associated with
high cognitive load. The working hypothesis is that certain types of poor
lexicon, such as the inconsistency of the lexicon with the source code
functionality, will have a significantly higher impact on program comprehension
compared to other types of poor lexicon. 3. Identify types of poor quality
lexicon that hinder program comprehension during software maintenance tasks. The
investigator hypothesizes that the presence of certain types of poor lexicon
will significantly increase the time needed to understand a piece of code and in
some cases, it will lead to failure while performing software maintenance tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.