* 1755873
* CRII: CHS: Early Detection of Collective Misconceptions with Network-aware Machine Learning Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Emoke-Agnes Horvat, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2021
* USD 174,788.00

This project builds theory, algorithms, and frameworks that can be used to
design network-aware machine learning tools aimed at eliciting useful diversity
and improving the accuracy of collective forecasting. Researchers in the social
and economic sciences know that there is great capacity for collective
intelligence to emerge from Web-based systems. Yet herding and homophily effects
often restrain the wisdom of crowds, vastly limiting this potential. The
research furthers the study of complex systems by introducing a new framework
that improves our understanding of the mechanisms that govern decision-making
under social influence. Advancing complex systems theory in this way greatly
enhances the ability to predict when crowds will provide accurate decision-
making support for complex problems and when they will fail miserably. Further,
the research aids the development of opinion aggregation mechanisms that
efficiently capitalize on diversity. The planned work will result in
developments that make collective intelligence detection tools practical by
providing early warning signs of shared misconceptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
attain these goals, the research will apply a general framework that
incorporates (1) network models that help understand the social processes that
lead to observed decision patterns; (2) machine learning tools that draw from
uncovered processes to identify signals that optimize the accuracy of collective
judgment; and (3) evaluation testbeds that use simulation tools in addition to
rich high-dimensional, real-world data about the various stages and performance
of group decisions. This research will contribute to societally-relevant
outcomes, including: (a) understanding decision-making in online investment and
lending settings to enhance the economic growth of underserved market segments;
(b) generating novel knowledge about the performance benefits of collective
judgment, and (c) quantifying the link between limited opinion diversity and
crowd misconceptions. The project will connect undergraduate students, including
women and under-represented minorities, to authentic practice in science and
engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.