* 1755373
* Developmental Genetics of Corolla Tube Formation: A Key Morphological Innovation During Angiosperm Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Yaowu Yuan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 06/30/2023
* USD 588,044.00

About one third of the ~300,000 flowering plant species (e.g., petunia,
snapdragon, primrose, rhododendron) produce flowers with petals fused into a
tubular structure referred to as the corolla tube. The corolla tube encloses and
protects the nectaries and reproductive organs. Differences in the length,
width, and curvature of the corolla tube have led to an endless variety of
differently shaped flowers that attract specialized groups of pollinators (e.g.,
beeflies, hawkmoths, hummingbirds, nectar bats). Because of its importance in
plant reproduction, the corolla tube is considered a key morphological
innovation that contributes to plant diversification and speciation. This study
employs a new genetic model system, monkeyflowers (Mimulus lewisii), to identify
and characterize the genes responsible for corolla tube development, including
the genes responsible for coordinated organ fusion and the generation of a
diversity of corolla tube shape. The flower images, pollination videos, and
interactive, multimedia illustrations resulting from this project will be
incorporated into a new Plant Biology section on the nationally and
internationally recognized Learn.Genetics website as online educational
resources for K-16 students. Multi-disciplinary training in genetics,
development, and evolution includes post-doctoral associates, graduate students
and undergraduate students, including members of under-represented groups
enrolled in the McNair Scholars Program at UConn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study leverages recently developed genomic resources, stable transgenic tools,
and chemically induced mutants of monkeyflowers (Mimulus) to identify and
characterize genes that control corolla tube formation. Results from preliminary
work in the investigator's laboratory allows the formulation of a new conceptual
model for the developmental genetic control of corolla tube formation. At the
heart of the model is auxin signaling that mediates coordinated growth between
the bases of the initially separate petal primordia and the inter-primordial
regions. Upstream of this core module is the genetic regulatory network (GRN)
controlling lateral expansion of the petal primordia, essentially the same GRN
that controls leaf adaxial/abaxial polarity and lamina growth. Downstream of
this core module lie the organ boundary genes that suppress localized tissue
growth if not repressed by auxin signaling. Two specific aims will be pursued to
test these hypotheses: (i) Determine the functional roles of the major
regulators of leaf polarity in corolla tube formation using in situ
hybridization, ectopic gene expression, and RNA interference in the model
species Mimulus lewisii. (ii) Identify additional components of the GRN
controlling corolla tube formation by bulk segregant analyses of several
additional non-allelic mutants of M. lewisii with unfused corollas. Genetic
interactions among the newly identified genes and the known leaf polarity
regulators will be determined by generating double or higher order combinatorial
mutants and transgenic lines. RNA-Seq analyses of selected regulatory mutants
and transgenic lines of the leaf polarity regulators will be conducted to
identify downstream genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.