* 1755331
* Support for the Workshop on Meteorological Sensitivity Analysis and Data Assimilation; Aveiro, Portugal; July 2-6, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Ronald Errico, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This award is for travel support for 5-6 researchers from the U.S. to
participate in an international workshop titled: "Meteorological Sensitivity
Analysis and Data Assimilation," to be held in Aveiro, Portugal from July 2-6,
2018. Presentations will include a mix of tutorials on fundamentals, overview
talks on recent development paths, posters or short seminars on new findings,
and some formal debates. Students will have an opportunity to present their
work. The workshop will be held at a self-contained facility at which all
participants will share meals and evening discussions, providing many
opportunities for dialogue with and between experts to make maximum use of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data assimilation lies at the heart of numerical
weather prediction that, in turn, lies at the heart of weather forecasting. Much
of the improved accuracy of weather forecasts during the past decade is due to
improvements in the accuracy of estimates of the current weather that data
assimilation provides. Implicit or explicit sensitivity analysis is a key
component of both data assimilation and weather forecasting, since it links
uncertainties of predictions with uncertainties of initial condition or
observations. Both data assimilation and sensitivity analysis are
computationally intensive, complex, multidisciplinary subjects. In order to
expedite progress in these studies and their applications, it is necessary to
establish proper foundations and to perform robust evaluations for all
scientific claims. These are the primary aims of the workshop, with its
principal societal impact being the further improvement of weather analysis and
forecasting.