* 1755297
* Collaborative Research:  Host ocular microbiome and pathogen dynamics: from individual to population-level effects in a songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Meghan May, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 244,249.00

Animals harbor many microbes that serve key beneficial roles for their hosts,
including protection from disease. While the beneficial roles of many microbes
are well established, it is not yet known how these benefits scale up to an
entire population and influence disease outbreaks in populations. This award
focuses on a contagious 'pink- eye' disease of a common songbird, the house
finch. Beneficial bacteria in the eyes of finches can protect birds from
developing severe 'pink-eye'. This project examines how the dose of infection
impacts the ability of beneficial bacteria to protect birds against disease, and
whether beneficial bacteria on the eye can prevent or slow down the spread of
this highly contagious disease within a flock of birds. Findings of this
research will have important implications for understanding infectious disease
outbreaks in wildlife, domestic animals, and humans. Investigators will engage
undergraduate and graduate students in the use of new genomics tools to identify
beneficial microbes. Using this study system and others as examples, project
personnel will work with the Science Museum of Western Virginia to design a
permanent, interactive 'Friendly Microbes' exhibit that illustrates the many
ways that microbes benefit their hosts. Graduate students at Virginia Tech will
learn how to better communicate science by assisting with the exhibit design and
summer workshops associated with the exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the
microbiome modulates population-level disease spread depends on how symbionts
function in host defense across the natural range of infectious doses, as well
as how both 'donating' and 'receiving' the pathogen during transmission is
modified by symbionts. This award investigates individual to population-level
effects of the ocular microbiome on disease dynamics using a tractable wildlife
disease system: a recently emerged conjunctival disease of house finches. Using
a suite of mechanistic tools and experimental approaches, this project will: 1)
test how pathogen colonization dose mediates the protective role of the resident
ocular microbiome for individual finches; 2) determine how the ocular microbiome
influences the likelihood of donating versus receiving a conjunctival pathogen
during pairwise transmission; and 3) quantify the epidemiological impact of the
host ocular microbiome on flock-level infectious disease dynamics. Researchers
will examine how microbial symbionts alter both host and pathogen phenotypes
relevant for transmission and reveal mechanisms of symbiont-pathogen-host
interactions that are most likely to influence population-level disease
dynamics. The award will provide training to undergraduate and graduate students
in population-wide microbiome research as well as scientific communication.
Researchers will develop a new, permanent exhibit at the local museum on the
beneficial role of microbes and host workshops to promote scientific literacy on
this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.