* 1755625
* CRII: SaTC: Systems That Facilitate Cooperation and Stewardship to Improve End-User Security Behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sauvik Das, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

This proposal explores opportunities to improve cybersecurity systems by
encouraging cooperation and stewardship, whereby people work together for
mutually beneficial cybersecurity outcomes. For example, coworkers could provide
accountability for one another in keeping their software fully up-to-date, or a
trusted expert might remotely configure the security settings on a new laptop
for a consenting non-expert. Many existing security systems, by contrast, are
not designed to enable or encourage social interaction, a situation that often
results in confusion and non-compliance. This proposal will involve studies with
people to understand how and when cooperation and stewardship might be
beneficial, along with the development of a platform that facilitates the
evaluation and construction of such systems. The proposed work work should add
to our understanding of how to design and engineer effective real-world
cybersecurity systems by incorporating social interaction. Furthermore, this
project will provide both undergraduate and graduate students an opportunity to
participate in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
marries ideas from social psychology, human-computer interaction, and design to
tackle a simple and timely question in usable security: How can we create
systems that facilitate cooperation and stewardship in end-user cybersecurity
systems in order to encourage better cybersecurity behaviors? In the context of
this proposal, end-users can be thought of as people who directly interface with
a security system to protect their own assets; cooperation in end-user security
systems allows people to act collectively towards mutually beneficial security
goals or benefit, and, stewardship in end-user security systems allow people to
act on behalf of others' security goals or benefit. The union of such
cooperative and stewarded systems can be said to be sociopetal, or designed to
bring people together. The proposed work will encompass three interacting
research thrusts: (i) running group interviews and diary studies to model end-
users' day-to-day security activities and how they relate to a broader social
context; (ii) developing novel sociopetal cybersecurity systems and evaluating
those systems with real user groups; and, (iii) creating and releasing a
platform for facilitating the development and evaluation of future sociopetal
cybersecurity systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.