* 1755766
* CRII: RI: Embedded and Continuous Shape Morphing using Twisted-and-Coiled Artificial Muscle
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Jianguo Zhao, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2022
* USD 191,000.00

Many animals have the ability to locomote in different environments, such as on
land, in the water, and in the air. Developing biologically inspired robots with
similar abilities would open up many new types of applications for robotics.
Towards this goal, this research investigates a novel shape morphing scheme that
can autonomously modify the shape of a structure, such as by changing legs to
flippers. With shape morphing capabilities, robots can leverage varying shapes
from the same structure for locomotion in different environments, which can
drastically reduce the robot's costs while dramatically improving their
performance. The approach can enable a structure to precisely morph into a
three-dimensional shape without using bulky external sensors and actuators,
making it suitable for various applications such as morphing wings, multimodal
robots, programmable matter, foldable robots, etc. The project will also broadly
impact STEM students of all ages through outreach to K-12 students, enhancement
of existing curriculum with research-inspired projects, and promotion of
undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new shape morphing scheme is
accomplished by embedding a novel twisted-and-coiled actuator (TCA) into soft
materials, together with a thermoplastic material with temperature-dependent
stiffness. With the proposed scheme, this project aims to accomplish embedded
and continuous shape morphing through closed-loop shape control enabled by the
TCA's dual actuation and sensing capabilities. To do this, physics-based models
will be first established to relate a desired shape of a structure to the
embedded TCA's electrical resistance. Then, closed-loop shape control can be
accomplished by controlling the TCA's resistance to a desired value. Finally,
the proposed shape morphing scheme is applied to a miniature amphibious robot
that can swim in water with straight legs and travel on ground by morphing the
legs into a curved shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.