* 1755734
* CRII: SCH: Visualization for Better Medical Decision-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Alvitta Ottley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,254.00

This project develops visualization methods for communicating complex health
risk data to patients. The project determines how the use of visual aids can
impact decision-making and whether visual aids can cause, reinforce or mitigate
biases. Additionally, the project identifies strategies people use when making
medical decisions. Results of this work will have broad and varying impacts. The
knowledge gained from this project will provide a better understanding of how
people reason and make decisions with health statistics, and how we can improve
or create novel designs for communicating such complex data beyond the medical
field. The output of the project will be a database of tested visualization
designs for supporting informed medical decision-making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite being fundamental components of
evidence-based decision-making, medical statistics are notoriously unintuitive
and arduous for people to understand. As a result, providing patient support for
health decision-making has become a significant challenge for the medical
community. This research addresses this problem by calling attention to
synergies between medical risk communication and visualization theory. The
project will create a theoretical framework for how visual representations
impact decisions. The results will demonstrate how different designs can create,
reinforce, or mitigate biases related to risk perception, and will identify
individual characteristics that may mediate cognitive biases. Furthermore, the
project will develop computational approaches for how people use visualization
throughout the decision-making process and will determine which visual elements
people tend to use or ignore. Using medical risk communication as a test bed,
this research will investigate core topics in the Visualization community and
simultaneously make contributions to the medical community. A core product of
this project will be a web-based multi-dimensional recommendation system for
health risk visualization. All publications, data, and source code will be
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.