* 1755762
* CRII: SHF: Building Visibility into the Cognitive Processes of Software Engineers via Biosensors
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Christopher Parnin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 159,662.00

The goal of this research project is to study cognitive effort associated with
tasks that computer programmers perform. This is important because the limits of
cognitive load present a barrier to improving a programmer's productivity and
quality. Using newly available biometric technologies such as fMRI, EMG and eye-
tracking, it is possible to conduct studies of cognitive processes in
programmers. Such studies make it possible to provide scientific answers to
questions such as which programming language constructs are easier to use, what
kinds of training produce better programmers, or how different programming
environments and situational variables are more conducive to writing the best
code. The main thrust of this project is to overcome the significant challenges
that currently prevent researchers in the software engineering community from
widely adopting these methods. This project performs some of the groundbreaking
work that is needed to provide robust measurements of cognitive processes in
programmers using the biometric technologies. The resulting tailored
methodologies and measurement devices will support a community of researchers
working in this space.

The project will develop techniques to use fMRI to measure difficulty in
understanding certain programming constructs. This will be done by measuring
cognitive effort, as measured by neural efficiency, and level of concentration
via neural deactivation. Similarly, measurements of cognitive processes
activated during other code comprehension tasks will be obtained. The objective
is to obtain a validated set of measures that predict the cognitive load
associated with understanding code, which is necessary to create the scientific
basis for the studies. The work will lead to combining different measurements,
such as eye-tracking and EMG, to establish more sensitive measurement tools. The
project will address technical concerns such as maintaining clean signal data
from sensors and learning how to calibrate devices to maintain validity of
results, as well as practical concerns such as how to perform measurements on
human subjects without interfering with the measurements. Ultimately, such
studies should lead to a better understanding what constitutes best practices in
software development and training of software engineers.