* 1755619
* CRII: AF: Strongly Polynomial Algorithms for Market Equilibria with Applications to Network Flows and Nash Social Welfare
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Jugal Garg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Market equilibrium is a central solution concept in economics with applications
in a variety of domains. It has found several surprising applications even in
non-market settings which do not involve any exchange of money but only require
the remarkable fairness and efficiency properties of equilibria. These
applications include scheduling, mechanism design, fair division, and others.
Designing fast algorithms for computing equilibria in markets is vital for their
many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a number of classical market
settings with divisible goods, computing an equilibrium reduces to maximizing
the geometric mean of agents' utilities, called the Nash social welfare. Nash
social welfare is also considered an important fairness notion in allocating
scarce resources in a non-market setting. Recently there has been a surge of
interest in finding such an allocation with indivisible goods. However, the
problem is NP-hard even when there are only two agents with additive valuations,
and hence designing fast and near-optimal approximation algorithms is a crucial
problem in this domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to obtain fast
algorithms for computing equilibria in fundamental market models and their
extensions, and for the Nash welfare problem. Many of these reduce to network
flow problems, which are central optimization problems that arise in numerous
applications such as transportation and communication. Despite the extensive
work on equilibrium computation and network flows, designing a strongly
polynomial time algorithm for many of these market models has been long open.
The first main thrust of this project is to make progress towards settling these
open questions. New algorithmic techniques and tools, as well as structural
insights will need to be developed to solve them. Recent work on the Nash
welfare problem crucially uses the market model extensions and their connections
with the flow problems. The second main thrust of this project is to obtain
improved approximation algorithms for the Nash welfare
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support and engage two PhD
students, and an undergraduate student to implement the designed algorithms and
test them for their practical efficiency. The new algorithmic techniques
developed in this project will be incorporated into a graduate course on Games
and Markets that the PI teaches. All the educational and implementation material
will be made freely available online.