* 1755530
* Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline (FAD)
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Margaret Vitullo, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 240,900.00

The Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline (FAD) at the American
Sociological Association (ASA) promotes the progress of science by supporting
innovative sociological research through making small grants (up to $8,000) to
sociologists. FAD projects help build the needed body of empirical evidence to
inform effective policy making at the national level. A few recent examples of
recent FAD funded projects and their broader impacts include: a study of the
impact of predictable scheduling legislation on the lives of retail workers and
their children, informing national debates about fair scheduling policies; an
ethnographic study of the shifting dynamics of labor, capital, drug addiction,
and racial migration and conflict in the coal region of Northeastern
Pennsylvania; and a study of digital expressions of fear expressed during the
2014-2015 Ebola epidemic, with implications for the recruitment and care
practices of healthcare volunteers in high-risk environments. The FAD program
also acts as a funding catalyst, helping young researchers develop their
projects to the point where they can secure additional outside support. Recent
FAD awardees reported receiving nearly $5.00 in additional funding for every
dollar they received from FAD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fund for the
Advancement of the Discipline (FAD) at the American Sociological Association
(ASA) advances sociology and nurtures the development of scientific knowledge by
supporting small, groundbreaking research initiatives and conferences that
foster new research agendas and networks. FAD also nurtures the scientific
potential of researchers who might have difficulty securing funding from other
sources. FAD has been extremely successful in this regard, with up to half of
all awards going to early career researchers and those employed outside of
research extensive institutions. The program fosters the development of
publications, educational resources, intellectual debates and public
conversations that stimulate new lines of scientific inquiry. Awards are based
on a merit review system that emphasizes innovativeness and the promise of the
research, feasibility and adequacy of project design, and plans for data
analysis and public dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.