* 1755393
* Unraveling a new signaling pathway for brassinosteroids: use of a novel biosensor for localized cAMP elevation to link cyclic nucleotide, Ca2+ and plant steroid signal transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Gerald Berkowitz, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Steroid hormones regulate growth and development in animals and plants. Plants
have a class of steroid hormone called brassinosteroids (BR), which, among other
effects, promote cell elongation and cell expansion. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms, how BR acts as growth-promoting hormone, could provide new avenues
to enhance crop yield and quality. It is known that upon binding to a receptor
at the plant cell surface, BR induces changes in gene expression, which regulate
growth and development. In addition to these relative slow BR responses based on
changes in gene expression, more rapid BR responses triggered by small, mobile
molecules, so-called second messengers, have recently been discovered by the
research team. This project will investigate how BR binding to its receptor
causes an increase in second messenger concentrations inside the cell, and how
this increase in second messenger concentrations brings about downstream
responses. To achieve this goal, the Principal Investigator has developed, and
will further establish, optical sensors that allow recording second messenger
concentrations with high sensitivity inside a living plant cell. As a result,
fundamental new insights into how BR affects plant cells are expected. One of
the second messengers to be studied is cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate),
which is well established as messenger in animal cells, but in plant cells
synthesis and function of cAMP have been an enigma since many years. This
project is aimed at providing experimental evidences that cAMP is a bona fide
second messenger in plant cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs
transgenic (Glosensor) Arabidopsis plants that express firefly luciferase fused
to a cyclic AMP (cAMP) binding domain. This biosensor generates light upon cAMP
binding, providing a unique tool; plants that allow real-time in vivo monitoring
of localized elevations of the cytosolic signaling molecule cAMP. Plant Ca2+
-conducting ion channels are activated by cAMP; these channels (and the cAMP
that activates them) play roles in numerous signaling pathways, including a
newly uncovered role in brassinosteroid (BR) signaling. Plant proteins involved
in cAMP generation are not canonical to those in animals. Plant genes encoding
these enzymes (and corresponding mutants) are not identified; Glosensor plants
provide an alternative genetic tool to study cAMP-based signaling. The project
will employ Glosensor plants, and newly developed methods to monitor membrane-
localized cytosolic Ca2+ elevations to examine molecular components of Ca2+
-dependent BR signaling. The signaling cascade is thought to involve G proteins,
as well as calmodulin (CaM) and a CaM-dependent transcriptional activator
(CAMTA). Involvement of these proteins in the signaling cascade will be
interrogated using appropriate Arabidopsis mutants. An innovative molecular
genetics training program (Camp DNA) will be delivered to high school teachers
as a broader impact. This two-week program trains participants in experimental
methods and underlying principles in an integrated fashion. Participants are
provided with a package of tools and resources (informational and biological) to
support a molecular genetics experiential lab high school educational
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.