* 1755055
* Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors Modulating the Shift from Paternal Care to Filial Cannibalism
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Richard Helm, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/29/2024
* USD 835,713.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many animals provide care for
their young that is critical for early development, but disruption of this
relationship can lead to neglect, abandonment, and death of offspring. In some
species, parents can even take the extreme step of eating their own young.
Cannibalism of offspring has long fascinated scientists, but little is known
about the environmental factors that provoke this behavior or the physiological
changes that underlie the decision to care for or eat one's young. Answering
these questions will provide insights into how and why adults terminate parental
care in a broad range of species. This study will examine the switch from
parental care to cannibalism in a fascinating study system, the eastern
hellbender. These giant salamanders were once common in streams across the
eastern U.S., but have experienced drastic population declines across much of
their range in the last 30 years. Unlike many species, male hellbenders provide
exclusive care for their young for an extended period (7 months). In some
circumstances, however, male hellbenders cease providing care and consume all of
their young. This study will employ underwater nest boxes in streams across a
gradient of habitat characteristics to determine what hormones trigger this
switch in behaviors and what environmental factors promote cannibalism. Not only
will this advance knowledge of parental care, but the study will also employ
high school science teachers in an integrated outreach effort to conserve of one
of the largest and most fascinating amphibians in the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parental care is a fundamental aspect of the
life history of many animals. Paradoxically, in some invertebrates and
vertebrates the parent(s) providing care engage in filial cannibalism, the
consumption of one's own viable young. The adaptive basis for filial cannibalism
remains an unresolved evolutionary conundrum, and the physiological basis for
the behavior is unexplored in wild animals. In addition, few studies have
considered the possibility that filial cannibalism may be maladaptive in some
contexts or that there could be multiple drivers of filial cannibalism within a
species. These critical knowledge gaps exist, at least in part, due to a
scarcity of tractable wild animal models for simultaneously identifying
environmental and physiological aspects of this life history decision.
Hellbender salamanders exhibit paternal care as well as filial cannibalism and
possess a suite of characteristics that make them an ideal system for addressing
previously untested hypotheses related to the modulation of this fascinating
life-history decision. Using a highly integrative framework that includes
underwater nest boxes deployed in streams across a gradient of habitat quality
and parasitism, coupled with genetic analyses and analysis of serum components
collected from individuals throughout the paternal care season, this study will:
1) Identify the physiological modulators (i.e., hormones, serum components) that
underlie the decision by a parent to either care for or cannibalize one's young,
2) Determine what key factors (i.e., per capita resources/body condition,
multiple paternity, and parasites) influence this trade-off, and 3) Determine if
habitat degradation increases the frequency of filial cannibalism. This award
was co-funded by the Animal Behavior and the Integrative Ecological Physiology
Programs within the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.