* 1755825
* CRII: SHF: Synthesis of Near-Tree Clock Networks with No Short Circuit Current that Can be Reconfigured into a Tree Topology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Rickard Ewetz, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,453.00

Many very large scale integration circuits deployed in the Internet of Things
and in various high performance applications are required to support the use of
high performance and low performance modes in order to minimize power
consumption. Such circuits are synchronized by a clock signal that is
distributed using a clock network. The clock network is required to reliably
deliver the clock signal even while the circuit is under the influence of
manufacturing and environmental variations. This research project will result in
a clock network synthesis tool that is capable of reliably synchronizing
components on circuits that operate in multiple modes. Moreover, a course on
computer-aided design and research opportunities will be provided to students at
the University of Central Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robustness and
power consumption of a clock network is mainly dependent on the topology of the
network. Existing clock networks have a topology in the form of a tree, near-
tree, or non-tree. In this project, a synthesis tool that is capable of
constructing clock networks with a mode reconfigurable topology will be
developed. In high performance modes, the required robustness to variations is
provided by reconfiguring the clock network into a near-tree topology. In low-
performance modes, the power consumption is reduced by reconfiguring the clock
network into a tree topology. Moreover, the proposed clock network structure has
no short circuit current, regardless of whether the topology is reconfigured to
be in the form of a tree or near-tree. No short circuit current is introduced in
the proposed structure because there is only a single gate driving each net of
interconnects. In particular, the project involves developing an entire-clock-
network-at-the-same-time methodology. Techniques of reconfiguring the topology
and improving the robustness of delivering both the rising and falling edge of
the clock signal will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.