* 1755529
* Identifying Drivers of the Meridional Overturning Circulation from Observations in Drake Passage
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Teresa Chereskin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 549,104.00

The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) in the Southern Ocean links all the
major oceans of the world. The ACC is therefore very important for the
transferring and exchanging of heat, freshwater and other properties like carbon
and nutrients that impact the marine ecosystem. The Southern Ocean is
particularly sensitive to climate variability, responding to winds that have
increased and shifted over the past several decades and a significant warming in
the core of the ACC. Yet we still have little understanding about what controls
the overall strength of the current as it flows around the Southern Ocean or how
the flow and the properties it carries change with depth in the ocean. The
proposed work aims to study the processes that might control the changes in
strength and depth distribution over a range of temporal and spatial scales
using a 20-year time series of currents, temperature and salt in the Drake
Passage sector of the Southern Ocean. This work will improve our predictions of
how this critical region will respond to future climate change. Given the
sparsity of data, the Southern Ocean's role in the climate system in
relationship to the impact of global warming and the uptake of carbon dioxide
are generally examined using global climate models. Eddy effects must be
parameterized in coarse-resolution models, and the parameterizations are
generally tested on a very limited observational database. The fine-scale
observations in Drake Passage allow for an evaluation of these parameterizations
and provide clues for identifying model errors or missing physics so as to build
confidence in the detailed model representation of processes and dynamics within
the ACC system. The project increases the participation of underrepresented
groups in science and technology. It promotes training and learning through the
involvement of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to
understand the physical processes that contribute to the circulation in the
Southern Ocean, focusing on three central research themes within Drake Passage:
(1) Mixing: Characterize the internal wave field and infer mixing from velocity,
temperature and salinity observations to understand what determines the vertical
and horizontal distribution of mixing; (2) Energy and transport: Determine the
mean and time-varying transport of the ACC in the upper 1000 m and determine how
the variability relates to changes in wind forcing and presence of eddies; and
(3) Property stirring: Understand the eddy energy distribution and its
relationship to topographic features, ACC fronts, wind and buoyancy forcing. The
proposed analysis will take advantage of underway shipboard measurements of
temperature, salinity and velocity profiles that have been routinely collected
year-round from the United States Antarctic Supply research vessels in the Drake
Passage over the past two decades. Contemporaneous measurements at similar high-
resolution time and space scales from the same platform offer significant
benefit for exploring the statistical characteristics, features, mechanisms and
impacts of the processes that drive the Southern Ocean circulation. Additional
measurements from Argo floats and satellite wind and sea surface height data
will provide regional context to help interpret the shipboard time
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.