* 1755096
* Nutritionally complex floral rewards in a community context
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anne Leonard, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 674,463.00

Bees contribute annually to the pollination of agricultural crops, providing
substantially to successful agriculture in the United States, and their visits
to wildflowers provide the foundation for many native plant communities helping
to sustain native habitats and wildlife. Despite their economic and ecological
importance, surprisingly little is know about how bees evaluate the composition
of the nectar (their source of carbohydrates) and pollen (their source of
protein and fat) they collect from flowers. The nutritional value of these
resources varies across plants, so bees often combine visits to several species
to achieve a balanced diet. This project asks how the composition of a given
plant's resources affects bees' foraging decisions and behaviors. It involves
experiments on bumblebee foraging behavior, analysis of variation in nectar and
pollen chemistry, and drone-based techniques to describe the nutritional
landscape bees encounter as they visit wildflower communities. A natural history
museum exhibit will educate school groups about the importance of nutrition for
pollinators, and help visitors decide which backyard plants provide the best
food for bees. Research experiences for undergraduates and science teachers-in-
training will help train the next generation of scientists and help disseminate
findings widely through future courses science teachers will lead. Many native
bee species and populations are in decline, driven in part by changes to the
nutritional resources available to them. Predicting how bees will respond to the
introduction of novel foods offered by invasive, ornamental, or agricultural
plants requires understanding how nutritional need guides their foraging
decisions. The information this project will uncover can thus help inform
efforts to conserve bee populations, whose own food security is directly linked
to that of Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floral rewards mediate interactions
between plants and their pollinators, shaping both plant communities and the
evolutionary dynamics of mutualisms. Despite their functional significance,
little is known about how the nutritional complexity of floral rewards
structures species interactions, because most previous research focuses on a
single reward type (most commonly, nectar). This project adapts a framework from
the field of nutritional ecology to explore how foraging bumblebees balance the
collection of multiple resources (nectar and pollen) from flowers. It
investigates the strategies plants use to manage interactions with their
pollinators via reward composition, and how the success of such strategies
depends upon the offerings of co-flowering competitors. It explores the
interaction between bees and the plants they visit under controlled conditions,
involving floral surrogates. To test these ideas in field settings, analyses of
floral rewards will be combined with observations of wild bee behavior to
determine whether reward composition predicts which members of Sierra Nevada
wildflower communities are co-foraged, and whether reward production depends on
community context. The project aims to expand nutritional ecology beyond its
consumer-centric focus, by asking how floral resource composition might alter
forager/pollinator behavior to benefit the plant. This effort offers insight
into pollen rewards, which are understudied despite their variation in
composition and critical role in pollinator nutrition. Undergraduates are
involved in research throughout, and this view of flowers as nutritional
resources will be shared with the public via an exhibit, 'The Floral
Supermarket' and the annual public Pollinator Festival at the University of
Nevada, Reno's Pollinator Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.