* 1755418
* Evolution and function of the AID/APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases in lampreys
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Max Cooper, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 537,879.00

The immune system of vertebrates uses antibodies to respond to infections.
Lampreys are ancient vertebrates that make antibodies differently from mammals,
such as humans. This project will analyze the function of a family of enzymes,
called cytidine deaminases (CDAs) in generating a diverse repertoire of
antibodies in lampreys. The work in lampreys will shed light on the function of
human enzymes related to cytidine deaminases, of which little is known. Findings
could lead to engineered lamprey antibodies for use in diagnosing and treating
human diseases. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in modern
immunological research methods, developing the next generation of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics workforce. Outreach to the Tapestry
Public Charter School for Autism Spectrum Disorder is designed to expose
students to science and understanding of the natural
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the assembly and somatic
diversification of antigen receptor genes termed Variable Lymphocyte Receptors
(VLRs) that encode antibodies in jawless vertebrates. VLR assembly in lampreys
is catalyzed by a multi-gene family of cytidine deaminases. In this research,
researchers will use genomics to comprehensively characterize lamprey cytidine
deaminases. They will examine the expression pattern of newly identified
cytidine deaminase 1-like molecules - cytidine deaminase 3-5 and four new splice
variants of cytidine deaminase 2 in lamprey tissues and test their function in
heterologous systems and cell lines. A deeper understanding of the mechanism and
function of different cytidine deaminases family members in lampreys will
provide insight into the function of human homologs and advance understanding of
the evolution of the adaptive immune systems in vertebrates. Knowledge gained
through this research could enable engineering of higher-affinity lamprey VLR
antibodies, which have important diagnostic and therapeutic potential in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.