* 1755539
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Stronger and Verified Security for Real-World Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Viet Tung Hoang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,469.00

Many real-world cryptographic schemes are based on the provable-security
paradigm, certifying their security via some proof. However, in several
important settings, existing proofs for the in-use constructions give weak
security bounds, even to the extent that these results are not meaningful.
Moreover, many proofs in the literature are buggy, giving false confidence on
the security of constructions which are in fact vulnerable. Even worse,
practitioners may introduce seemingly harmless optimizations into a secure
scheme, only to find out later that these optimizations completely undermine the
security of these schemes. This project aims to partially address these issues
from several fronts: (1) improving security guarantees of important
applications, (2) weeding out insecure optimizations of real-world protocols by
devising attacks, and (3) developing tools for automatic verification of
cryptographic proofs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop some
message-recovery attacks on real-world format-preserving encryption schemes,
which are widely used for encrypting credit-card numbers. The work targets some
national standards as well as other constructions that are widely used. The
research also studies how to provide meaningful provable security guarantees
assuming that the discovered weaknesses are fixed properly. Furthermore, the
research revisits the current approach for extracting high-quality randomness
from random sources, with the goal to improve both security and efficiency. This
is a fundamental problem in cryptography, as many cryptographic scenarios
crucially rely on the use of randomness. Finally, the research investigates how
to improve current methods of automatically verifying cryptographic
proofs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.