* 1755464
* CRII: OAC: Scalable Cyberinfrastructure for Big Graph and Matrix/Tensor Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Da Yan, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2022
* USD 170,941.00

The existing distributed graph and matrix analytics frameworks are designed with
data-intensive workloads in mind, rendering them inefficient for compute-
intensive applications such as graph mining and scientific computing. The goal
of this project is to develop novel big data frameworks for two compute-
intensive tasks, graph mining and matrix/tensor computations, respectively. The
two frameworks advance the field of big data analytics by motivating future
systems for compute-intensive analytics, and promoting their application in
various scientific areas to improve research productivity. The two systems will
be available for public use, and can serve several cross-disciplinary projects
in computer forensics, computational physics, and bioinformatics. The project
includes mentoring graduate students and training K-12 students through summer
internships, as well as related new course materials and outreach activities to
help the public learn big data technologies. Thus, the project aligns with the
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the national
health and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graph mining system and the
matrix/tensor platform share the design of (i) a tailor-made storage subsystem
providing efficient and flexible data access, and (ii) a computation subsystem
with fine-grained task control for data-reuse-aware task assignment and load
balancing. The graph mining system, called G-thinker, aims to facilitate the
writing of distributed programs which mine from a big graph those subgraphs that
satisfy certain requirements. Such mining problems are useful in many
applications like community detection and subgraph matching. These problems
usually have a high computational complexity, and existing serial algorithms
tackle these problems by backtracking in a duplication-free vertex-set
numeration tree, which recursively partitions the search space. G-thinker adopts
an intuitive programming interface that minimizes the effort of adapting an
existing serial subgraph mining algorithm for distributed execution. The
subgraphs to mine are spawned from individual vertices and they grow their
frontiers as needed, and memory overflow is avoided by spilling subgraphs to
disks when needed. In each machine, vertices and edges shared by multiple
subgraphs need only be transmitted and cached once, which minimizes
communication (and hence data waiting) so that CPU cores are better utilized. To
address the load-balancing problem of power-law graphs, G-thinker explores
recursive decomposition and work stealing to allow idle machines to steal
subgraphs for mining from heavily-loaded machines. The project also explores a
distributed matrix/tensor storage and computing framework, where matrix/tensor
partitions are stored in multiple replicas using different storage schemes to
efficiently support all kinds of submatrix access operations. This flexible
storage scheme offers the upper-layer computations much more opportunities for
fine-grained optimizations, including smarter task scheduling and in-situ
updates. The use of this framework is exemplified by matrix multiplication and
LU factorization. Both of the proposed frameworks can help build a
cyberinfrastructure for collaborations with scientists in science, medicine, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.