* 1755025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Quantification of Geography and Social Relations in Agrarian Reforms
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Sheng Long, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 6,779.00

The research supported by this award investigates how land and other resources
are quantified in rural land reform projects. Land reforms reallocate access to
primary productive resources. This reallocation critically depends on
measurements and calculations that can vary significantly from one context to
another. The researcher seeks to understand how these numbers are produced and
how they are incorporated into governmental planning and design. The research is
important because quantifications of all kinds, from national censuses to
educational testing, have become a common part of contemporary life. This
research focuses on the micro-processes by which the actual numbers are produced
and who produces them. This information will help both policy makers who use
numbers to make important decisions and citizens whose lives are affected by
those decisions to better understand the complexities that can lie behind
quantifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken by Sheng
Long, a University of Michigan anthropology doctoral student, who is supervised
by Dr. Erik Mueggler. Long will use rural land reform in China as a case study.
This major national quantification project provides a rich and unique
opportunity that would not be available in the United States, although the
results of her study will be applicable to the U.S. Long will investigate how
rural residents and other social actors measure and calculate agricultural
resources. She has structured her research with two sets of queries. The first
set is about numerical governance. How do social actors--farmers, bureaucrats,
government staff, and surveyors--produce numbers, individually and
cooperatively, in land reforms? The second set of questions is about the
quantification of personhood and belongings. How do people manipulate numerical
standards that generate social labeling? How do they calculate land contextually
when they shift social roles from household to neighborhood to community? Long
will collect data in three major sites: village households and agricultural
fields; a GIS survey company; and familial and institutional archives. Findings
from the research will contribute to interdisciplinary theorization of social
category and relations through the lens of numbers. It also will provide data
for policymakers worldwide who need to understand how local population are drawn
into, affect, and are affected by large-scale quantification
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.