* 1755431
* Functional properties and computational function of top-down feedback in early visual cortex: an optogenetic investigation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Paul Bressloff, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Cognitive functions such as thinking, perceiving and remembering, rely on the
coordinated activity of neurons in the cerebral cortex, the site of conscious
experience. In the cerebral cortex of higher mammals, sensory information
travels along feedforward connections through a hierarchy of cortical areas,
each processing increasingly complex stimulus features. In turn, higher
processing areas send much denser feedback connections to lower processing
areas. The role of feedback connections in sensory processing has remained
hypothetical due to unavailability of methods for rapid and selective
perturbation of feedback circuit activity. The goal of the studies proposed in
this application is to understand the role of feedback in the processing of
sensory stimuli, using optogenetics. This is a novel methodology, which allows
to selectively and rapidly perturb, using light, the activity of feedback
neurons expressing light-sensitive excitatory or inhibitory opsins derived from
bacteria. In turn, opsin expression in feedback neurons is induced via
injections into the cortex of viruses carrying the exogenous opsin gene. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposal will offer a unique opportunity to
train young graduate and undergraduate students in both neuroscience and
mathematics. Women and minority undergraduate students will be specifically
recruited working with existing outreach local programs. Moreover, use of
optogenetics to understand the function of feedback circuits in higher mammals
is a major technical innovation, which will have a major impact on studies of
neural circuit function in higher mammalian
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optogenetic activation will be used to identify
feedback neurons in different cortical areas and characterize their specific
functional properties (Aim 1). This will reveal the unique properties of
feedback neurons and how they differ from those of feedforward or other cortical
neurons. Instead, optogenetic inactivation will be used to determine how
silencing feedback from higher cortical areas affects the processing of sensory
stimuli in lower cortical areas (Aim 2). Finally, computational modeling will be
used to understand how feedback neuron activity affects the cortical network and
its dynamics (Aim 3). In particular, the modeling work will reveal how the
complex interactions between feedback neurons and other cortical circuits
generates the results observed in the experimental studies. Together, the
proposed studies will increase understanding of how the cerebral cortex works by
revealing the role of feedback connections in sensory information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.