* 1755125
* Operation of A National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Facility at The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Ann McNichol, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2024
* USD 8,345,331.00

The National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry facility (NOSAMS)
offers state of-the-art 14C (radiocarbon) measurements in a wide range of
natural sample types, including seawater, groundwater, carbonates, bulk
sediments, soils, and organic carbon. Measurements of radiocarbon in natural
samples provide a unique and powerful set of tools for ocean and earth science.
The 14C half-life (time it takes for half of the atoms in a sample to decay) of
5700 years can be used to date carbon-bearing samples as old as 50,000 years,
and to study the time scales of ocean circulation and mixing, the timing of
climate changes, and the details of modern carbon cycling. Radiocarbon
measurements are used in many branches of ocean research including physical
oceanography, biogeochemistry, paleooceanography, and climate change. The
research enabled by the NOSAMS measurements addresses questions that are
important to society: among them issues of past and future global climate
change, local and regional environmental impacts, and the development of natural
resources. In addition to supporting socially relevant research, NOSAMS will
play an important role in training and mentorship of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. NOSAMS promotes general public understanding of
radiocarbon and related scientific issues through web sites and in hosting tours
for the visiting public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Ocean
Sciences at NSF provides base support for the operation and maintenance of the
National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometer (NOSAMS) facility. The
facility provides natural level radiocarbon dating services to the oceanographic
community. Radiocarbon is an important tool in climate, carbon cycle, and
biogeochemical science. It is useful as a chronometer covering the past ~50,000
years, it is a diagnostic of past changes in the carbon cycle, it serves as a
tracer of ocean circulation, and it is a probe for carbon flow in the
environment. Thus radiocarbon measurements are used in many sectors of ocean
science research ranging from paleoceanography, physical oceanography,
biogeochemistry, and climate change science. Current environmental level
radiocarbon measurements require careful sample processing that minimizes
contamination risk and other experimental artifacts, and the use of Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (AMS) systems. Consequently, it is advantageous to have and
maintain a central facility that serves the broader ocean sciences community by
making such measurements and acting as a center of expertise, as well as
sustaining and advancing the state-of-the-art in such measurements. The PI?s
propose to continue operations for another five years, while gradually
increasing the numbers of samples analyzed each year, improving the accuracy and
precision of measurements, and expanding the methodology in new directions. They
also plan to continue to improve and develop new radiocarbon measurement
capabilities and propose to expand the portfolio of services offered to the
community. Recent advances include pioneering innovative techniques such as the
REDICS (Rapid Extraction of Dissolved Inorganic Carbon System) and the Ramped
Pyrolysis System, both of which allow NOSAMS to maintain its competitive edge.
Proposed research includes new inroads into compound specific and compound class
radiocarbon analysis, as well as extending analyses to smaller
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.