* 1755781
* CRII:RI: Adaptive and Practical Algorithms for Personalization
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Haipeng Luo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 04/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Intelligent personalization systems, such as those in news, advertising, search,
online shopping, and clinical trials, are playing an increasingly important role
in daily lives, bringing to us tremendous convenience as well as increasing the
productivity of society. The main challenge in developing algorithmic solutions
for these systems lies in the fact that only feedback for the recommended
options, but not the other ones, is provided by the users. Many simple
heuristics have been used in practice, and there are also some recent advances
on more rigorous approaches based on the "contextual bandit" model, referring to
an analogy with the objective to maximize the sum of rewards earned through a
sequence of lever pulls where an encoding of past performance provides context.
However, there is still great room for improvement in terms of both practicality
and performance guarantees. This project seeks to develop more practical and
adaptive contextual bandit algorithms for such systems. The success of this
project requires developing new algorithmic techniques as well as mathematical
tools from statistics, optimization, machine learning, and their combinations in
an innovative way, which advances the theory and practice of the field of online
decision making. Education is integrated into the project through curriculum
development and student mentoring. Outreach activities include collaborations
with other universities as well as with industry, and also organizing related
workshops at top conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
aims at designing a family of practical contextual bandit algorithms which not
only enjoy some information-theoretic worst-case guarantees but can also achieve
much better performance when the problem exhibits some kind of "easiness".
First, the project systematically studies different kinds of "easiness"
measurements and develops and analyzes specific algorithms for each of these
measurements. Second, the project further considers the question of whether it
is possible to have a single algorithm that is optimal against all problem
instances, where optimality is in terms of the best performance among a
reasonable class of algorithms. Finally, the project implements all the
developed algorithms and conducts empirical evaluation on benchmark datasets,
with the goal of releasing easy-to-use and publicly available
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.