* 1755224
* Analysis of the Flowering Regulatory Network in the Grass Brachypodium distachyon
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Richard Amasino, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 06/30/2023
* USD 662,547.00

The initiation of flowering is a key transition in the plant life cycle. In many
plant species, particularly those adapted to temperate climates, flowering
occurs at a particular time of year in response to the sensing of seasonal cues
such as changes in day-length and temperature. The objective of the research is
to further the understanding of the genes and biochemical pathways that control
the timing of flowering in response to seasonal cues in grasses, a group of
plants that includes many important crops such as wheat, oats, rice, and corn.
Much of the research will utilize the model grass Brachypodium distachyon
because working in this species facilitates identifying the genes underlying
flowering in response to seasonal cues. The data generated will help to lay the
groundwork for tailoring the flowering of crop species, and will advance the
basic understanding of how organisms have evolved systems to perceive
environmental cues and translate those cues into developmental programs such as
the initiation of flowering. This project will result in the training of
graduate students and postdocs, and provide undergraduates with an opportunity
to learn about research in genetics, molecular biology, and plant development
while exploring their interests in a STEM career. The project will also involve
development of a classroom module to provide K-12 students with an opportunity
to explore how plants grow and develop and respond to seasonal signals such as
the cold of winter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal is to advance the
understanding of how perception of winter cold as well as the short days of
winter are translated into stable, epigenetic changes in gene expression that
enable grasses that are adapted to temperate climates to become competent to
flower in the spring when conditions are most favorable for reproduction. The
process is known as vernalization. The project will involve studying certain
recently discovered key genes involved in both cold-mediated and short-day-
mediated flowering in grasses. These genes had not previously been known to play
a role in flowering. One group of genes encodes proteins that may be part of a
novel, plant-specific gene regulatory complex; another represents a new role for
a member of the florigen gene family. A combination of genetics and biochemistry
will be employed to explore the role of the proteins encoded by these genes with
the goal of better understanding the molecular basis of how flowering is
regulated in response to seasonal cues in grasses. The flowering pathways under
study evolved independently in different groups of plants; thus, this research
is also a model for studying how convergent evolutionary pathways can lead to a
solution to the common problem of ensuring that flowering only occurs after
winter has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.