* 1755670
* CSBR: Living Stocks Support for the Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Hippokratis Kiaris, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,229.00

An award is made to the University of South Carolina to provide support for the
Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (PGSC). Animals of the genus Peromyscus
(commonly referred to as deer mice, white footed mice, beach mice, etc.) are a
model of choice for NSF-supported and other investigators that study evolution,
adaptation and stress response, behavior, physiology, host-parasite
interactions, microbiome-associated studies and others. The PGSC maintains and
distributes outbred stocks of Peromyscus. In addition, it provides biological
samples of various species, such as fresh, frozen and preserved tissues, DNA,
fecal and blood samples and in response to external requests performs small-
scale research projects to facilitate the research needs of external
investigators. In view of the continuing need for transparency and
reproducibility in science, the PGSC provides a consistent and uninterrupted
supply of animals with verified quality, health, genetic and physiological
status. The PGSC also operates as a focal point for Peromyscus associated
research and provides training for undergraduate and graduate students, and
other investigators using Peromyscus in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deer
mouse Peromyscus maniculatus and congeneric species are the most common native
North American mammal. They range from Alaska to Central America and occur in
many natural habitats. Because of their abundance, these animals constitute a
major component of nearctic terrestrial ecosystems. The PGSC maintains genetic
and phenotypic variants drawn from the geographic variation present in wild
populations of deer mice in the genus Peromyscus. These stocks provide critical
resources for the study of genotype to phenotype relationships, local
adaptation, and evolution in natural populations. Some of the clearest evidence
of natural selection and adaptation have come from studies of deer mice.
Peromyscus has emerged a model of choice for the study of major biological
processes such as speciation, adaptation and stress response, behavior
adaptation in the context of physiology and evolution, host-parasite
interactions, microbiome-associated studies and others. The stock center enables
these studies by providing living stocks for quantitative genetic and genomic
analyses to identify the genes underlying ecologically important, adaptive
phenotypic variation and make predictions about population evolutionary response
in a spatially variable and temporally changing environment. The Peromyscus
Genetic Stock Center (PGSC) maintains and distributes outbred stocks of
Peromyscus and several behavioral and coat-color mutants for research. In
addition, it provides investigators with biological samples of various species,
such as fresh, frozen and preserved tissues, DNA, fecal and blood samples and in
response to external requests performs small-scale research projects to
facilitate investigator's research needs. The PGSC also functions as a clearing-
house for Peromyscus associated information through the 'Perotimes', a
newsletter that is published twice a year, and the PGSC website
(www.pgsc.cas.sc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.