* 1755088
* The Management and Operation of the National Center for Atmospheric Research
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Antonio Busalacchi, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bernard Grant
* 09/30/2023
* USD 624,412,567.00

The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) is an NSF Federally Funded
Research and Development Center. NCAR's mission is: to understand the behavior
of the atmosphere and related Earth and geospace systems; to support, enhance,
and extend the capabilities of the university community and the broader
scientific community, nationally and internationally, and to foster the transfer
of knowledge and technology for the betterment of life on Earth. NCAR fulfills
this mission with tightly integrated programs organized around three overlapping
primary areas of activity: cutting edge airborne and ground-based observational
facilities, community weather, and climate models with many thousands of users,
and petascale high-performance computing. These are accompanied by a broad
portfolio of programs supporting education, career development, public
engagement, and increasing diversity in the geosciences. This award funds the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) to manage and operate
NCAR on behalf of NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the Earth system is
among the most exciting and important scientific challenges of our time - from
the drivers of hazardous weather events that cost the nation tens of billions of
dollars in damage each year to the longer-term impacts of climate change on the
water cycle, water availability, and weather extremes. Under UCAR's management,
NCAR will work with the broader scientific community to observe, understand, and
ultimately predict the evolution of the atmosphere and related components of the
Earth system at greater time and finer spatial scales. Ultimately, these
advances will improve our nation's ability to protect lives and property,
enhance the American economy, and support national security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon its strong stewardship of NCAR since 1960,
UCAR aims to ensure that NCAR continues to be a community leader and preeminent
National Center that advances the atmospheric and Earth system science
communities by conducting fundamental and transformative research at the
frontiers of knowledge. UCAR will operate, maintain and develop NCAR's state-of-
the-art observational, computational, and modeling facilities and services. UCAR
will support NCAR by recruiting, developing, and retaining an expert and
increasingly diverse workforce for the National Center. UCAR will also promote
an ambitious and inclusive program of research, education, and outreach to serve
the scientific community, and is moving aggressively to increase diversity and
inclusiveness in its culture and in STEM education for the geosciences
workforce. UCAR's vision includes identifying future requirements; developing
compelling NCAR strategic plans; involving the community in planning,
implementation and review; providing effective and efficient performance-based
management of resources; making strategic investments in NCAR; creating an
environment that attracts and retains exceptional talent; and enabling new
partnerships that advance the science. UCAR brings a unique governance structure
through its 117 members and many academic, government, and industry partners
that will strengthen and promote NCAR to represent broad national and
international interests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, it is
anticipated that NCAR will maintain a leadership role in creating objective
information in support of national and international decisions on mitigation,
adaptation, resiliency, and sustainability; and engaging interactively with the
consumers of its science. This will result in improved prediction capabilities
and more effective application of these advances to societal needs. Because
UCAR's governance is based in academia, its management structure facilitates the
development of future diverse scientists, provides access to world-leading
facilities and exciting research opportunities for students, and engages the
public through successful outreach program. UCAR's policy of free and open
exchange of ideas, data, models, observational instruments and platforms, and
information will maximize the impacts of the Center's research, development, and
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.