* 1755611
* CRII: CHS: Concept-Driven Visual Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Khairi Reda, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 03/31/2021
* USD 190,977.00

Tools that create visualizations, or visual representations of large datasets,
are increasingly important for making use of data in a number of domains from
commerce to science. To date, most visualization tools have been designed to
support open-ended exploration of patterns in data; though useful for some
tasks, this exploratory model does not fit well when analysts have existing
models or hypotheses. This project aims to support a "concept-driven" analysis
style in which analysts can share their existing conceptual models with the
system, which uses those models to generate visualizations that allow the
analyst to explore places where the models and data disagree and develop revised
models that reconcile those discrepancies. To do this, the research team will
design a number of prototype techniques for communicating conceptual models,
algorithms for selecting visualizations and data features that best match those
models, and interfaces that highlight discrepancies and provide tools for
analysts to dig into the data around them. If successful, these concept-driven
analyses will provide better ways for scientists and other analysts with
existing models to leverage data while reducing the risk of confirmation biases
in which people choose analyses that don't show where their existing models are
wrong. The project will also enable the research team to learn more about the
ways people come to form and express expectations about data. Lastly, project
will provide opportunities for graduate research training as well as tools to
support K-12 outreach workshops that introduce younger students to data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two main activities. The first
involves prototyping three elicitation techniques that prompt users to
externalize their mental models and expectations about a dataset: free text
expressions combined with natural language processing techniques that extract
both variables of interest and implied relationships between them; concept
mapping tools that allow users to graphically express relationships between
entities, ideas, and concepts as node-link diagrams in which the nodes represent
key aspects of the data and links represent suspected relationships between
them; and tools for sketching expected relationships between variables using
existing visualizations such as line charts and heatmaps. The team will also
develop interfaces that encourage analysts to develop several alternative models
to reduce the chance of confirmation bias. The second main activity is using the
captured models to generate relevant visualizations that support discrepancy
exploration. To do this, the team will first use a taxonomy of best practices
for choosing visualizations that best fit the concepts and relationships
represented in the models. They will then design interfaces that highlight
discrepancies in both the visualizations (for instance, by highlighting data
that badly fits a model) and the models (for instance, by highlighting links in
a concept map that are not supported by the data) to call attention to
inconsistencies. Both the elicitation and feedback interfaces will be refined
through a series of semi-structured visual analysis studies in which
participants use them to analyze data in domains of general interest such as
socioeconomic indices, crime statistics, and health risks. The refined versions
will then be used to compare the effectiveness of the concept-driven approach
with more traditional exploratory approaches, as well as against both structured
and unstructured workflows that interleave exploratory and concept-driven
elements, in a series of lab studies using participants drawn from a number of
scientific disciplines and a case study with scientific partners at Argonne
National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.