* 1755437
* Symposium for Engineering School Deans to Increase the Retention of Women and Underrepresented Minority Students
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Karl Reid, National Society of Black Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 49,799.00

In an era when leaders from the White House to Silicon Valley tech giants
portray engineering as critical to America's competitiveness - and are calling
upon universities to graduate a bigger, broader group of engineers -
institutions of higher education struggle to align strategies and actions with
achievement of these outcomes. The research is quite clear about the value of
diversity to innovation and invention. The wellsprings of creativity do not flow
from a single tap. Rather, they lie in the different perspectives, backgrounds
and talents that individuals bring to a team. However, despite decades of
efforts and millions of dollars in federal funding, the needle has barely moved
in terms of the percentages of women and underrepresented minority students
(African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans) earning engineering degrees.
In 2016, women earned 19.9 percent of engineering bachelor's degrees awarded in
the U.S. A decade earlier, the proportion was 19.3 percent. Hispanic students
earned 10.7% of engineering degrees. Over the same period, the proportion of
engineering bachelor's degrees earned by African Americans fell to 4 percent
from 5 percent. Key to increasing the number and percentage of degrees awarded
to underrepresented students is to dramatically increase the completion rates of
these groups. The National Society of Black Engineers is convening a conference
for 100 Deans of ABET-accredited engineering schools for the purpose of sharing
research on the most effective institutional interventions, core strategies, and
critical concepts in retaining and graduating underrepresented minorities in
engineering bachelor's degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium for
Engineering School Deans to Increase the Retention of Women and Underrepresented
Minority Students will address barriers to retention by bringing the wealth of
research findings that are currently available to the academic leaders of
university engineering department, i.e., those who are in the strongest position
to move change forward in increasing retention. NSBE compiled a systematic
synthesis of research available on successful retention strategies for
underrepresented students into a white paper, Paving the Way: Institutional
Interventions for Academic Excellence and Success in Engineering (Reid, Ross,
&amp; Yates, 2015). The researchers interviewed university administrators with
experience in successfully graduating underrepresented minority (URM) students
in engineering and reviewed research studies about the interventions. Based on
this prodigious body of knowledge, NSBE identified a list of interventions that
have proven to facilitate the success of underrepresented students in
engineering. The Plenary and breakout sessions will be organized around
successful interventions and concepts that are necessary to inform these
interventions: 1) Institution or Department Level Interventions: institutional
leadership engagement; climate; and faculty development; 2) Core Strategies:
summer bridge programs, scholar cohort programs; collaborative learning
environments; early alert systems; and facilitated study groups; 3) Critical
Concepts: self-efficacy; and identity. Session presenters and keynote speakers
will be invited from the universities that have implemented successful programs
in the topic areas.