* 1755364
* A functional analysis of the evolution of metazoan cell polarity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Mark Martindale, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 850,000.00

All living cells have polarity (e.g. front-back, top-bottom) which is absolutely
essential for their normal function. For example, epithelial cells generate
"inside" and "outside" barriers and embryonic cell polarity is required for
cells to make important decisions on what they are going to give rise to in
adult forms. Recent work has shown that many of the same molecules are used in
both epithelial and embryonic cell polarity. This grant uses both comparative
and functional genomics in animals with simple body plans to discover how these
molecules are deployed to give rise to normal functioning tissues. By inhibiting
their normal molecular interactions these findings will have important
implications for how normal adult organs function (e.g. gut, heart, lung) and
how disruptions/mutations in these processes give rise to birth defects. The
research plan has other broader impacts such as demonstrating that many
different kinds of animals and techniques are useful for understanding how life
"works" and that local community members, including over 5,000 K-12 STEM
students per year, will be exposed to the value of the maintaining coastal
marine environments surrounding the Whitney Lab for Marine Bioscience that
provide homes for the animals utilized for this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that
fundamental changes in the spatial deployment and interactions of molecules
underlying both cellular and tissue polarity were essential for animal organ and
body plan evolution. Recent discoveries showing crucial differences in the
deployment of Par, cWnt, and PCP Wnt signaling pathways in embryos of the
cnidarian Nematostellla vectensis relative to bilaterian species suggest that
the site of gastrulation (endomesoderm formation), changed from the animal pole
in ctenophores and cnidarians (i.e. "prebilaterians") to the vegetal pole in
bilaterians. Furthermore, changes in the gene regulatory network that give rise
to the trifunctional endomesoderm in cnidarians were responsible for the
formation of distinct endodermal and mesodermal tissue types. Comparative and
forward functional genomic approaches (including transgenesis, mRNA
misexpression and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing) utilizing embryos of the acoel
flatworm Hofstenia miamia (a member of the earliest branching clade of
triploblastic bilaterians), and the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi (a metazoan
clade predating the origin of cnidarians + bilaterians), both available year
round at the Whitney Marine Lab, will be used to determine the sequence of
molecular changes responsible for bilaterian evolutionary innovations. These
studies will determine the integration between cell signaling, the cytoskeleton,
and cell adhesion systems in the regulation of cell polarity during the
developmental process of these two species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.