* 1755992
* CRII: SaTC: Democratizing Differential Privacy via Algorithms for Hybrid Models
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Aleksandra Korolova, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 05/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Individuals generate enormous amounts of personal data that are subsequently
collected and stored by organizations and governments. The data powers many
innovative applications in areas such as web services, health care, and
transportation, but they also increase privacy risks. Differential privacy, a
framework to rigorously reason about privacy properties of algorithms, holds
tremendous promise for enabling privacy-preserving yet useful data analyses.
However, its adoption has been limited to entities with massive user bases. This
project aims to democratize the ability to deploy differential privacy by making
it practical for entities with smaller user bases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities in this project include formulation of
a new, hybrid, privacy model that models heterogeneous privacy preferences of
individuals and current industry practices. The project also develops novel
algorithms that preserve differential privacy while taking advantage of the
hybrid model to improve utility outcomes, and evaluation of their performance.
The work makes progress towards eliminating one of the significant barriers to
data-driven innovation by expanding the applicability of differential privacy to
a wider range of entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.