* 1755536
* CAREER: Tracking, Revealing and Detecting Crowdsourced Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Kyumin Lee, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 489,298.00

The goal of this project is to create the algorithms, frameworks, and systems
for defending the open web ecosystem from emerging threats. This project aims to
(i) analyze malicious tasks and behaviors of crowdturfers; (ii) detect malicious
tasks on crowdsourcing platforms by developing novel malicious task detectors;
(iii) design and build a task blacklist; (iv) uncover the ecosystem of
crowdturfers and detect crowdturfers; (v) combine crowdturfer detection
approaches with other malicious participants detection approaches. Crowdsourcing
systems have successfully leveraged the attention of millions of "crowdsourced"
workers to tackle vexing problems. From specialized systems for crisis mapping,
for protein folding, for translation to general-purpose crowdsourcing platforms.
However, these positive opportunities have sinister counterparts: large-scale
"crowdturfing", wherein masses of cheaply paid workers can be organized to
spread malicious URLs in social media, formation of artificial grassroots
campaigns ("astroturf"), and manipulation of search engines. As a result,
crowdsourced manipulation threatens the foundations of the open web ecosystem,
reducing the quality of online social media, degrading our trust in search
engines, manipulating political opinion and ultimately, reducing security and
trustworthiness of cyberspace. Products of the research will be available for
public use. The education and outreach efforts of the project are tightly linked
to the research goals through curriculum development, workshops, direct training
of underrepresented women, and involvement of industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is it will advance
the current security systems against crowdsourced manipulation in cyberspace.
This project fundamentally alters the landscape of malicious task problems by
detecting malicious tasks in crowdsourcing platforms. Early detection of
malicious tasks has the potential to transform our solutions for secure and
trustworthy information systems. Given our malicious task detection systems,
identified malicious tasks can be used as samples for creating new blacklists.
The blacklists have the potential to prevent propagation of malicious tasks to
popular online target sites. Given our novel techniques, detecting almost all
crowdturfers becomes a distinct possibility in the near future. Overall, this
project will advance knowledge and understanding the crowdsourced manipulation
problem, and the proposed detection framework will complement the current
security systems against crowdsourced manipulation. The broader impacts of the
proposed work include advances to discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training and learning. To benefit society, the proposed malicious task
and crowdturfer detection framework including task blacklists will enable
crowdsourcing service providers and target sites providers to detect
crowdsourced manipulation with protecting information quality and trust.