* 1755078
* Precision Agriculture and Governing Nature
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Eden Medina, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 14,640.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project that undertakes a
detailed study of precision agriculture, a digitally mediated approach to
farming. That approach is of rapidly growing social and environmental concern;
it promises to shape conversations around climate change, food security, and the
political and cultural effects of digital technology and big data in years to
come. Precision agriculture has the potential to mitigate the environmental
effects of farming while helping to increase food production for a growing world
population. However, it will likely accelerate the processes of farm
consolidation and automation, raising serious concerns regarding labor and
economic inequality. Existing scholarly work on precision agriculture tends to
focus on technical problems to the exclusion of the socio-cultural and
environmental issues this study focuses on. The proposed research therefore
creates and advances knowledge regarding the social, cultural, political, and
environmental corollaries of this transformation, knowledge that helps shape and
highlight the possibilities and consequences of precision agriculture. It will
contribute new data and perspectives of relevance to both the scientific and
humanities communities while participating in larger conversations about
technology, culture, and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this project is to advance understanding of precision agriculture,
an approach to farming leveraging the power of digital sensing and big data
analytics to evaluate and customize crop management, livestock, and farm
operations in extreme detail. It seeks to determine how and why precision
agriculture developed, and what consequences is it likely to have. The
overarching goal is to produce an empirically grounded history of precision
agriculture that pairs discursive and historical analysis with ethnographic
fieldwork in two distinct agricultural regions of the United States, Indiana and
New York. The researcher will use multiple methods including participant
observation, interviews, archival research and discourse analysis. Research data
will be gathered at farms, businesses, universities and trade organizations
invested in this approach. He will generate a granular and critically-informed
account of precision agriculture that shows how precision agriculture is being
designed, used, and understood; the account will, in turn, serve to advance
understanding of the drivers and consequences of digital technology in food and
farming systems. The research will contribute to broader social goals by folding
its findings into larger design, policy, and cultural discussions regarding
digital technology, food systems, automation, and ecology.