* 1755015
* Forces and molecules that shape tissue across the evolution of Drosophilid species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Celeste Berg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 704,482.00

Animals exhibit an amazing variety of shapes and forms, yet the variations have
evolved by modifying fundamental developmental processes shared by all animals.
For example, a human hand, a bat's wing, and a whale's flipper all arise from a
common set of instructions that direct the activities of highly conserved
molecules that regulate cellular structure, signaling, and adhesion. Although
these processes that give tissues and organs their shape are essential to
multicellular life, surprisingly little is known about the underlying mechanisms
that regulate the shapes of tissues. This project investigates the physical
forces, cellular behaviors, and molecular regulators that determine tissue shape
by exploring the formation of eggshell appendages in Drosophila melanogaster
(fruit flies) and related Dipteran (fly) species. This work develops a novel
technique to measure cellular forces and generates new genomic and gene
expression data from across a variety of unexplored species. Additionally, this
project brings teachers and students into the laboratory to carry out
independent research projects, learn firsthand about the logic and methods of
science, and develop STEM lesson plans related to the mechanisms underlying, and
evolution of tissue shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epithelial tubes are important
features of multi-cellular life and form the framework controlling the shape of
many internal organs. While the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
tube formation are heavily studied, the mechanisms controlling tube morphology
are less well understood. This project uses the dorsal appendages (DAs) of the
Drosophila eggshell as a system in which to study the control of tube shape. The
DA system is an ideal system in which to address questions of tube formation
both because the fundamental mechanisms underlying patterning and the initiation
of tube formation have already been heavily studied, and because eggshell
appendages vary considerably in shape from one Drosophilid species to another
allowing comparative approaches. Within the context of DA formation, the
investigators measure the pattern of physical forces exerted by follicle cells
on the extracellular matrix, and test whether these forces at the basal surface
predict the extent of tube elongation and overall tube geometry. The role of
apical cell-shape changes on tube morphology, are also being examined with a
special focus on the roles of the motor protein, myosin and the polarity
protein, Par3 (Bazooka in flies). Finally, the group is profiling
transcriptional differences between species with unique appendage morphologies,
with the aim of identifying the molecular changes that facilitated the evolution
of shape. This work reveals and describes the forces that drive changes in organ
shape and tissue morphogenesis. Furthermore the project provides hands-on
opportunities for teachers and students to be involved in basic research in
genetics, biomechanics and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.