* 1755497
* I-Corps: High frequency propulsors for hybrid-electric airplanes
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Kiruba Haran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
widespread adoption of electric and hybrid-electric aircraft that can help
reduce the growing fuel needs and carbon impact the global aviation industry.
With studies showing that commercial transport aircraft with electric propulsion
can substantially reduce the mission fuel burn, many commercial efforts have
recently been launched to develop more efficient hybrid-electric airplanes. The
high specific power electrical machines and drives being pursued in this project
can significantly alter system level trades of weight versus efficiency and
improve the technical and commercial viability of these vehicles. These
technologies have the potential to help the aerospace industry achieve the
ambitious goals that have been set for the next three generations of commercial
transport aircraft, and ensure US leadership of the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on determining
the commercial potential of a new class of high frequency, high power-to-weight
ratio electrical machines for weight sensitive applications like electric and
hybrid electric aircraft. Power converters based on wide band-gap power
electronic devices are used to drive the operating frequency of the machine to
about ten times current values, leading to a significant reduction in the need
for heavy metals in the electric motor. A set of computationally efficient
multi-physics models for this type of machines, incorporating coupled
electromagnetic and thermal effects, has been developed within a prior NSF-
funded program. These models have been embedded within a rapid optimization
scheme and used to generate machine designs with very high power-to-weight
ratios, attaining values that have been identified by the industry as a
threshold for wide-spread adoption of hybrid electric propulsion in commercial
aircraft. In addition to weight reduction, this class of machines have
electrical and mechanical features that are quite different from currently
available machines. Through the I-Corps program the team will work to understand
the full set of customer requirements and the value added by flight-weight,
megawatt scale electric motors to the economics of the complete aircraft.