* 1755407
* Applying bacterial growth theory to understand the evolution of thermal performance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2024
* USD 580,751.00

Temperature affects biology at all levels, from single molecules to whole
organisms. However, the effects of temperature on important cellular processes
including protein synthesis and nutrient uptake remain poorly understood.
Resolution of this longstanding and hotly debated puzzle is essential for
developing a better understanding of how organisms respond to long-term changes
in environmental temperature. Here, the investigators will address this issue
for two groups of bacteria from extreme environments that have independently
adapted to high temperatures. The approach will combine the extension of
recently developed theory with the novel application of new technologies for
monitoring protein synthesis. This research will provide a general predictive
framework with the potential to transform our understanding of the evolution of
thermal physiology. The investigators will also integrate research and education
through mentoring and outreach at both K-12 and university levels. Graduate
students will be trained to communicate their research to the general public,
increasing the outreach efforts to the community. Modules on effect of
temperature on biological systems will be developed and presented at different
venues to reach a broad spectrum of K-12 students. Finally, underrepresented
students will be involved in all aspects of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the links between temperature,
metabolism and fitness remains a fundamental challenge in evolutionary
physiology. The longstanding debate over the relative importance of
thermodynamic effects on physiological rates versus biochemical adaptation for
the temperature dependence of organism performance has been particularly
contentious. To better distinguish among alternative mechanisms that may
contribute to the evolution of thermal performance, the PI proposes to extend
recently developed theory on the interdependence of microbial growth rate and
gene expression to investigate how temperature effects on fitness arise from
both thermodynamic effects on metabolic rates and cell allocation trade-offs
between protein synthesis and nutrient metabolism. Growth theory models will
determine the relationship between growth rate and resource allocation at
different temperatures for ecologically divergent members of two clades of
thermophilic cyanobacteria that have convergently radiated along geothermal
gradients. Further, characterization of ribosome activity with a next-generation
sequencing approach will connect the organism-level phenomena described by the
models with their underlying molecular mechanisms of gene expression. The
experimental design will enable the determination of the relative contributions
of temperature effects on physiological rates versus temperature-compensating,
adaptive mechanisms for the evolution of thermal performance. It will improve on
existing theory by simultaneously accounting for both the temperature effects on
metabolic rates and the constraints imposed on growth by finite cellular
resources, thereby enabling improved predictions for how gene expression,
metabolism and fitness change along an organism's thermal niche. Together, the
research will provide a fresh perspective on the mechanisms that drive niche
differentiation and thermal specialization. The educational impacts of these
research will also involve training and mentoring of students from the
postdoctoral level to K-12 and include students from underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
and by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.