* 1755844
* CRII: RI: Towards Human-Level Assessment of Speech Quality and Intelligibility in Real-World Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Donald Williamson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,995.00

Separating speech from background noise is crucial for many speech-based
applications, including hearing prostheses, robotics, and multimedia
communication. Many speech separation algorithms perform reasonably well when
they are tested in simulated environments, but this level of performance does
not always carry over to real environments that are more nuanced. For example, a
common complaint of many hearing aid users is that their hearing aid is not
effective in noisy environments such as restaurants. Current computational
measures do not enable practical or convenient speech assessment in everyday
environments, and this is a major hurdle for improving real-world separation
performance. In addition, the end-user has largely been left out of the
development and evaluation process, which is not ideal since an approach's
usefulness is ultimately determined by people. The objective of this project is
to develop computational evaluation algorithms to better assess speech quality
and intelligibility in real environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key area of
research focuses on developing novel, data-driven assessment algorithms that use
deep learning to predict human assessment scores, which enables testing in real
environments. Considering the recent success that deep learning has had in
speech processing, this new assessment approach is promising and offers
substantial differences from prior approaches. The relationship between
spectral-temporal speech attributes and human assessment scores are determined
as a result of this project. Quantifying this relationship ensures that
assessment algorithms are accurate and have strong agreement with human
evaluations. An effective integration of human assessment in speech separation
algorithm development should result in improved separation algorithms, which
ultimately benefits users and applications. This is expected since accurate
assessment enables researchers to more easily identify and correct weaknesses
based on real-world environmental factors. The research activities lay the
foundation for the emerging research area of improving realism in speech
processing applications and offer key insights on human perception to the larger
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.