* 1755355
* Mechanism of Light Control of Root Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Vincent Pedmale, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 898,924.00

Unlike animals, plants do not have specific organs that can see or hear various
environmental stimuli; nor can they move around to avoid adverse conditions.
Although lacking a "brain", plants can successfully integrate internal and
external cues, and make appropriate decisions about growth. For example, shade
cast by neighboring vegetation leads to rapid shoot growth to better capture
sunlight under sub-optimal light conditions. At the same time, this shade
avoidance response (SAR) decreases plant productivity and overall performance as
resources are diverted towards growth and extension of the shoot at the expense
of the root. This project will use an integrated genetic, genomic, and
biochemical approach to study the underlying mechanisms of shade avoidance that
allow the aboveground shoot to communicate with the belowground root to
reallocate resources and alter growth. Shade avoidance is a universal problem in
many crop plants, and the findings generated in this project could help develop
crops that resist increased plantation density without affecting yield to
improve food security. In addition to providing research training opportunities
for postdoctoral associates and high school students, the project will establish
an educational outreach program with an elementary school in Long Island (NY) to
provide an integrated hands-on class that informs about the impact of the
environment and other factors on crop yield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roots and
shoots live in different environments, yet the root knows when the shoot faces
adverse environmental conditions. Shade avoidance response (SAR) triggered by
the sub-optimal light environment from nearby vegetation leads to rapid growth
of the stem and petioles to maximize light capture but at the expense of root
growth. Surprisingly, not much is known about the mechanisms that affect root
growth when the shoot detects changes in light conditions. Given the importance
of the roots in the overall growth and productivity of plants, this project aims
to understand the molecular and genetic mechanisms by which root growth is
affected by vegetative shading. Recent results suggest that roots activate
stress responses in the shade to slow down its growth by diverting resources to
the shoot. The specific aims are to (1) generate a high-resolution
spatiotemporal transcriptome map of the root in the shade to uncover tissue-
specific programs that alters growth; (2) characterize WRKY transcription
factors and their associated signaling that may be involved in activating stress
responses in the roots; and (3) investigate the nature of the shoot to root
signals using a forward genetic screen and other techniques. If successful, this
project could identify new components and provide new insight into the process
that can be used to design cell-type specific or synthetic networks to
inactivate or activate root growth in economically important crop
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.