* 1755772
* CRII: SaTC: Enhancing Mobile App Security by Detecting Icon-Behavior Contradiction
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xusheng Xiao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 190,923.00

Mobile applications (i.e., apps) are becoming critical parts in our daily life.
While these apps provide better customized services using users' personal data,
certain behavior of the apps is less than desirable or harmful. For example, if
an app's user interface (UI) has no texts or images to indicate that it will
access users' personal data (e.g., GPS data), but the app discloses users'
personal data when an action is performed (e.g., pressing a button), then red
flags should be raised. Thus, it is crucial to understand the intents of the app
to determine whether the app will perform within the user's expectation. Various
research efforts have been dedicated to understand apps' intents via analyzing
the semantics of texts in UI. However, images, especially icons, remain
unexplored. In apps' UIs, icons are often used in interactive widgets (e.g.,
buttons) to express the intents to use sensitive data. It is often difficult to
analyze the semantics of icons due to the varieties in image styles and the lack
of descriptive texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will build a
knowledge base of icons' semantics via collecting icons from apps in major
smartphone markets, and develop a framework to infer the semantics of icons
based on the collected icons. More specifically, the PI proposes to adapt
computer vision techniques to develop icon recognition techniques that identify
similar icons based on the collected icons, and leverage program analysis
techniques to check the compatibility between the icons and the program
behaviors. Furthermore, this research will combine the semantics of both texts
and icons to better detect undesired behavior in apps. The proposed research in
understanding apps' intents improves mobile app security, which will have
tremendous economical impact on society due to our increasing reliance on mobile
apps. The proposed techniques will also benefit the security analysis of other
event-driven GUI software applications, such as desktop applications, wearable
apps, and web apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.