* 1755965
* CRII: CSR: NeuroMC---Parallel Online Scheduling of Mixed-Criticality Real-Time Systems via Neural Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Zhishan Guo, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 10/31/2018
* USD 174,946.00

With progression of technology, as the transistors become smaller, more of them
can be integrated into a semiconductor chip; this in turn enables integration of
many processor "cores" into one chip. Emerging chips integrate different types
of processor cores, which are specialized for various functions including
graphics processing and pattern recognition. Availability of many cores creates
a task scheduling problem for a software program, namely which portions of the
software should execute on what type of core. Given that the capabilities of the
cores are not equal, a task may take different amounts of time to finish
depending on which core it was assigned to. In a real-time system, while mapping
tasks to cores, deadlines should be met, which may not always be possible.
Further, the consequences of missing a deadline are not the same for all tasks.
Some are more forgiving than others. Consequently, tasks can be classified
broadly based on their criticality. This research will investigate an efficient
scheduler for mixed-criticality real-time systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
resource constrained system, consequences of failure to meet a deadline may
range from catastrophic to Minor. Consequently, there are varying penalties
associated with missing deadlines. The investigator plans to address the
scheduling problem of mixed-criticality real-time systems. This scheduling
problem is NP-hard; the proposed approach involves an artificial neural network
(NN)-based scheduler. The investigator will experiment with parallel NNs for
faster convergence, and develop a prototype system to evaluate the efficiency
and scalability of this solution. The project is expected to lead to the ability
to make near-optimal decisions in real time. This project serves as the initial
step of a larger effort in bringing the parallel computation and neural networks
together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad economic and societal impacts of this
project include integration of research and education, as it will involve
development of a new course offering and redesign of an existing course on real-
time and cyber-physical systems. The project will involve undergraduate students
in programming graphics processing units and will seek to support multiple
female students to broaden participation. Research results, educational
material, software, and experimental data will be disseminated on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.