* 1755237
* The Application of High Resolution Excavation in Reconstructing Early Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Harold Dibble, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 161,896.00

Dr. Harold Dibble, of the University of Pennsylvania, along with colleagues from
the US, Canada, and Europe, will investigate the use of fire by European
Neandertals at 100,000 years ago. This research will be conducted at the French
Paleolithic site of Pech de l'Azé IV. While evidence for human use of fire
appears to extend back to around 1 million years ago, several lines of evidence
suggest that fire was not used regularly until much later, at around 300,000 to
400,000 years ago. More recent evidence shows that the frequency of fire use, at
least for some Neandertal groups, was not constant, however, and that it
actually decreased during colder periods of the Pleistocene. Perhaps this is
because they lacked the ability to start fires themselves and thus had to
acquire it from natural wildfires, which were more prevalent during warmer
periods. Nonetheless, this pattern implies that fire for warmth or cooking was
not necessary for their survival. This, in turn, raises the question of exactly
how did they use fire when it was available. The research is significant because
it examines the fundamental relationship between technology and human behavior
and sets it into a deep chronological context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
to be conducted at Pech de l'Azé IV is designed to obtain the maximum amount of
information concerning the numerous hearth features at the site. Much of this
information comes from newly-developed analytical techniques that can determine
from the sediment and associated artifacts the temperatures of ancient fires and
the fuels used, as well as being able to detect the presence of organic
materials. In order to apply these methods, this project will significantly
enhance the precision and accuracy of current excavation techniques by removing
blocks of intact sediment from the site and excavating it under highly
controlled techniques in a laboratory setting. This approach, developed
specifically for this project, will allow the researchers to identify individual
hearths and to establish geochemical, geophysical, and sedimentological
signatures of them that reflect how they were used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.