* 1755526
* Research Capacity Building and Communication Activity Support for Future Earth
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,011,401.00

This award provides core support for capacity building, communications and
information technology activities of the US Hub of Future Earth Secretariat. The
Future Earth program seeks to coordinate international global change research to
help accelerate transformations to sustainability through research and
innovation. In this role, the US Hub of Future Earth serves as a convener that
helps US researchers engage in research based on the co-design and co-production
of knowledge and tools designed to help develop solutions to global
environmental challenges such as fresh water security, coastal vulnerability,
disaster risk reduction and resilience. The program is supported by major U.S.
agencies, under the interdisciplinary auspices of the U.S. Global Change
Research Program. Over the past several years, the US Hub has taken on
activities that directly support the USGCRP and its member agencies. These funds
will be used to further engage the US research community in these developing
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Future Earth program is organized around
three major themes: Dynamic Planet; Global Development; and Transformations
toward Sustainability. Under the auspices of these three themes, the US Hub of
the Future Earth Secretariat will support workshops and other efforts to foster
the co-design of research to enhance transdisciplinary efforts to help develop
solutions for many challenging societal issues. The US Hub will also develop
programs and initiatives to educate the next generation of inter-disciplinary
researchers and professionals on how to integrate global sustainability with
human prosperity and will actively engage the public through an extensive
communication and outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.