* 1755958
* CRII: CSR: Skeletor: Building a Platform for Quantitative Workload Characterization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Avani Wildani, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,860.00

Combined compute, memory, storage and networking systems are too complex to be
modeled correctly. Thus, only way to determine performance of an entire system
or a sub-system in the context of a whole system is to test it by applying a set
of workloads under controlled conditions. The workloads should be representative
of the real applications. In characterizing a system, the workloads that expose
diverse system behaviors are more valuable than workloads that behave similarly.
Thus, workload characterization is important. This proposal focuses on workloads
for storage systems to enable storage systems performance optimization. From a
systems perspective, if the behavior of the executing workload can be mapped to
one or more of the known behaviors, then the system can be adapted to a
configuration(s) that is best suited for that behavior. The goal of this project
is to recognize the behavior of the workload to find workload
archetype.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will research workload metrics
important to measure and define rigorous archetypes parameterized by these
metrics to characterize new workloads without complex, slow predictive analytics
or onerous domain specification. The investigator plans to produce a workload
classification schema in preparation for developing adaptive, workload-aware
automated storage tuning and provisioning framework. The project has two main
goals, (1) learning what to measure by creating a parameterized taxonomy of the
model workloads; and (2) learning how to measure by creating a framework to
infer and categorize functionally distinct workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.