* 1755908
* CRII: CHS: Designing Scalable Help Tools for Programming Courses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Steve Oney, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,981.00

The growing demand for programming skills has led to an influx of new learners
in both traditional and online programming courses. However, it is challenging
to provide effective personalized help, particularly online. Synchronous tools
such as video chat enable interactive help but limit scheduling flexibility,
which is a key advantage of online courses. Asynchronous tools such as
discussion forums provide flexibility and allow students to learn from prior
questions but are less interactive and lose important contextual information
about the learner's question. This project aims to design, build, and test
"semi-synchronous" tools to combine the best of both help styles. The idea is
that capturing snapshots of the program's code and output should allow learners
to ask clearer questions and let instructors form a more complete picture of the
problem that should improve their answers, while integrating chat features with
the code and tracking how code changes as the discussion progresses should help
other learners make more effective use of prior questions. Building and testing
these tools will advance knowledge about how to develop scalable collaborative
systems, useful information repositories, and more effective support resources
for programming courses. Further, it will have practical impacts on software
education, particularly for students with lower socioeconomic status who could
benefit most from better support in online courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is organized around the evolution and evaluation of an existing
prototype semi-synchronous tool called chat.codes. On the development side,
there are two major activities. The first is integrating version tracking with
the existing chat interface and developing tools to visualize how code changes
along with conversational turns during a help session. The second involves
developing tools to archive, search, and view past conversations based on
specific discussion topics, code keywords, or instructor-created tags. The
evaluation has four main phases. The first is a one-hour lab study pairing
students and instructors on simulated programming tasks that require students to
learn a new concept from the instructor, aimed at evaluating the usability of
chat.codes relative to other synchronous help systems. The second is a lab study
to test the archiving, search, and visualization features, assigning students to
a programming problem and giving them access to the help sessions from the first
experiment but not a live instructor to see how well the archived conversations
both help solve the programming problems and convey the underlying concepts.
Results from both studies will be used to improve chat.codes, which will then be
deployed as a remote support tool for two semesters in a large in-person
introductory undergraduate programming course. This deployment will be open-
ended and students and instructors will not be required to use the tool but will
be encouraged to do so; the project team will use a combination of interviews
where they ask users to compare chat.codes to other support tools, along with
analysis of logged help sessions, to better understand the strengths and
weaknesses that come with integrating the code and chat elements. The team will
then develop a final version of the tool that will be deployed alongside
existing online programming courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.