* 1755946
* CRII: III: Understanding Urban Vibrancy: A Geographical Learning Approach Employing Big Crowd-Sourced Geo-Tagged Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Yanjie Fu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 174,515.00

Vibrant communities are defined as places with the following features:
permeability, vitality, variety, accessibility, identity, and legibility.
Developing vibrant communities can help boost commercial activities, enhance
public security, foster social interaction and, thus, yield livable,
sustainable, and viable environments. With the advent of the mobile and sensing
technologies, big crowd-sourced geo-tagged data (BCGD) are increasingly
available from diverse sources (e.g., buildings, vehicles, human, sensors,
devices) in urban space, and represent an invaluable source of intelligence for
understanding urban vibrancy and enhancing smart growth. This project will
develop novel, systematical, and effective analytical techniques to
significantly advance critical problems in urban vibrancy by taking advantage of
the wealth of BCGD. The algorithms and tools developed in this project will
directly impact community planning, city governance, and urban economics. The
educational component of this project includes developing a new curriculum that
incorporates research into the classroom and provides students from under-
represented groups with opportunities to participate in research.

This project will develop new analytical techniques to discover, analyze, and
leverage the patterns within and the relationships among BCGD to understand and
sustain urban vibrancy. Novel methodologies that are appropriate to urban
vibrancy will be designed in three directions: measurements, patterns, and
mechanism. In researching measurements, axioms that a metric of urban vibrancy
should satisfy will be introduced, and principled metrics will be devised to
evaluate community vibrancy and learn how it is distributed. In researching
patterns, an analytic framework will be proposed to discover the complex
patterns of spatial configuration from BCGD for urban vibrancy. This framework
aims to identify the compatible dimensions and corresponding measuring methods,
as well as optimal portfolios and geographic presentation of spatial
configuration. In researching mechanism, new machine learning models will be
developed to examine the impact of spatial configuration on urban vibrancy by
exploiting the conformity between spatial view and mobility view and the
regularity of geographic dependencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.