* 1755003
* Untangling the Development and Use of Infrastructures in the Production of Knowledge about Genetics, Blood, and Race
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Joan Fujimura, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 179,974.00

This project uses social scientific knowledge about the complexities of notions
of race and notions of population differences to examine how biomedical
researchers and medical professionals use race in their research and therapeutic
infrastructures and practices. It also examines the effects of the organization
of these infrastructures by racial categories in the subsequent production of
knowledge about genetics, blood, and race. For example, the organization of
blood infrastructures has consequences for bone marrow transplantation and stem
cell research and therapeutics. This project will provide knowledge that will
assist life scientists and medical faculty with their research and with a
potential reorganization of research and therapeutic infrastructures. The
project will also provide knowledge to supplement ongoing research and training
of Ph.D. students in the social sciences, bioethics, and life sciences, and to
medical and pharmacy students. The research will contribute to a book designed
to present social studies of infrastructures, standards, race, genetics, and
blood to a broad readership, including undergraduate students in relevant
humanities, social sciences, life and medical sciences. This project will shed
light on difficult ethical and political questions that arise as researchers
carry out research on genetic and biological differences amongst human groups,
especially when it involves racial and ethnic differences that already divide
this country.

The current project examines the use of racial and ethnic categories by
researchers who work with blood banks and bone marrow registries, as well as
with genetic markers and diets. It engages two major topics in science and
technology studies. First, it will contribute to social scientific scholarship
on infrastructures and standards in science. Infrastructure is a term that
includes the databases, algorithms, models and practices used in scientific
research. This study of scientific infrastructures also includes an analysis of
policy decisions about which infrastructures to build and how to organize them;
the laboratory practices, instruments, and decisions that create and structure
the data in infrastructures; and the analytic processes through which data in
infrastructures are used. Second, the project examines whether and how social
assumptions and ideas about race and ethnicity become part of research and
therapeutic infrastructures, practices, and outcomes. This focus on race
categories is part of an ongoing set of studies that has raised questions about
the use of race categories in genomic and biomedical research. The project
introduces the study of the rationale for and impact of a newly instituted
category of "multiracials" into blood infrastructures. The research sites
include cord blood banks and bone marrow registries in large, racially diverse
city, which are currently organized by race and multiracial categories. The
findings from these sites will be compared with similar infrastructures in a
similarly diverse city in another state. The findings about these blood
infrastructures will then be compared with the PI's previous findings from
genomic biomarker research conducted in a project that was based in these two
cities. Research data gathering methods include ethnographic observation,
interviews and documentary reviews, and data analysis based on the "grounded
theory" method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.