* 1755805
* How do viscosity contrasts affect patterns of deformation in multiphase rocks?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Zachary Michels, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 324,111.00

Strain in the lithosphere localizes into tabular shear zones that accommodate
large amounts of tectonic strain and separate less strained portions of the
lithosphere that form relatively rigid tectonic plates. Therefore, shear zones
represent lithospheric-scale examples of strain partitioning that are
fundamental to the architecture of the lithosphere and the operation and
maintenance of plate tectonics. The idea explored here is that, due to
heterogeneities in rocks, some regions will be slightly weaker then neighboring
regions. These weaker regions deform more quickly than stronger areas and, as a
result, the grain size decreases in the deforming regions by a process called
dynamic recrystallization. Therefore, the strength of the initially weaker
region decreases further, since strength decreases as grain size decreases.
Thus, a positive feedback loop is established in which deformation in a
localized region decreases grain size which, in turn, weakens the rock in that
localized region which further enhances deformation in that region. To better
understand this decrease in strength with increasing amounts of deformation, the
research team will deform rocks under well-controlled laboratory conditions to
varying amounts of deformation. In particular, rocks composed of at least two
different minerals will be studied in order to isolate the effect of one mineral
on the behavior of a second mineral. A new method to quantify the internal
strain of the mineral grains will be applied to data from optical and electron
microscopic analysis of the experimentally-deformed samples. Ultimately, results
from this study can be used to address grand challenges in the earth sciences
such as what allows lithospheric plates to move past one another along narrow
zones of weakness. The research project also has potential to advance desired
societal outcomes through increased public scientific literacy and public
engagement with STEM through various outreach activities and development of a
globally competitive STEM workforce through support and mentoring of an early
career post-doctoral fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central question to be
addressed by this resesarch project is how different are patterns of lattice
rotation axes from different phases in sheared polyphase rocks, and how do these
patterns evolve during deformation? A preliminary series of laboratory torsion
experiments indicate that the weaker phase reliably tracks the aggregate-scale
deformation geometry, whereas the stronger phase does not. To understand this
result the research team will conduct rock deformation experiments and
microstructural analyses designed to test whether or not contrasts in the
viscous strength of the different phases in the same rock results in systematic
differences in grain-scale strain partitioning in these phases. The research
will test the hypothesis that the weakest phase records the dominant rotational
strain pattern. A series of new experiments will be conducted on two-phase
mixtures deformed in torsion and in general shear. Torsion experiments will be
conducted at a constant equivalent strain rate of 5x10-5 to 5x10-4 s-1 under
constant temperature and confining pressure conditions, typically 1423 to 1523 K
and 300 MPa, respectively. The torsion experiments will be used to impose a
range of finite simple-shear strains on the two-phase aggregates and will be
conducted to finite shear strains from 1 to 20 at shear stresses ranging from 30
to 150 MPa. General shear experiments will be conducted to finite shear strains
ranging from 1 to 3 at shear stresses ranging from 30 to 100 MPa.
Microstructural analyses will be conducted using electron backscatter and
electron backscatter diffraction, which will provide detailed maps of all
constituent phases in the deformed samples and their crystallographic
orientations. The electron backscatter diffraction data will provide the
foundational information necessary for quantifying lattice strain in individual
grains and across entire sample sections. The internal strain within grains of
the different phases will be quantified using new orientation-dispersion methods
to calculate lattice-rotation patterns that will be directly compared between
phases and also compared to the imposed strain geometry of each experiment. The
new experiments will test the effects of viscosity and phase fraction on the
development of lattice rotation patterns in three different two-phase systems.
Results from analysis of large-strain torsion experiments will explore how
lattice rotations in different phases develop with strain and how well rotation
axes in the different phases track the deformation
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.