* 1755880
* CRII: SHF: Bespoke Data Representation Synthesis via Contextual Data Refinement
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Benjamin Delaware, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 163,212.00

Nearly every modern programming language provides some mechanism for hiding the
implementation details of reusable components behind some abstract interface.
This interface acts as a contract, enforced by the language, that benefits both
the developers and clients of such components: protecting the developers? design
decisions from clients and enabling clients to safely swap in different
implementations of the same interface. Recent advances in program synthesis have
shown how custom implementations can be automatically built from high-level
specifications of a client?s requirements, exploiting this contract to ensure
that synthesized components satisfy the desired requirements. Existing
approaches to language-enforced abstraction approaches can be too restrictive in
this setting, however, as they require the synthesized implementation to work
for any client. This disallows any implementations whose correctness are
dependent on a particular client?s usage. The goal of this project is to relax
this condition, enabling the synthesis of custom implementations that are
tailored to a particular client while still providing the same strong
abstraction guarantees that programmers expect from their programming languages.
The intellectual merits are the development of a refined notion of modularity in
programming languages, advancing the state of the art in the synthesis of
correct, performant code. The project's broader significance and importance are
the development of an approach that allows programmers to program against high-
level abstractions without paying a performance
penalty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances the state of the art in both
the theoretical foundations of data abstraction and the development of verified
software. The vehicle for the work's theoretical contributions is a
formalization of a core calculus for data refinement. This calculus is used to
reformulate the well-established notion of data refinement for abstract data
types (ADTs) to incorporate information about a specific client's usage of an
interface. A key component is the development of the metatheory proofs
establishing that the standard property of representation independence under
data refinement is preserved. This approach is used to improve the existing Fiat
deductive synthesis framework, enabling clients to derive verified ADT
implementations that are tailored to their particular usage. The augmented
system is evaluated via the synthesis of custom implementations of the popular
Haskell bytestring library for two open-source Haskell programs, using an
existing derivation of a performant bytestring implementation in Fiat as a
starting point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.