* 1755338
* Collaborative Research: Physiological and regulatory mechanisms of the attenuation of maladaptive plasticity in highland deer mice
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Shane Campbell-Staton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 269,385.00

Many physiological systems buffer organisms against environmental perturbations
by safeguarding their internal conditions against changes in the environment.
Upon colonization of new environments, however, physiological systems that
evolved in one environmental context may produce misdirected responses when they
are inappropriately coopted to respond to novel challenges. Prominent examples
of this phenomenon include several physiological responses to high-elevation
environments in native lowlanders. For example, exposure to high elevation
induces excessive red blood cell production, constriction of pulmonary blood
vessels, and other physiological changes in lowlanders that may be considered
maladaptive because they contribute to high-altitude diseases (e.g. chronic
mountain sickness, pulmonary edema). In such cases, natural selection should
favor attenuation of these maladaptive responses. This research focuses on
understanding the evolutionary, physiological, and genetic mechanisms that allow
such maladaptive ancestral responses to blunted, without simultaneously
impacting beneficial responses. The project PIs will use a series of acclimation
experiments and field studies of high- and low-altitude populations of deer mice
to explore the adaptive modification of physiological responses to high-altitude
stressors. Like indigenous high-elevation human populations, highland deer mice
exhibit blunted maladaptive responses to hypoxia. The results of this research
will also be used to develop a public outreach program that illustrates the
value of comparative physiology for informing applied problems in human health
using high-altitude environments and the animals that inhabit them as its
centerpiece. These outreach efforts will be centered on the development of short
films that will serve as springboards for interactive discussions between
researchers and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physiological
responses to hypoxia are largely coordinated by a family of master transcription
factors, known as hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF1-3). Because mutations that
alter the function of transcription factors like HIF (i.e. trans-regulatory
mutations) are prone to pleiotropic effects, evolutionary theory suggests that
they should be rare in the adaptive modification of regulatory networks compared
to changes that are more modular in their phenotypic effects. Nonetheless,
recent genomic studies of high-elevation human populations, and several other
species have shown that allelic variation in a gene (EPAS1) that encodes a
specific HIF isoform (HIF2) has been the target of natural selection, and is
associated with the attenuation of maladaptive responses to hypoxia. Thus,
adaptive modification of regulatory networks that coordinate hypoxia responses
seems to have repeatedly proceeded through modification of trans-regulatory
factors in high-elevation specialists. This poses interesting physiological and
evolutionary questions because HIF2 also coordinates a number of beneficial
physiological changes to maintain O2 homeostasis. Given that alteration of HIF2
induce deleterious pleiotropic effects, how can maladaptive responses be
attenuated while adaptive responses are maintained? Does alteration of HIF
function require compensatory cis-regulatory mutations in HIF targets that
coordinate adaptive responses or can compensatory modifications be achieved
through epigenetic changes? This research will address these questions using a
series of physiological, genetic, and transcriptomic experiments on highland and
lowland deer mice. Like other highland specialists, patterns of allele frequency
variation at EPAS1 suggest local adaptation in deer mice, and this variation is
associated with the attenuation of maladaptive hypoxia
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.