* 1755884
* CRII: SaTC: Image Publication with Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Liyue Fan, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 174,967.00

The publication of image data captured by ubiquitous surveillance devices, such
as traffic cameras and security surveillance cameras, would greatly benefit
various communities and enable many applications. However, sharing image data
with untrusted parties would raise privacy concern due to potential sensitive
content, like identities and activities that may be in the images. Standard
image obfuscation techniques, such as pixelation and blurring, do not provide
effective privacy preservation for people or objects represented in the data.
The goal of this project is to quantitatively define the notion of privacy in
image data and develop image publication solutions to achieve rigorous privacy
guarantees. By formally modeling image privacy, this project promises
significant impact in enabling image data sharing with a wide range of
recipients while ensuring individual privacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops rigorous privacy notions based on differential privacy for image data,
while accounting for the representation of sensitive content in images and
effective image obfuscation algorithms to guarantee privacy, and incorporates
widely adopted feature extraction techniques in computer vision. The
investigator will evaluate the utility and efficiency of the obfuscation
algorithms, including the feasibility for popular image processing applications
such as crowd counting and object recognition. The project also includes
educational activities for K-12 students and involvement of women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.