* 1755631
* Increasing the Number of Highly-Qualified Biology and Mathematics Secondary Teachers in the Joliet, Illinois Area
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* William Bromer, University of St. Francis
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 957,217.00

The University of St. Francis (USF) Track 1 Noyce project will provide
scholarships and stipends for talented undergraduate STEM majors to pursue
teaching careers in high-need high schools. The project aims to address the
critical need for highly effective secondary STEM teachers in the Joliet/Greater
Chicago region by preparing and mentoring at least 24 new STEM teachers. In
particular, USF will increase the number of secondary biology and mathematics
teachers by increasing the number of STEM majors successfully completing biology
and mathematics licensure. The project will also increase the effectiveness of
Scholars as teachers and teacher leaders through evidence-based practices, field
experiences in high-needs classrooms, informal science education opportunities,
additional teaching and research opportunities, and mentoring from STEM and
education faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USF Noyce project will provide at
least 24 undergraduate and transfer students from Joliet Junior College academic
scholarships and and summer stipends. Scholars will receive excellent
preparation in STEM and teacher education via USF's teacher certification
pathway, a rigorous 4+1 program. Funding will support the final two years of the
undergraduate degree in mathematics or biology and an additional year leading to
the Master of Education degree with Secondary Educator Licensure. In addition,
the project will engage Scholars in co-curricular STEM education and leadership
opportunities, such as STEM service learning projects, teaching STEM in a summer
camp, undergraduate research, and participation in local and/or national
conferences. USF Noyce Scholar teachers will be mentored by STEM and Education
faculty and alumni for two years post-graduation via an online Professional
Learning Community. Program evaluation and other research studies will
contribute to the body of knowledge on STEM teacher preparation and new teacher
retention in high needs schools. Results will be disseminated at regional and
national conferences. A newsletter that highlights Scholars' experiences will be
distributed to principals in regional high-needs schools. Several Chicago area
schools will benefit from the addition of 24 new STEM teachers. USF Noyce
Scholars will be well prepared to integrate STEM into mathematics and biology
instruction as well as via co-curricular activities, thus fostering STEM
literacy in traditionally underrepresented students who may be inspired to
pursue careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.