* 1755012
* Doctoral Dissertation: Extreme Heat Governance for Rural Agricultural Communities
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Leo Bachinger, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 19,440.00

This project will advance understanding of cross-national differences in
responses to extreme heat events. It fills a research gap by focusing on extreme
heat in rural and agricultural communities. Extreme heat events are a risk to
public health, livestock, crops, and economies. This study will examine two
different approaches to rural adaptation to extreme heat. While rural
communities in each place face similar climate-related challenges, there are
crucial differences in the roles that rural landowners take within environmental
and climate change governance. This study will compare the extreme heat
adaptation measures that are taking shape in two places to understand how
national and state-level policies interact with local cultures and values to
create distinctive approaches. The study will lead to recommendations and best
practice examples that will be of interest to emergency planners, policy makers,
local governments, and rural residents.

The research uses an interpretative and comparative case study approach,
focusing on two regions. Data will be gathered to answer the following research
questions: 1) What factors are shaping the extreme heat adaptation policies in
each region? 2) How do local knowledge and social orders shape the
implementation of climate adaptation programs that are developed on the
regional/national scale? 3) What role do and could local actors play in shaping
the response strategies to environmental hazards, such as heat, and their
implementation ? and how can their stronger involvement as community leaders
strengthen these solutions? Data collection will involve participant observation
of public meetings and hearings, an analysis of public records and publicly
available materials/data, and interviews. Interviews will be conducted with
three different categories of participants: regulators and policymakers (such as
policy analysts, adaptation program coordinators, public officials), scientists
and agricultural professionals, and rural residents (such as local community
leaders, advocates, participants in public meetings). The results of this
investigation will make a novel contribution by revealing how the problem of
extreme heat is being addressed in rural communities that have locally-specific
challenges and priorities.