* 1755454
* RUI: Collaborative Research:  Genetic and ecological drivers of microbial adaptation to high-nickel serpentine soils
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Maren Friesen, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2023
* USD 573,085.00

As Earth's geology varies across the landscape, so do the properties of soil
microbial communities. Variation among these microbial communities reflect an
adaptive process in which genes providing benefits in a particular soil habitat
are more common in the microbes dwelling there. Grassland landscapes in
California are naturally punctuated by unusual patches of toxic, nickel-rich
soil. For thousands of years, these patches have been sites of microbial
adaptation to toxic metals. The primary goal of this project is to discover
genes that allow the nitrogen fixing soil bacteria, Mesorhizobium, to tolerate
toxic metals, to understand how these genes are distributed among bacteria
across a patchy landscape, and to test whether these tolerance genes impose
disadvantages when toxic metals are not present. Insights from this study will
assist in developing strategies for biologically based remediation of human-
contaminated soils and provide insight into adaptation of microbes to toxic
environments. Since rhizobial bacteria, which include the Mesorhizobium, are
responsible for approximately half of the biological nitrogen fixation, this
research has agricultural implications. The project will integrate an
undergraduate-focused training program that provides students with authentic
research experiences. In this program, students will isolate bacterial strains
with extremely high tolerance to toxic metals, and investigate whether their
genomes include genes known to provide heavy metal tolerance. The funded work
therefore contributes to understanding how organisms adapt to extreme
environments and employs the efforts of young scientists at a critical stage of
their training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a critical frontier
in microbial evolutionary ecology: microbial local adaptation in nature, and the
role of fitness trade-offs in determining genotype distributions across
heterogeneous environments. In this project, mesorhizobia, nitrogen-fixing
bacteria that are easily isolated from symbiotic host plants, will be isolated
from serpentine and non-serpentine soils. These Mesorhizobium strains will be
subjected to straightforward laboratory physiology and fitness assays under
varying nickel levels. Whole genome sequencing, transcriptional profiling, as
well as molecular genetic manipulations, will also be used to characterize these
strains. This highly tractable system will enable the identification of genes
and mechanisms of nickel adaptation, along with direct measurement of fitness
trade-offs. The project will additionally link trade-offs to the distribution of
specific adaptations across a landscape of serpentine patches that vary in size
and level of nickel enrichment, thereby testing general evolutionary-ecological
theories about the relationship between specialization and fitness trade-offs.
Undergraduates will be involved in characterization of the physiology, taxonomy,
genetics, and genomics of Mesorhizobia during a course based research
experience. Additionally, outreach will be performed to K-12 schools to expose
these students to STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.