* 1755248
* Determining mechanisms of rewiring of the eukaryotic cell cycle by a virus without disrupting network function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Nicolas Buchler, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 01/31/2019
* USD 338,756.00

Part 1: non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses infect cells and use the host
cell machinery to create more viruses. Some viruses do this by hijacking
cellular processes (e.g. cell division cycle) to force cells into states where
they grow more and produce more virus. Recent work from the investigators' labs
showed that a viral gene (SBF) hijacked and rewired the cell cycle of an
ancestor of Fungi and replaced the ancestral regulator (E2F) without disrupting
the function of the cell cycle regulatory network. Some Fungi (e.g. Chytrids)
have a hybrid network with both ancestral and virally-derived cell cycle genes,
which reflects a transition state during the rewiring of the cell cycle.
Unfortunately, nothing is known about the Chytrid cell cycle. This project will
study the function and architecture of the hybrid cell cycle network in a
Chytrid (Spizellomyces punctatus) using genomics. The proposed work is
significant because it will provide new data to elucidate how a virus could be a
driver of evolution by contributing new genes and regulatory elements into an
essential and highly conserved cell cycle network. This project also integrates
graduate and post-doctoral research with high school teaching to develop the
next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:
technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this proposal is that the viral
SBF initially gained cell cycle control by binding cis-regulatory sequences of
E2F-responsive promoters, and thereby gained the ability to control the G1/S
transition. Early SBF then became redundantly integrated into the ancestral G1/S
regulatory network, allowing the dikaryotic ancestor of Fungi to lose the E2F
transcription factor. The project will generate data to address the central
hypothesis and its alternatives with two specific aims: (1) Characterize the
evolution of the DNA-binding specificity of recombinant SBF and E2F in early-
diverging Fungi using high-throughput in vitro assays; and (2) Measure gene
expression, chromatin accessibility, and transcription factor binding to
promoters using genomic methods in cell cycle synchronized cultures of
Spizellomyces punctatus. The in vitro data will identify overlapping and/or
distinct DNA binding specificities and their conservation across early-diverging
Fungi. The Spizellomyces data will identify cell cycle genes and elucidate the
cis-regulatory architectures of SBF and E2F-regulated genes in an exemplary
Chytrid that has both factors. Conservation of overlapping DNA-binding
specificity of SBF and E2F across most early-diverging Fungi and redundant
regulation of cell cycle genes in Spizellomyces would support the central
hypotheses.