* 1755779
* CRII: OAC: A Hybrid Finite Element and Molecular Dynamics Simulation Approach for Modeling Nanoparticle Transport in Human Vasculature
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Ying Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2023
* USD 258,999.00

Through nanomedicine significant methods are emerging to deliver drug molecules
directly to diseased areas for cancer treatment. Targeted drug delivery is one
of the most promising approaches which relies on nanoparticles (NPs) that carry
and release drugs. The therapeutic efficacy of NP-based drug carriers is
determined by the proper concentration of drug molecules at the lesion site. NPs
need to be delivered directly to the diseased tissues while minimizing their
uptake by other tissues, thereby reducing the potential harm to healthy tissue.
Therefore, the design of these NPs and hence the efficacy of the targeted drug
delivery could be significantly improved by understanding how the drugs carried
by NPs are transported and dispersed in human body. This project proposes a set
of computational tools to model and investigate the transport and dispersion of
NPs in human vasculature. This, in turn, can provide better imaging sensitivity,
therapeutic efficacy and lower toxicity of NP-based drug carriers. The
multidisciplinary nature of the project also brings together concepts from
biology, engineering and computer science to educate the next generation of
computational biologists, scientists and engineers. This research, thus, aligns
with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the
national health, prosperity and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of this project is to create a hybrid finite element and molecular
dynamics computational approach for modeling NP transport and adhesion in human
vasculature. The realistic geometry of vascular network and fluid dynamics of
blood flow are accurately captured through the finite element model. The
microscopic interactions between NPs and red blood cells within blood flow and
adhesion of NPs to vessel wall are resolved through the molecular dynamics
simulation. A robust and efficient coupling interface is built to couple the
finite element and molecular dynamics solvers. Specifically, this project aims
to 1) create a multiscale and multiphysics computational model for predicting
the vascular dynamics of NPs under the influence of realistic geometrical and
physiochemical features of human vasculature; 2) craft an interface coupling
technique that enhances computational accuracy and predictability by coupling
the finite element and molecular dynamics solvers; 3) build testsuits for
multiscale and multiphysics simulations for coupled solution error and
convergence analysis; and 4) advance the current cyberinfrastructure to
accelerate the material design process and enrich the cyber-enabled materials
design community. Such a computational method can be used to explore how the
vascular dynamics of NPs will be affected by their size, shape, surface and
stiffness properties, as well as complex geometry of human vasculature. The
simulation results can further guide experimentalists to design NP-mediated drug
delivery platforms that optimally accumulate within diseased tissue to provide
better imaging sensitivity, therapeutic efficacy and lower
toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.