* 1755277
* Role of gene body methylation in acclimatization and adaptation of a reef-building coral.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Mikhail Matz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,117,574.00

The field of epigenetics studies modifications to DNA that do not change its
sequence but do affect the function of the DNA. The study of epigenetics is a
burgeoning and broadly popularized, with popular culture references outpacing
the scientific data. What makes epigenetics so exciting is that it could be an
entirely novel mechanism of altering gene function during evolution and
adaptation. One type of epigenetic change is the addition of methyl groups to
functional genes, termed ?gene body methylation?. Such changes are known to
occur in diverse multicellular organisms, from sunflowers to humans, but thus
far there was no direct evidence concerning its role in acclimatization or
adaptation. The proposed project will fill this knowledge gap using a reef-
building coral as a study system. Corals are primitive animals that can be
clonally sampled by simple fragmentation, which allows researchers to
disentangle the roles of genotype and environment. Also, corals recapitulate
ancient features of animal genomes better than conventional model organisms. For
example, both corals and humans possess gene body methylation while it is
notably absent from the model fruit fly and the worm. The results of this
project will therefore be broadly relevant for understanding fundamental
mechanisms of molecular adaptation in multicellular animals. In addition, the
project will generate much-needed insight into the capacity of reef-building
corals to adapt to the rapidly changing climate, informing reef conservation and
restoration approaches. Finally, the project will train multiple young
scientists and disseminate methodologies and results through workshops to the
public and broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene body
methylation (GBM) is a common DNA modification found throughout Metazoa, but its
biological functions remains unclear. It has long been hypothesized that changes
in epigenetic marks, including GBM, might modulate responses to environmental
change and result in transgenerational plasticity, but thus far the evidence has
been lacking. In this project, the function of GBM is addressed using reef-
building corals as a study system. Corals are basal metazoans that can be
clonally replicated and transplanted among environments, which makes them
perfectly suited to disentangle effects of genotype and environment on any
trait. The overarching hypothesis underlying the proposed research is that GBM
is involved in long-term acclimatization, possibly spanning generations. The
existing preliminary data indicate that GBM is indeed responsive to the
environment and is linked to fitness of the transplanted individual. The
experiments proposed here will include lab-based and field-based approaches and
will investigate time scales of GBM modulation by the environment, its
interaction with gene expression and fitness, and its
heritability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems within The Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Division of Ocean Sciences within The Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.