* 1755283
* Neuromodulatory Control of Switching between Single and Dual Oscillatory Network States
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Dawn Blitz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2023
* USD 360,206.00

Networks of neurons are important for rhythmic behaviors such as walking,
breathing, and chewing, as well as cognitive processes such as learning and
memory. Flexibility of these rhythmic networks is essential for organisms to
alter their behavioral output to meet changing demands. An important aspect of
network flexibility is that neurons can rapidly switch their participation
between networks. Modulatory inputs that project to rhythmic networks can induce
neuronal switching through the release of chemical messengers. These chemical
messengers alter network activity through their modulatory actions on the
properties of neurons and on the synaptic connections between neurons.
Determining how individual modulatory actions combine to elicit switching is a
major challenge in the field of neuroscience. Small well-defined networks are
instrumental in bridging the gap between cellular-level actions and whole
network output. In particular, the crustacean stomatogastric nervous system
(STNS) provides access to all network components as well as modulatory inputs to
networks, and enables manipulation of individual neuronal properties and
synaptic connections. This proposal uses the STNS to identify fundamental
cellular mechanisms by which modulatory inputs switch neuronal participation
between rhythmic networks. This includes the use of hybrid biological-
computational networks to dissect the contributions of individual modulatory
actions. This project also advances scientific discovery and learning for
graduate and undergraduate students through training in the research lab of the
principal investigator and in advanced lab-based courses. Underrepresented
groups continue to be incorporated into the lab's research through partnerships
with university and elementary school level STEM minority participation
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Interestingly, neuronal switching can include
neurons that switch between single and dual network activity. This switching can
result in a single neuron expressing two activity patterns at two different
frequencies. There is some evidence that modulatory inputs can elicit switching
through their actions on synapses and neuronal properties. However, the complex
interplay of electrical coupling, chemical synapses, and neuronal membrane
properties has limited research at the network level. An identified modulatory
input in the STNS causes a neuron to partially decouple from its electrically
coupled partners in one network and simultaneously participate in a second
network. The objectives of this proposal are to determine how modulatory
actions, individually and collectively, regulate switching between a single and
a dual network state. These objectives are achieved using a combination of
electrophysiological and computational approaches, including hybrid networks in
which biological and model neurons are coupled with the dynamic clamp technique.
This project aims to identify novel mechanisms by which modulatory actions
enable a neuron to become an active contributor to: 1) rhythm generation for two
rhythms simultaneously, despite their occurrence at different frequencies, and
2) coordination among different network neurons. Determining these mechanisms
will provide new insights into how electrical and chemical synapses can interact
with neuronal membrane properties to regulate participation between networks.
Increased understanding of how electrical coupling interacts with other network
properties also provides a framework for future biological and computational
studies in other rhythmic neural networks including those in larger, less
accessible systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.