* 1755409
* NSF-IOS-BSF: Mediation of biological filtration in marine suspension feeders: significance of intrinsic and extrinsic factors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sandra Shumway, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 764,426.00

Filter-feeding marine animals such as bivalve molluscs (e.g., clams, oysters,
scallops) and sea squirts are among the most important members of bottom-
dwelling communities, both for their environmental impacts and commercial value.
Their feeding processes strongly couple organisms in the water-column with those
on the bottom, and can influence the general "health" of near-shore ecosystems.
In this research, scientists from the University of Connecticut will collaborate
with scientists in Israel and Canada to study filter feeding using a combination
of field and laboratory experiments. Using their previously developed methods
and innovative approaches, scientists will examine, with unprecedented accuracy
and resolution, the full range of planktonic cells that filter feeders can
capture, and address fundamental questions regarding physiological control (or
lack thereof) of particle feeding. One of the novel aspects of the research is
that scientist will determine if particle capture by the animal responds to
changes in the types of planktonic cells available, or if capture is a
consequence of the characteristics of the cells themselves (e.g., size, shape,
surface properties). Results of this research will enable better predictions of
the types of plankton that are and are not filtered efficiently, provide insight
into the factors that influence particle capture, help define the food resources
of bottom-dwelling filter feeders in different environments, and strengthen
existing models regarding competition between different species of filter
feeders and their influence on the community structure of plankton in near-shore
ecosystems. The project will involve high-school, undergraduate and graduate
students, and will develop educational packages for home-school and marine-
science educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
plasticity of particle capture in two groups of invertebrate suspension-feeders
(bivalves, tunicates) and determine if the process can be mediated by intrinsic
(behavioral, physiological) or extrinsic (particle properties) factors. The work
focuses on feeding because of the primacy of this process in determining
fitness. Specifically, researchers will determine if particle capture responds
to changes in the number and types of planktonic cells available (i.e.,
plasticity), or if capture is a consequence of the physicochemical properties of
the cells (e.g., size, shape, surface charge, wettability). They will employ
their previously developed methods and innovative approaches to study suspension
feeding using a combination of in situ techniques, controlled dock-side
experiments, in vivo laboratory assays, flow cytometry, and DNA barcoding by
means of Illumina sequencing. The combined application of these methods will
allow researchers to examine, with unprecedented accuracy and resolution, the
full range of planktonic cells that suspension-feeders capture, and address
fundamental questions regarding physiological control of particle capture (or
lack thereof) under different particle spectra and, thus, changing food
supplies. In the process, they will re-examine the paradigm that biological
filtration of plankton is mostly controlled by particle size. Results of the
study will enable better predictions of the types of plankton that are and are
not captured efficiently, provide insight into the factors influencing
mechanisms of particle capture, help define the food resources of mesotrophic
and oligotrophic suspension-feeders, and strengthen existing models regarding
interspecific competition and impacts of suspension-feeders on microbial
community structure of the seston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.