* 1755362
* Collaborative Research:  How to live on a (carbon and water) budget:  Tree investment in chemical defenses across a gradient of physiological drought stress
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* William Pockman, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2023
* USD 387,167.00

Drought-induced forest die-off is a global phenomenon with far-reaching
ecological and economic impacts. In the western US, tree death from drought,
high temperatures, and bark beetle outbreaks now exceeds forest growth. Despite
increases in the frequency and severity of drought-related insect outbreaks,
factors influencing a tree's susceptibility to insect herbivores, such as the
presence of chemical defenses, have received little attention. In particular, it
is unclear how drought causes trees to shift resources toward or away from the
chemical defenses that deter insect attacks and the subsequent trade-offs that
exist with other important plant functions. To address this critical knowledge
gap, this study focuses on how pinon pine trees allocate their carbon resources
toward defense and other physiological processes under increasing drought stress
to avoid death by drought or bark beetle attack. This study uses an isotope
labeling approach in both greenhouse and field experiments to track drought-
induced changes in carbon allocation to specific chemical compounds that affect
bark beetle choice and success. The project increases participation of Native
American students through undergraduate recruitment for summer research
assistantships as well as other underrepresented minorities in science through
the development of two critical thinking modules and support for their adoption
in rural middle school classrooms across Montana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rate
of tree mortality has increased across the globe yet the understanding of the
mechanisms underlying tree death remains surprisingly limited. Most work to date
on drought-related tree death has focused on understanding the coupled roles of
carbon starvation and hydraulic failure, but drought is oftentimes accompanied
by insect outbreaks that cause or contribute to tree mortality. Research has yet
to determine when trees cease investment in effective chemical defenses against
biotic attack along the continuum of drought stress, and how these shifts in
carbon availability simultaneously impact other plant physiological processes.
This study seeks a mechanistic understanding of how drought stress affects the
interactions among tree hydraulic function, carbohydrate availability, and
chemical defense. Using both greenhouse experiments and field drought
manipulations this research will couple enzyme assays with the use of stable
isotopes to identify mechanisms responsible for shifts in pinon pine allocation
of recently fixed carbon at the level of individual compounds with known impacts
on bark beetle behavior. These methods will also allow identification of trade-
offs involved in the synthesis of defense compounds at different drought
severities while also advancing fundamental understanding of tree physiology and
whole tree C budgets. By providing a comprehensive understanding of the effects
of drought-induced physiological stress on mechanisms determining defense
against bark beetles, a new, more complete framework for assessing mechanisms of
tree mortality will be developed. This research was co-funded by the Integrated
Ecological Physiology Program in IOS/BIO and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.