* 1755386
* RUI:  Elucidating the signaling interactions that control spinal cord fate specification
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Isaac Skromne, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,515.00

This project advances understanding of how cells in embryos interpret localized
signaling cues to decide their fate, that is, the type of tissue to become. This
complex problem is simplified by investigating a simple binary decision event:
the specification of posterior neural precursor cells to become either hindbrain
or spinal cord. This decision is controlled by three signaling molecules
regulating the expression of one gene family. Because developmental signal
interactions are conserved across organisms, this research will expand our
knowledge of signal interactions in the nervous system specifically, while also
providing a foundational framework to understand vertebrate head-trunk evolution
more generally. This work will have broad intellectual implications in
neurobiology, developmental biology, and evolutionary biology. The project will
also support the training of undergraduate students, fostering inquiry-based
research essential to developing the skills needed in a thriving US scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A remarkably small number of signaling factors
specify a large number of cell fates during the development of vertebrate
tissues, and the nervous system is no exception. A striking example occurs in
the caudal neural plate, where inputs of the signaling molecules FGF, Wnt and
Retinoic Acid are required to specify which portion of the tissue will become
spinal cord and not hindbrain. Previous studies have shown that FGF-Wnt, FGF-RA
and Wnt-RA all contribute to regulation of the spinal cord specification gene
cdx4. This project will focus on determining the individual and collective
contribution of these three signals to spinal cord specification. By determining
these interactions, the project will produce a detailed map of the signaling
networks coordinating hindbrain-spinal cord specification, an important step for
further analysis of nervous system development and
evolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.