* 1755482
* Protein Glycosylation in Pollen Tube Growth and Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Cora MacAlister, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 616,943.00

The majority of food crops are flowering plants that require successful
fertilization to produce grains and fruits. Fertilization requires pollen to
land on the female flower and form a pollen tube, a rapidly elongating single-
celled projection which grows through the female tissue, in some cases for
several centimeters. This pollen tube is able to reorient its growth in response
to chemical guidance cues to deliver the male reproductive cells to the female.
The pollen tube, like other plant cells is surrounded by a cell wall and cell
expansion requires the proper secretion of new cell wall material that is
specifically targeted to the specialized, flexible cell wall at the growing tip.
The internal secretory machinery and the cell wall must be appropriately
coordinated with each other and with the direction of elongation for successful
sustained growth. Despite the importance of this process for agricultural
production, a major gap exists in our understanding of how the external cell
wall and the intracellular secretory apparatus coordinate to maintain a stable
but responsive tip region over time. This project will elucidate the linkage
between these two compartments using genetics, biochemistry and cell imaging
approaches. The research will also support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. Research activities will be integrated into an
introductory plant biology lab course giving students an authentic research
experience. In addition, the project will provide interactive, hands-on
activities to the general public in collaboration with the University of
Michigan Museum of Natural History. This project was co-funded by the Plant,
Fungal and Microbial Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowering plant fertility depends on the sustained rapid
elongation of pollen tubes and their ability to reorient growth to effectively
target receptive ovules. Proper pollen tube elongation requires hydroxyproline
(hyp) O-arabinosylation, the posttranslational addition of arabinose sugar
chains to hydroxyprolines. Arabinosyltransferase mutants exhibit shorter, wider
and sometimes branched pollen tubes, suggesting impaired tip-region stability.
The secretion required for pollen tube elongation depends on the highly dynamic
F-actin structures at the pollen tube tip. F-actin organization is controlled,
in part, by the nucleation activity of class 1 formin homology proteins. The
extracellular domains of these proteins contain predicted arabinosylation motifs
which have been implicated in interaction with the cell wall. This project will
test the hypothesis that the pollen tube cell wall and actin cytoskeleton are
coordinated via hyp O-arabinosylation of the class 1 formin homology proteins,
limiting their actin organizing activity to appropriate cortical domains though
interaction with the overlying cell wall. Altered cell wall polarity and actin
organization will be assayed in the mutants and wild type. The in vivo
glycosylation status of the class 1 formins will be determined for three
important members of this protein family, including two known regulators of
pollen tube actin. Furthermore, the effect of the extracellular domains on
protein mobility and localization in the pollen tube will be determined. This
research will establish an essential point of connection between two major cell
components required for pollen tube polarization and
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.