* 1755984
* CRII: NeTS: Towards Predictive Communications for UAV based IoT Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Abolfazl Razi, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,787.00

More than 2 million Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have shipped in 2016
creating a global market revenue of $4.5 billion, and is projected to increase
further, with huge potential to transform modern living in future smart &amp;
connected communities. UAVs will significantly impact our daily life by enabling
new applications, and simplifying existing applications including
transportation, traffic control, remote health monitoring, surveillance, border
patrolling, habitat monitoring, and precision agriculture. An important drawback
to commercialize UAV-based solutions in these domains is networking
inefficiency. Current communication protocols are extremely inefficient in
accommodating dynamic topologies of networks of UAVs. This project seeks to
address this issue and develop predictive communication strategies by
anticipating network topology changes. The research will thus develop cognizant
communication protocols for fully autonomous UAV networks by facilitating high-
throughput information exchange and eliminating the need for multiple ground
control stations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop novel tools
for predictive communication for networks of flying objects with heterogeneous
maneuverability levels. The key idea is to take preventive actions via
communication protocols before anticipated network partitions and/or failures.
The proposed methodology relies on developing a universal model to predict
motion trajectories of surrounding network nodes. To enable motion profiling,
driving force of each object is modeled as a hierarchical generative model with
a hidden layer shared among objects of the same type. The use of a novel merge-
and-split method provides flexibility in accommodating new object classes with
unseen maneuverability levels and repealing intruding objects. Novel methods
based on cyclic monoids in category theory will be used to design optimal
measurement patterns for network topology prediction. Finally, a predictive
routing algorithm will be developed by incorporating the predicted network
topology into decision making when looking for the optimal path. A concrete
characterization of the tradeoff between the routing optimality and prediction
uncertainties will be developed based on random matrix concentration
inequalities to pave the road for practical implementation. Graph snappers and
hybrid routing techniques will be studied to integrate conventional and
predictive routing algorithms to accelerate the routing algorithm execution for
large-scale networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.