* 1755402
* Collaborative Research: The role of gut microbiota in supplying amino acids to their mammalian hosts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Cristina Takacs-Vesbach, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 529,584.00

Microbes living in digestive tracks are now recognized as important contributors
to the health and fitness of animals. Within a single host, thousands of
different microbial species form symbiotic communities influenced by many
factors, including host diet. These communities often metabolize compounds that
their hosts cannot, and likely supply essential compounds needed for growth and
reproduction, particularly for organisms that experience protein limitation. To
date, the role the gut microbiome plays in the protein metabolism of its hosts
has not been systematically explored. This project will combine studies of the
building blocks of proteins (amino acids), stable isotope techniques, and next
generation DNA sequencing to answer two questions. First, how does gut
microbiome contribute to the building and maintenance of tissues by its hosts?
And second, which microbial species are most important in the gut? In addition,
a series of controlled feeding experiments where the diet will be systematically
varied will also determine the role that the gut microboime plays in the
relationship between hosts and the resources they consume. This work will
provide many opportunities for training STEM students through hands-on
experiences. These experiences are important for young scientists as they gain
confidence and nurture identities as independent researchers. University of New
Mexico and University of California at Riverside are both minority-majority
universities and certified Hispanic Serving Institutions. The research group
will also host two workshops to discuss how animal and microbial ecologists can
work together to study interactions between gut microbes and their host
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gut microbiota are integral components
contributing to the health and fitness of animals. Animal ecologists and eco-
physiologists are discovering the many positive and negative roles microbes play
in contributing to their hosts. Within a single host, thousands of different
microbial species form symbiotic communities influenced by many factors,
including host diet. These communities often metabolize compounds that their
host species cannot, and likely supply essential compounds needed for
homeostasis and reproduction, particularly for organisms that experience
seasonal diet stress or protein limitation. This project will combine studies of
amino acids using stable isotope techniques coupled with next generation genetic
sequencing to (1) identify and potentially quantify, the degree to which the gut
microbiome contributes to protein budgets and the building and maintenance of
tissues by its hosts, and (2) characterize which microbial taxa are most closely
associated with digestive metabolisms in the gut, in which amino acids are used
subsequently by the host to synthesize tissues. These topics will be addressed
through a series of controlled feeding experiments on deer mice where the
proportion and isotopic compositions of dietary macromolecules and individual
compounds will be systematically varied. The study will produce a more thorough
understanding of the role that the gut microboime plays in influencing natural
isotope tracers, a tool for quantifying diet composition and trophic level of
wild animals. The research group will also host two workshops to discuss how
animal and microbial ecologists can combine genetic and isotopic data to study
biochemical interactions between gut microbes and their host
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.