* 1755128
* Early birds and extra-pair mates: Do nightly peaks of steroid hormones influence onset of daily behaviors and opportunities for extra-pair mating?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Timothy Greives, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 845,919.00

Nearly all organisms, from bacteria to humans, display daily changes in
physiology and behavior. Yet, substantial variation among individual daily
rhythms exist; some individuals naturally begin their daily activity early (e.g.
morning larks) while some begin their daily activity later (e.g. night owls).
The biological reasons that lead to these variations among individuals and the
relationships between behavioral rhythms and other important biological
processes is still not fully understood. Reproductive steroid hormones (e.g.
testosterone and estrogens) play an important role in regulating many
reproductive related behaviors. The level of these hormones in blood also
display daily rhythms. Using a Eurasian, cavity nesting songbird (i.e. readily
nests in boxes provided in the forest), this research will test the hypothesis
that variation between individuals in the levels and rhythms of these hormones
may be influencing daily behavioral patterns and reproductive success. In many
areas of the world an urbanized life-style is leading to altered daily activity
rhythms of both human and non-human animals. This study will provide insight
into the mechanisms that influence these rhythms and how these rhythms influence
the persistence of species. Such information will be vital for providing
baseline knowledge needed to address future questions of the causes and
consequences of human-induced alterations of animal rhythms. This project will
be conducted in collaboration with a German colleague and will provide
opportunities for international training of postdoctoral associates, graduate
and undergraduate students. The investigators are actively involved in
scientific outreach to public audiences, including cultural and knowledge
exchange between scientists and tribal college students and instructors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormones regulate a wide variety of traits that have been
linked with fitness. Steroid hormones (e.g. estradiol and testosterone) display
circadian variations in circulating levels. These hormones are also known to
interact with the circadian system in lab animals. Little is known about how
daily (daytime and nightly) peaks of hormones are linked to the timing of
important daily behaviors or fitness. In songbirds, extra-pair copulations often
occur during the pre-dawn period with the earliest risers having greatest
success, suggesting that daily behavioral rhythms, and the mechanisms driving
them may have important implications for individual fitness. Using a Eurasian
cavity nesting songbird (Parus major) this research will (1) Identify
relationships between natural variation in daily steroid concentrations and
behavioral rhythms. (2) Experimentally test the hypothesis that circulating
levels of steroids influence the expression of circadian behaviors (onset of
activity and dawn song). (3) Quantify the relationship between daily rhythms,
peak hormone levels, and reproductive success. To address these aims, daily
behavioral rhythms will be quantified through the use of an automated telemetry
recording system, combined with behavioral observations and Radio-Frequency ID
(RFID) readers on nest boxes. Hormones will be measured in blood samples
collected at night from roosting birds in the pre-laying period as well as
during the day. Hormone manipulations will be employed for experimental studies,
and effects on rhythms and reproductive success will be documented. Reproductive
success will be quantified via monitoring of all nests in a breeding population
and genetic parentage analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.