* 1755606
* RUI: Bulk Water Adsorption and Aerosol Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) Activation of Insoluble Aerosol: Toward Experimental Closure and Accurate Model Parameters
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Courtney Hatch, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 549,034.00

This project will investigate the role of mineral dust particles on the
formation of cloud droplets in the atmosphere. Current theories of droplet
formation have not included the influence of particle surface structure and
porosity. State-of-the-art laboratory techniques will be used to quantify the
effects of particle surface microstructure on the uptake of water and the
formation of cloud droplets in the atmosphere. This research will contribute
significantly to the current understanding of how mineral particles of
atmospheric relevance interact with water vapor in the atmosphere and lead to
improved models of dust-cloud interactions and the influence of these
interactions on weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of
the studies are: (1) to quantify water adsorption on model insoluble aerosol
components as a function of relative humidity (RH); (2) to measure size-resolved
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) activation of the same model aerosol components;
(3) to apply new water adsorption analysis methods to correct for surface
microstructure and porosity to obtain more accurate Frenkel Halsey Hill
Adsorption Activation Theory (FHH-AT) fit parameters; (4) to compare surface
microstructure and porosity-corrected bulk water adsorption-based CCN activation
to aerosol CCN activation measurements to establish experimental closure between
the two methods; and (5) to mentor and educate a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students in atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.