* 1755229
* The Impact of Maternal Effects on Social Plasticity and Fitness Variation in a Long-Lived Mammal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 865,593.00

Studies of long-lived social mammals such as primates, elephants and dolphins
repeatedly show that individual social behavior is linked to survival and
reproduction. Yet, few have examined what factors contribute to individual
variation in social behavior within a species or population. For instance, it
has yet be to determined why some individuals are more gregarious than others.
In mammals, it is known that mothers have a pervasive influence on offspring
behavioral development, not just through genetic inheritance, but also through
social learning (maternal effects). Here, the research team will focus on how
maternal effects influence offspring social development, a key contributor to
individual variation in social behavior. Dolphins in Shark Bay, Australia, are
an excellent empirical system for examining these questions because they live in
a large open and dynamic social community with over one hundred potential
associates to choose from. Long-term data on this social system spans 35+ years
and enables this team of scientists to quantify: 1). how a dolphin changes its
social behavior in space and time throughout its development, 2). the extent to
which this is influenced by maternal and non-maternal effects, and 3). the
extent to which maternal effects provide fitness benefits to offspring. This
study will have broad reach, appeal, and implications well beyond the scientific
community because it will contribute to wildlife policy, management, and
conservation as well as train multiple undergraduate and graduate students and
early-career stage researchers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
several studies link sociality to fitness in long-lived mammals, maternal
influence on inter- and intra-individual variation in sociality (e.g. dynamic
social patterns) and fitness outcomes is relatively unexplored. This study
investigates how sociality evolved, not just why. Recent computational advances
allow this project to incorporate multi-level, dynamic variation to advance
understanding of how sociality evolved, i.e., transmission pathways. This study
system, a 35-year longitudinal study of wild bottlenose dolphins, provides a
unique opportunity to address these questions because of species
characteristics, and the size, detail, and long-term nature of the dataset. This
project will use: 1). novel quantitative genetics methodologies to unravel the
importance of maternal effects on social behavior while accounting for both
additive genetic variation and the mothers' social environment; 2). next-
generation sequencing combined with demographic data to construct accurate
pedigree information from high- density single nucleotide polymorphisms; 3).
dynamic social network modeling (social association/interaction matrices) to
account for changing social attributes of individuals rather than just static
traits. As such, this study will be a comprehensive exploration of how maternal
effects impact social traits over the lifespan and across more than one
generation within an evolutionary framework. In addition, this is the first
study to do so in wild long-lived mammal with extensive maternal social
transmission, while accounting for additive genetic variation. The results will
provide significant advances by extending our study of the genetic and non-
genetic mechanisms of inheritance, which play critical roles in evolution and
responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.