* 1755687
* CRII: SCH: Applying Motor Control Theories for Ambulatory Monitoring of 3D Upper-Limb Movement
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Sunghoon Lee, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,228.00

Accurate monitoring of three dimensional (3D) upper limb posture and motion in a
community setting has been of paramount importance in rehabilitation. This work
is aimed at developing a system that can provide an objective assessment of
individually-tailored therapeutic treatments. Specifically, in movement
disorders with a long recovery time, such as stroke or traumatic brain injury,
continuous monitoring of movement using a minimally-invasive sensing has been a
goal to support long-term adherence. A wrist-worn inertial sensor has been the
most commonly used wearable sensor due to its immediacy, ubiquity, and
acceptance for sustained use. However, developing a precise understanding of
upper limb movements based on a single wrist-worn device is challenging. Data
from these devices tends to drift over time; that is, a small error in the
sensor measurements grows rapidly as the data are integrated to estimate the
movement. This project aims to establish a system that allows accurate
monitoring of upper limb movement using a single wrist-worn inertial sensor by
specifically addressing the issue of drift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
effort will advance the state-of-the-art in ambulatory monitoring of upper limb
motion by exploiting the unique kinematic properties of voluntary upper limb
movements mediated by the human central nervous system (CNS) and the physical
properties of the musculoskeletal structure. The project starts from prior
knowledge regarding the unique kinematic characteristics of limb motion that
would eliminate the need for the second integration and many of the drift
errors. This model will provide unique opportunities to develop a novel
computational algorithms for precise measurement of upper limb motion and
kinematics. This study will address the following scientific challenges: 1)
development of mathematical models and computational algorithms to estimate the
dynamically changing body direction, 2) establishment of a new machine learning
framework to estimate the 3D position trajectory of the sensing unit without
double integration by leveraging the motor control theories, and 3) development
of a sequential algorithm to estimate the most likely kinematic profiles of limb
joints based on the human musculoskeletal properties. The success of this
project will lead to a major breakthrough in precise gesture monitoring in the
free-living setting, opening a new door leading to previously unexplored
datasets and potentially new development of personalized disease management via
unobtrusive monitoring of motor functions in movement disorders. This project
will also embrace the integration of interdisciplinary research and
undergraduate/graduate training among the areas of wearable computing, signal
processing, data science, and smart health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.