* 1755996
* CRII: CPS: Internet-Inspired Autonomous Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Mithat Kisacikoglu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Electric vehicles (EVs) are transforming the modern transportation and energy
systems. With a growing EV market, the mass penetration of EVs into the utility
grid will result in detrimental effects due to coincidence between utility peak
power loading and EV charging. This impact will include increased peak loading
and voltage drops that will call for over-investments in the network resulting
in an overall high cost for the society. Therefore, advanced and practical
interaction methods between vehicles, charging stations, and the utility grid
need to be developed. Internet-inspired EV charge control offers a new paradigm-
shift for EV charge control studies. This project aims to build a new autonomous
and fair EV charge control technique that can penetrate into practice at large
scales. The significance of the proposed idea lies in the effort to bring
together a cyber-physical system that utilizes the prior art in end-to-end
internet network congestion control with decentralized autonomous EV charging.
The effort is inter-disciplinary and brings together ideas from computer science
as well as power engineering to support mass integration of EVs into the
conventional electric energy system. The proposed idea can impact the way all
grid-connected power electronics systems are controlled. The algorithms
developed in this work can be used to accelerate the integration of low-carbon
energy sources such as solar photovoltaic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research develops a new family of EV charging algorithms by adopting
some of the well-deployed end-to-end congestion control techniques in the
Internet. The research objectives include (i) investigating distribution grid
congestion through extensive data collection from field, modeling, and
simulations to understand and extract the impacts of EV charging on voltage and
frequency signatures at the end-nodes, (ii) design of entirely decentralized and
localized EV charging algorithms that work autonomously, (iii) investigation of
adaptive increase and decrease of EV charging rate according to the power flow
congestion on the distribution network to attain proportional or max-min fair
charging of EVs in a neighborhood, and (iv) exploration of hybrid charging
architectures where more than one EV measurement can be utilized. The cyber-
physical system that will be developed with this project will help the
researchers understand and resolve issues relating to large scale electric
vehicle integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.