* 1755270
* Collaborative Research:  Ammonia oxidizers and their heterotrophic friends
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Annette Bollmann, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2023
* USD 368,066.00

Microorganisms play a major role in the global nitrogen cycle. One group of
bacteria, ammonia oxidizing bacteria, oxidize ammonium to nitrite and thus play
a key role in the removal of ammonium from human derived urea in wastewater
treatment plants. In nature, diverse microorganisms coexist and interact in
complex ways. Communities of different microorganisms can perform vital
functions more efficiently than single species achieve alone. Ammonia oxidizing
bacteria are one example, where ammonia is converted more efficiently when in a
microbial community than when the oxidizing bacteria are alone. Yet, the
interactions among microbial neighbors that improve ammonia conversion are not
well understood. The goal of this project is to better understand how living in
microbial communities improves ammonia oxidizing bacteria's ability to convert
ammonia. An additional goal of this project is to educate a diverse group of
students on the importance of microbial communities, and to raise awareness and
urgency about water quality. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in state of the art microbiology techniques and involved in the research.
Elementary school students from rural Ohio and undergraduate non-microbiology
majors will be taught about the importance of microbial communities,
nitrification, and water quality. This research will provide important insight
into synergistic interactions within bacterial communities and increase the
ability to manipulate microbial communities for improved or desired function,
such as those in wastewater plants to improve ammonia
removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) oxidize ammonia
to nitrite. AOB are core contributors to nitrification, a crucial step in the
global nitrogen cycle. As part of microbial communities, AOB positively interact
with nitrite-oxidizing bacteria and heterotrophic bacteria. It has already been
shown that the nitrite-oxidizing bacteria keep the level of toxic nitrite around
AOB low, maintaining a beneficial environment that allows for AOB growth. The
mechanisms underlying the positive interactions of AOB with heterotrophic
bacteria have not been elucidated. These positive interactions will be
investigated in well-defined laboratory co-cultures, enrichment cultures, and
native environments. Experiments will include (1) proteome and transcriptome
analysis of the AOB Nitrosomonas sp. Is79 in the presence of heterotrophic
bacteria as single and mixed cultures; (2) proteome analysis of three additional
AOB strains in the presence of heterotrophic bacteria; and (3) proteome analysis
of an AOB incubated in their original environment. The results will be analyzed
to identify strain-specific physiological responses in order to determine the
nature of the interactions between AOB and heterotrophic bacteria. Insights into
the molecular mechanisms and metabolic pathways in AOB that are impacted by
heterotrophic bacteria will add to the growing field of research on autotrophic-
heterotrophic interactions. This research will also address the physiological
similarities and differences in AOB grown in laboratory pure cultures, in
laboratory enrichment cultures, and in their original
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.