* 1755079
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Quantifying the roles of tectonic activity and climate as drivers of glacial-interglacial landscape evolution in the Teton Range, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Glenn Thackray, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2022
* USD 129,579.00

The interplay of tectonics and climate is an essential aspect of mountain
landscape evolution. Research efforts focusing on the interactions of mountain
landscapes with climate and tectonism, especially those directed toward
quantitative reconstructions of climatically and tectonically driven
disturbances, are fundamental to understanding the past and future evolution of
Earth's surface, and are critical for human adaptation and resource conservation
efforts. This project focuses on the Teton mountain range in Grand Teton
National Park, WY, where past climatic and tectonic disturbances are unusually
well-recorded by glacial landforms, fault scarps, and lake sediment archives,
all of which can be precisely dated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals
of this project are to quantify the influences of tectonic-driven disturbances
(earthquakes, landslides) and climate-driven changes and disturbances (e.g.
deglaciation, glacier fluctuations, vegetative shifts, fire occurrence) on
alpine erosion rates and landscape evolution operating during the late
Pleistocene and Holocene (past 25 ka). Specifically, the study combines detailed
landform mapping, 10Be surface exposure dating, paleoseismic fault trenching,
lake seismic surveys, and lake sediment cores to develop complementary records
of: i) glacier fluctuations, including the timing and character of deglaciation
and Neoglaciation; ii) environmental variability along the elevation gradient of
the Teton range; and iii) earthquake timing and frequency related to postglacial
ruptures of the Teton fault. The highly-active tectonic setting, distinctive
geomorphology, and relatively pristine ecosystem of the Tetons present an
exceptional opportunity for this research. Moreover, the integration of these
techniques will provide comprehensive insights into the couplings and feedbacks
among climatic and tectonic processes that modify all mountain landscapes over
diverse length and time scales.