* 1755016
* Collaborative Research: Identifying osmosensitive molecular targets using a unique vertebrate model.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Darren Lerner, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 348,400.00

This research addresses how specialized cells sense and respond to changes in
the external environment and, in turn, control the physiological systems that
maintain a stable internal environment. The regulation of salt and water
balance, or osmoregulation, is fundamental to most vertebrates, including
humans. Detection of a change in osmotic concentration or salinity is the
necessary first step in successful osmoregulation. Nevertheless, understanding
of how osmoreceptor cells work remains incomplete because of their complex
structure and arrangement among other cells in the brain of many animals, making
it difficult to develop effective experimental approaches. This problem is
solved by study of the prolactin cells of the tilapia fish, because these cells
are arranged into a nearly homogeneous mass in the pituitary gland. The hormone
prolactin is involved in osmoregulation in tilapia, an estuarine fish that can
thrive in salinities ranging from fresh water to greater than full-strength
seawater. This project uses the tilapia prolactin cell model as a means to
uniquely connect the operation of osmoreceptor cells with environmental
adaptation at the organismal level. The collaborative study links the research,
teaching, and outreach programs at the University of Hawai'i at Manoa and
Skidmore College and will reveal the mechanisms supporting osmoreception in a
manner that is applicable to all vertebrates. It will immerse graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in rigorous and
interdisciplinary educational programs at the collaborating institutions. The
scientific outcomes of this research will be conveyed to a broad audience
through institutional outreach educational programs, workshops and symposia,
posters, lay press articles, guided visits to research facilities, and a
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
collaborative project is to further the understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of osmoreception, a fundamental, albeit understudied, sensory
modality. Tilapia prolactin cells have allowed for the identification of some of
the mechanisms underlying osmoreception, such as extracellular Ca2+ entry
through mechanosensitive transient-receptor-potential vanilloid channels and
cAMP accumulation. Nonetheless, little is known about how the prolactin (prl)
gene is activated by hyposmotic stimuli. By employing a dual luciferase reporter
assay system in embryonic kidney cells (HEK293) expressing a vector containing
the tilapia prl promoter, the specific promoter regions that respond to
secondary messengers activated by changes in extracellular osmolality will be
characterized, thereby allowing for the identification of novel transcription
factors that mediate hyposmotic induction of the prl gene. Based on the
discovery of specific regulators of prolactin, other vertebrate genomes can be
searched for conserved gene sequences that respond to changes in extracellular
osmolality. The project will advance the field by identifying promoter sequences
that mediate transcriptional regulation of hyposmotically-induced genes in
vertebrates. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from involvement
in the research project and the planned educational activities. The results will
be broadly disseminated, including via a website and public outreach programs,
including those in association with the University of Hawai'i Institute of
Marine Biology and Sea Grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.