* 1755284
* Neural mechanisms of social behavior in rodents
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Ian Davison, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2021
* USD 485,000.00

Animals of all species need to recognize potential mates and known foes, and
adjust their behavior accordingly. The brain has evolved hardwired neural
pathways for controlling key social behaviors like aggression and mating, but
basic organizing principles of these neural circuits remain poorly understood.
This project tests how pheromonal signals-- chemical signals that impact
behavior of the receiving organism-- are used to guide reproduction-specific
behaviors, and how the corresponding neural pathways are altered by social
experience. Like many animals, male mice form dominance hierarchies that
strongly influence their behavior, where aggression is reduced in low-status
males and preserved or increased in high-status males. The present experiments
examine how becoming familiar with new social partners changes the way their
pheromonal signals are processed in the brain, shifting thresholds for
triggering aggressive behavior in dominant and submissive animals. First, to
examine the basic biological processes that underlie learning, the investigators
use single-neuron recordings to test the cellular changes that alter their
responses to familiar individuals. Second, the investigators use new tools for
visualizing neural activity during active social interactions, evaluating how
familiarity shapes the patterns of brain activity corresponding to both dominant
and submissive partners. Overall, this work addresses the neural changes that
allow animals to adapt their behavior to reflect the history of their social
experience with others. The project also offers opportunities for local high
school students and undergraduate trainees from diverse backgrounds to engage in
neuroscience research, including the use of cutting-edge technologies, and
includes the development and dissemination of educational materials for local
elementary schools and a science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key social
behaviors, such as aggression, reproduction, and parenting are controlled by
conserved neural circuits with strong similarities across species. Despite their
critical role, little is known about the pathways that translate sensory cues
into male- and female-appropriate behaviors. This project characterizes neural
coding and plasticity in the mouse vomeronasal system, which plays a key role in
mapping social chemosignals onto sex-specific responses. The main hypothesis of
this work is that distinct behaviors are mediated by dedicated pathways in the
accessory olfactory system, which are selectively altered by social experience
to reflect individual relationships. It focuses primarily on aggression, a core
male behavior that is rapidly and reliably triggered by other males, yet is also
dramatically altered as animals establish dominance relationships. To
characterize experience-dependent changes in aggression, these experiments
combine ex vivo cellular electrophysiology and in vivo imaging of activity in
the accessory olfactory bulb, a key node for routing sensory signals to central
behavioral networks. The resulting data will address basic principles of sensory
coding in a circuit intimately linked to innate behaviors, as well as
characterize a novel form of cellular plasticity that may support adaptive
changes in diverse social interactions. Together, this work helps establish how
the brain organizes and routes the sensory signals that guide stereotyped
behavioral responses, while still allowing flexibility in interactions with
familiar partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.