* 1755179
* CRII: OAC: Inferring, Attributing, Mitigating and Analyzing the Malicious Orchestration of Internet-scale Exploited IoT Devices: A Network Telescope Approach
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Elias Bou-Harb, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Despite the benefits provided by the widespread adoption and deployment of
diverse Internet-enabled devices such as phones and smart home components in
consumer markets and critical infrastructure - the so called Internet of Things
(IoT) devices, security concerns are rising as such devices also introduce new
vulnerabilities that could be leveraged by attackers to launch disrupting cyber-
attacks. The objective of this project is to enable exploration of the inherent
insecurity of the IoT paradigm by exploring innovative data analytics as applied
to raw cyber security data. Insights gained will allow detection,
characterization and attribution of Internet-scale compromised IoT devices,
coupled with their malicious activities, in near real-time. Several technical
challenges impede addressing IoT security at large, including, the excessive
diversity of IoT devices in addition to their Internet-wide deployment, the lack
of IoT-relevant data and the shortage of IoT-specific actionable attack
signatures. In this context, this project serves NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science by aiming to generate a first-of-a-kind, large-scale
analysis of the magnitude of compromised IoT devices. The project also promotes
cyber security research and training for minorities, given that it will be
executed within the boundaries of a designated Hispanic-serving institution.
Moreover, the project will contribute to operational cyber security by
developing a real-time capability for storing and sharing IoT-relevant threat
information.

The project will draw-upon macroscopic, large-scale passive measurement data
collected in real-time from a network telescope to highlight the severity of the
insecurity of the IoT paradigm. Network telescopes, most commonly known as
darknets, constitute a set of routable, allocated yet unused IP addresses. The
project will design and develop real-time algorithms that are capable of
inferring Internet-scale exploited IoT devices by exploring darknet data.
Furthermore, the project will investigate formal correlation approaches rooted
in stochastic data structures between IoT-relevant passive measurements and
malware samples to aid in the attribution and thus the remediation objective.
The project will further explore the orchestration behavior of seemingly
independent IoT activities, which operate within well-coordinated IoT botnets.
To this end, the project will innovate time series analytics based upon
trigonometric interpolation techniques, recursive optimal stochastic estimators,
and bitmap matching algorithms to infer such IoT botnets by employing passive
measurements.  The project will also (1) develop a unique cyberinfrastructure
for IoT cyber threat indexing by automating the proposed algorithms, techniques
and methods, (2) generate IoT-specific signatures by employing piecewise hashing
techniques, and (3) create access methods based on an API mechanism and a front-
end service facilitated by Elasticsearch to allow the sharing of IoT-centric
empirical data, threat intelligence and signatures.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.