* 1755901
* CRII: III: Visualization of Event Sequences for Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Cody Dunne, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Many datasets of interest to scientists, analysts, clinicians, and patients
include events that take place over time. Events can come from electronic
monitoring devices or manual data entry, and all together form an event
sequence. By analyzing event sequences, we can make inferences about complex
behaviors over time. Interactive visualization tools are an important tool for
human decision makers to use for exploring and understanding data. However, the
existing visualization techniques need to be improved to support interpretation
of data in applications with a large number of events that vary in frequency,
accuracy, and timing. This project will create new visualization encoding and
interaction design techniques that will advance the state of the art for
understanding long streams of event sequences. Techniques will be validated for
general uses as well as in a case study on type 1 diabetes treatment decision
support. This research will afford more effective data exploration and decision-
making tools for analyzing temporal data, applicable to many domains. The
resulting visualization techniques will benefit clinicians and patients
performing intensive insulin management for type 1 diabetes by enabling them to
reduce the burden of care and improve outcomes. In addition, there are immediate
applications to the treatment of chronic heart failure as well as non-health
domains such as data centers monitoring cyber security. The outreach efforts in
this research will disseminate the findings to the type 1 diabetes community,
including both caregivers and patients, as well as encourage teenage girls to
pursue careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the
state of the art in visualization and visual analytics for long streams of
temporal event sequences with multidimensional, interrelated data. It will
create methodologies for: (1) folding and reconfiguring long event sequences to
align by dual non-periodic sentinel events; (2) scaling time axes between dual
aligned events to show time distributions; (3) dual-event alignment of
overlapping units of folded and reconfigured event sequences with data
duplication; (4) compositing data from multiple event sequence sources to enable
temporal inference with uncertain, erroneous, and missing data; and (5)
displaying rapidly changing time series scalar values composited with point and
interval event sequences at different time granularities and at different
aggregation levels. The domain case study problem will be characterized and
refined through semi-structured interviews with certified diabetes educators
(CDEs). The visual encodings and interaction designs will be iteratively
designed and evaluated through formative usability studies, visualization expert
review, controlled task-based experiments, and qualitative studies with CDEs.
The project website (http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/cody/p/IDMVis/) will include
resulting materials, including relevant publications, visualization software,
data analysis tools, documentation, deidentified data from user studies, and
deidentified domain data for reproducibility and
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.