* 1755864
* CRII: CHS: Knowing and Creating: Implications of Increased Information Availability During the Design Process
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Christine Toh, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2022
* USD 172,401.00

Developing creative products is a key software engineering problem for companies
that want to distinguish themselves from similar products in the market.
Relatively little is known, however, about how software development teams in the
early stages of design use relevant information such as customer behavior and
competing products to generate creative ideas for product requirements, nor how
different kinds of information might affect their creativity. This project will
study how expert software designers engage with design information in the early
stages of software development to develop an "Information Archetypes Framework"
that characterizes design information and its influence on design creativity.
This framework will be validated through studying the performance of student
design teams that are given different types of information to support product
brainstorming activities. In addition to improving understanding of design
creativity and cognition from a research perspective, the project team will
conduct collaborative workshops with local software development and startup
companies to discuss how to effectively navigate complex information to enhance
their competitiveness. The project will also have significant educational
impacts through training student researchers, informing the design of
innovation-enhancing activities for software engineering students, the
development of a broader curriculum on innovation in information technology, and
supporting outreach through immersive summer programming workshops aimed at
increasing middle school girls' knowledge and interest in STEM and design-
related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the project has
two main elements. The first aims to expand on an initial version of the
Information Archetypes Framework that characterizes the source, abstractness,
and generality of information, as well as team styles for problem solving and
sharing information. To do this, expert software designers will be asked to
attend a design session and given a short design problem along with carefully
crafted pieces of information that are relevant to the problem domain and
correspond to the dimensions identified in the current version of the framework.
The project team will ask each designer to organize the information and explain
how they made judgments about the relatedness and potential usefulness of the
different pieces of information for design, using a combination of quantitative
analysis of the similarity judgments and qualitative analysis of interview
responses to revise the framework. The impact of the revised framework on design
creativity will then be investigated by developing a similar design problem for
an introductory design class in an information technology innovation program,
giving each student team a unique set of relevant information corresponding to
each type of information identified in the revised framework. The project team
will use a protocol analysis of each team's interactions to analyze how these
differences in available information affect communicative content and processes,
along with an existing framework for measuring the novelty and quality of
generated ideas in order to link differences in available information to the
teams' design outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.