* 1755279
* Mechanisms and adaptive consequences of group decision-making in a communally nesting bird
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Christina Riehl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 590,098.00

Solving collective problems is one of the central challenges of group living.
When individuals prefer different outcomes, how do societies agree on one choice
for everyone? Human groups have developed a variety of methods, from despotism
to democratic voting. Collective decision-making in animal groups is less well
understood, although examples are ubiquitous: a honeybee colony picks a new
location for the hive; a monkey troop invades a neighboring territory; a flock
of birds changes its roost site. Theoretical models have been developed to
predict the conditions under which such decisions should be shared, and how the
structure and stability of the social group might influence the speed and
accuracy of these decisions. However, experimental studies on wild animals are
rare, leaving gaps between theoretical predictions and empirical evidence. This
project explores these gaps in a tropical bird, the greater ani. Anis nest in
social groups composed of several pairs, which build a single nest in which all
of the females lay their eggs. The choice of where to build the nest is a
crucial decision, since its location determines its exposure to predators. The
project combines field experiments, behavioral observations, and tracking
techniques to test how groups arrive at shared decisions - and, crucially, which
opinions prevail when group members disagree. This project will provide research
experiences to students and a postdoctoral researcher, training to Panamanian
researchers through a series of public workshops, and outreach to the public
through a partnership with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores three major questions about
collective decision-making that have arisen from recent theoretical work. First,
do shared decisions become less democratic as delays in decision-making grow
more costly? Second, can a well-informed minority exert disproportionate
influence over group decisions? Third, how does social network structure affect
the equality, speed, and accuracy of collective decisions? The research plan
leverages a long-term (&gt;10-year) data set on greater anis in Panama, which
live in groups containing multiple unrelated breeding pairs. Some groups are
remarkably stable, consisting of the same members for over a decade; whereas
others consist of a mix of experienced individuals and newcomers. Anis show
close affiliative relationships with other group members who are not their
mates, and prior research has found that the duration of these relationships
affects coordinated behaviors. In this project, conflicts of preference between
group members will be created by manipulating nest-site quality and the
information available to different individuals. This will enable hypothesis
testing of how group members arrive at collective decisions when their opinions
conflict, how individuals communicate preferences, and whether the presence of
well-informed individuals changes the outcome of collective decisions. Knowledge
of individual life histories and natural variation in group stability, combined
with RFID tracking data on interactions between group members, will reveal how
social network structure affects the process and outcome of collective decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.