* 1755767
* CRII: CHS: Structurally-Aware Computation for Geometry Acquisition and Design
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Emily Whiting, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 69,563.00

Current modeling software is primarily concerned with geometric descriptions of
objects, while real-world considerations such as structural stability and
robustness have been treated as a separate issue. This separation lacks the
insights that structural information can bring to the design and modeling
process, and makes the modeling of physical artifacts difficult and inefficient.
The PI's goal in this project is to alleviate this problem by establishing a
research program in a new field of structural geometry processing, a cross-
pollination of digital geometry processing and structural engineering, which
will infuse structural information into all stages of geometric modeling, from
scanning to reconstruction to editing and design, and which will lead to more
efficient 3D models with a higher degree of accuracy and realism that behave in
a physically-correct manner. 3D printing and digital fabrication have started a
revolution in design and manufacturing; the emergence of desktop 3D printers has
delivered widespread accessibility to non-experts for realizing complex objects.
This research will allow the development of more robust, reliable, and usable
tools for creating digital content. Aside from their direct relevance to
computer graphics, the geometry processing technologies to be developed here
will also have applicability to cultural heritage applications, opening up new
possibilities for archiving and visualizing historic sites, and for analyzing
the stability and safety of historic masonry buildings that have survived for
centuries. The PI's interdisciplinary approach will also open new areas of
research in the respective fields of geometry processing and structural
engineering.

This research will impact three core thrusts: structurally-informed 3D geometry
acquisition; geometric modeling and design of stable structures; and prototyping
with 3D fabrication. This first thrust will develop new methods to capture the
geometry of large architectural sites by exploiting structural priors. Scans
often suffer from missing information due to obstructions and inherent
construction limitations. The PI will improve on reconstruction methods from
scan data by incorporating constraints for structurally-correct, and hence more
faithful, digital representations of buildings. Algorithms will be developed to
automatically translate captured surface geometry into volumetric mass models
that can be analyzed by structural mechanics methods. The second thrust will
develop the foundation for a new class of Computer-Aided-Design (CAD) tools that
harmoniously integrate structural objectives. Advances in surface and volumetric
modeling have had wide influence in engineering and design. While contemporary
buildings now feature an explosion of free-form shapes, these expressive shapes
are often achieved at the expense of high material and construction costs.
Existing software lacks the ability to aid designers in improving geometry, for
example, to reduce internal forces and required material. The PI will
investigate shape optimization methods for exploring energy landscapes linked
with structural constraints. The third thrust will validate the optimized
geometry from the first two thrusts using digital fabrication technology. The
process of turning a virtual model into a physical artifact is subject to many
constraints. The PI will develop computational tools to address problems in
robustness, economic use of material, and printability for large-scale
prototypes. Scaled 3D printed models will enable effective physical validation
of the modeling concepts previously discussed.