* 1755397
* Collaborative Research:  Biogenesis and evolution of hagfish slime and slime glands
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Douglas Fudge, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2023
* USD 553,559.00

Hagfishes are a group of eel-shaped animals that are found in deep ocean
habitats around the world. Hagfishes are notorious for their ability to thwart
attacks by predators such as sharks by producing large volumes of gill-clogging
slime in a fraction of a second after they are bitten. The slime is unique both
in the speed with which it forms, and because it contains thousands of silk-like
fibers known as slime threads. One aim of this project is to investigate how
these 15-cm long fibers are produced within the cytoplasm of specialized cells
called gland thread cells. To do this, researchers will observe developing gland
thread cells using live cell microscope imaging techniques. The second aim of
this project is to understand how the slime glands evolved and diversified.
Hagfishes are an ancient group of about 78 described species, and the two
species we have examined thus far have defensive slime that differs in
significant ways. To explore the evolution and diversification of hagfishes and
their slime glands, researchers will collect anatomical and genetic data from
many hagfish species from around the world. Hagfish slime threads have material
properties that rival those of high performance spider silks; understanding how
they are made within cells could thus provide valuable information for efforts
to produce bio-inspired textiles. Furthermore, this project dovetails with a
summer outreach program called "Inspiring Biology", which aims to increase
enthusiasm and participation in the sciences by under-represented minorities by
introducing them to the concept of bio-inspired
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hagfishes are a group of 78 species of marine
craniates that are important players in benthic ecosystems worldwide. One of
their most remarkable adaptations is their ability to thwart attacks by fish
predators by producing large volumes of gill-clogging slime in a fraction of a
second. The slime consists of a synergistic mixture of seawater, mucus-like
glycoproteins, and thousands of silk-like protein fibers known as "slime
threads". While much is known about the function and mechanical properties of
the slime, little is known about how the major slime components are produced
within the slime glands or how the slime glands evolved. The project has two
Aims. First, researchers will elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms
involved in slime thread production within hagfish gland thread cells.
Specifically, several mechanistic hypotheses about how the slime thread
elongates, coils, and matures within these cells will be tested. Second, the
researchers will elucidate the evolutionary origins and diversification of
hagfish slime glands. Specifically, they will test the hypotheses that the slime
glands arose from invagination of the skin, or that they are serial homologs of
cloacal glands and evolved via metameric duplication and modification. To
achieve these aims, they will use an approach that integrates cell biological,
morphological, and comparative transcriptomic and phylogenetic methods. These
experiments will identify the genes that are most important for slime production
and they will illuminate the proximate and ultimate mechanisms involved in the
origins of an evolutionary novelty unique to hagfishes and central to their
organismal biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cell Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.