* 1755628
* CRII: CHS: Automatically Praising Learning Process to Promote the Growth Mindset in Computer Science
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Eleanor O'Rourke, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,738.00

There is a pressing need to train large numbers of computer scientists to meet
the demands of our nation's economy, but many students struggle in introductory
programming courses. Recent studies show that these courses often promote the
fixed mindset, or the belief that programming aptitude is an inborn trait.
Psychology research shows that students with the fixed mindset view mistakes as
indications of low ability and perform poorly in the face of challenge. In
contrast, students with the growth mindset believe that programming aptitude is
malleable and excel when challenged. This project aims to design, build, and
evaluate programming tools that help students develop the growth mindset by
automatically detecting and praising good learning behaviors as students write
code. This research will contribute scientific knowledge about the growth
mindset in the domain of computer science and provide insights about the process
of learning to program. The project team will deploy the tools to hundreds of
students at their own university and release them for free online for any
student or teacher to use. If successful, this intervention has the potential to
improve the experiences, skills, and diversity of students who successfully
complete programming courses and go on to participate in employment and research
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a new growth
mindset intervention that leverages the programming environment by using
artificial intelligence techniques to automatically detect and praise good
learning processes in real time. Programming environments provide a unique
opportunity to track and understand student learning behaviors, and offer a
scalable environment for praising good practices automatically. By exposing and
praising the learning process, this intervention will teach students to
attribute their successes and failures to malleable learning processes, rather
than an innate aptitude for computer science. This research will be conducted in
two phases. First, the project team will develop heuristics that detect good
learning processes using behavioral log data, leveraging the computer science
education literature and studying the behavior of fixed and growth mindset
students to identify good processes. Second, the team will iteratively design
and build a programming environment extension that uses the validated heuristics
to automatically detect and praise good learning process, and evaluate this
intervention through a controlled ten-week study with university
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.