* 1755981
* CRII: SHF: Design, Extraction, and Optimization of Multi-Chip Fan-Out Wafer-Level-Packaging for Low-Power Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Yarui Peng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

With the slowing down of Moore's Law, it is challenging to integrate more
transistors and features into a single chip. New system- and package-level
techniques are critical for emerging mobile and Internet of Things (IoT)
applications with a strong emphasis on power and cost. This research aims to
develop the key models and Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tools to enable
integrating various heterogeneous components into a single Fanout Wafer-Level
Package. It will address the major challenge of maintaining signal integrity and
electro-thermal reliability in a powerful, yet compact, system with multiple
Integrated Circuits (ICs) closely packed together to improve energy and cost
efficiency. Moreover, a graduate course on CAD and physical design will be
offered at the University of Arkansas. The developed CAD framework will be open-
sourced and publicly available to further stimulate the advancement in chip-
package co-design tool flow and commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
heterogeneous components tightly integrated, new parasitics, resulting from both
electrical- and magnetic-coupling, require both IC and package designers to work
together closely on circuit and physical design. The proposed CAD framework
blurs the boundaries between chip and package layouts in the design flow and
extracts major coupling elements between them. It integrates chip-package co-
design techniques into the entire VLSI design flow with time-efficient
computational models so that signal integrity issues can be captured and
addressed early to avoid a time-consuming trial-and-error design process. All
parasitic components such as coupling capacitance and mutual inductance are
included to ensure accurate timing and noise analyses. The new modeling methods,
CAD algorithms and flows, and optimization techniques address the principle
motivation behind more-than-Moore technologies and move toward high-density and
energy-efficient heterogeneous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.