* 1755568
* CRII: RI: Lyapunov-Certified Cognitive Control for Safe Autonomous Navigation in Unknown Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Nikolay Atanasov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 09/30/2020
* USD 173,130.00

Applications for unmanned aerial and ground vehicles requiring autonomous
navigation in unknown, cluttered, and dynamically changing environments are
increasing in fields such as transportation, delivery, agriculture,
environmental monitoring, and construction. To achieve safe, resilient, and
self-improving autonomous navigation, this project focuses on the design of
adaptive online environment understanding that guarantees stable and collision-
free operation in challenging conditions. The proposed research is important
because current practices rely on prior maps or hand-crafted online mapping that
attempt to capture the whole environment, even if parts are irrelevant for
specific navigation tasks. This increases memory and computation requirements,
spreads the effects of noise, and makes current approaches brittle, particularly
in conditions involving dynamic obstacles, unreliable localization, or
illumination variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal offers two technical
innovations to achieve safe autonomous navigation. First, it develops a
learnable neural map based on 3-D convolution over hierarchical (octree)
partitioning of space to extract navigation-specific features and on
differentiable memory to infer long-term dependence among the features. The
neural map parameters are trained from navigation experience not to produce
accurate maps but to quantify the collision probabilities of intended motion
trajectories accurately. The second innovation is a Lyapunov-theoretic control
approach that uses the total energy of an autonomous system with respect to a
virtual kinematic system (that can stop immediately) to derive conditions that
guarantee stable and collision-free tracking of the trajectories proposed by the
neural network. The proposed learnable neural map significantly increases the
robustness of collision prediction, while the Lyapunov-theoretic control
guarantees stable and safe navigation in new, unpredictable, and cluttered
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.