* 1755227
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Social modulation of migratory timing and endocrine mechanisms of migration in two flexible migrants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Marianne Laporte, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 06/30/2024
* USD 313,563.00

Animal migration is a centrally important life cycle stage for thousands of
species, it is critical to the dynamics of many ecosystems, has impacts on human
health, and is a process that is particularly prone to disturbance. Thus,
research on the control of migration is critical from both basic and applied
perspectives. Understanding how animals decide when to move is of particular
importance given that this can dictate whether or not they arrive at their
destination at an appropriate time for reproduction or overwintering. Many
animals move in groups and social interactions and social cues are expected to
be important in the decisions that animals make in preparation for and during
migration. Yet, there is little known about the role of social cues in
determining when animals begin or end migration or about the physiological
mechanisms by which social signals might act to influence migratory timing. This
collaborative project will address these two knowledge gaps using two species of
migratory songbirds that have flexible migratory schedules and that are highly
sensitive to social information. Results of this work will advance our
understanding of how social cues influence both migratory timing and the
hormonal regulation of migration. This project will also provide training and
mentoring for undergraduate and graduate students. Outreach activities linked to
the project will engage elementary school students and the general public in
migratory biology. Training and outreach activities at the university level and
in elementary schools will target individuals from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this
collaborative project is to evaluate the influence of social cues (specifically,
the migratory state of conspecifics) on the timing of migration. Experiments
will be carried out to test the hypotheses that birds use cues from conspecifics
to fine-tune timing of initiation and termination of migration. Social cues have
not been well studied in the context of migratory timing and the project's
inclusion of the termination phase of migration will be important in advancing
the understanding of this particularly understudied phase of migration. The
second goal of the project is to advance understanding of the endocrine and
neuroendocrine regulation of migratory transitions, with the further objective
of investigating how social cues influence endocrine and neuroendocrine
parameters to potentially alter migratory timing. Thus, investigators will
quantify changes in circulating steroid hormones and the availability of their
receptors in the brain and peripheral tissues across transitions into and out of
a migratory state. This type of whole-body approach to understanding endocrine
mechanisms in the context of migration is unique. The investigators will also
experimentally manipulate social cues to evaluate endocrine and neuroendocrine
mechanisms by which these cues might influence migratory timing. The results of
this project will thus greatly broaden understanding of the roles of social cues
and plasticity of endocrine mechanisms in life history
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.