* 1755957
* CRII: CHS: Understanding cognitive potentials of interactive visualizations
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Paul Parsons, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 194,650.00

Visualizations are increasingly used to support analysis and understanding of
data; however, little is known about just how visualizations affect people's
mental models of the underlying data and their resulting influence on analysis
task performance. To that end, this project will conduct a number of experiments
to address two key questions that link visualization design to cognition. The
first question addresses how different techniques for visualizing the same data
affect people's ability to carry out common analysis tasks, as well as how the
designs affect their visual perception of and attention to different aspects of
the data. The second focuses on the kinds of conceptual models people form about
a dataset when they explore it using different visualization designs, and how
visual and interactive elements of the designs affect those models. Developing
better understandings of how people reason with visualizations will advance both
cognitive psychology and visualization design. Students studying information
visualization will be involved in the research, directly benefiting their design
abilities and having potential benefits in domains where visualizations are
becoming increasingly common, including journalism, education, business, and
medicine.

To address questions of how visual and spatial elements of a given design affect
attention and task performance, the project team will first create a taxonomy of
the visuo-spatial properties of common visualizations based on existing research
scattered across a variety of academic disciplines, mapping visualization
features to their ability to support various analysis tasks such as comparison,
interpretation, ranking, and categorization. They will validate and extend the
taxonomy through a series of experiments that look at time spent, error rates,
eye gaze data, and qualitative participant feedback to triangulate conclusions
about how different designs support observations and inferences over the data
and which kinds of visualizations provide observational advantages for which
kinds of tasks. The project team will design a series of analysis tasks that
emphasize different cognitive processes derived from both Bloom's taxonomy and
different types of knowledge (factual, conceptual, and procedural) in order to
conduct experiments that get at the kinds of mental models people form when
using different visualization designs. Participants in these experiments will be
given time to explore the visualizations, then perform the tasks using a think-
aloud protocol while the project team collects eye gaze data. Participants will
then be asked to reflect on their analysis activities through a series of
interviews, and draw a series of representations of the data that capture
different sorts of relationships that might compose a mental model. A followup
study will look at the effect of providing multiple visualizations and levels of
control of which visualizations are shown, to address how interacting with
multiple visualizations of the same data affects the mental models that people
form.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.