* 1755808
* CRII: CIF:  Next-Generation Group Testing for Neighbor Discovery in the IoT via Sparse-Graph Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Ramtin Pedarsani, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2020
* USD 174,938.00

Group testing is a fundamental inference problem that aims to detect a set of
defective items from a larger set of items via group tests. Group testing has a
variety of applications in different fields including communications, computer
science, machine learning, biology, and signal processing. The main challenges
in group testing are to design a small number of tests such that the defective
items can be reliably recovered, and to efficiently recover the defective items
using a low-complexity decoding algorithm. The goal of this project is to
address both challenges by developing fast and near-optimal group testing
schemes. The application area that the project focuses on is active neighbor
discovery in the Internet of Things (IoT). In an IoT setting, there is an
abundance of low-energy devices that collect and transmit information. The main
challenge in such systems is to enable a massive number of devices to
communicate via a scalable and low-complexity random access scheme. This project
addresses this challenge by designing large-scale active neighbor discovery
protocols based on group testing.

The key idea of this research is to view the group testing problem from a
coding-theoretic lens to develop recovery algorithms with near-optimal sample
complexity (number of tests) and optimal decoding complexity. The main
ingredients of this coding-theoretic approach are to: (i) design the tests based
on a sparse-graph code; (ii) develop a fast peeling-based decoder with sublinear
computational complexity for detecting the defective items; and (ii) leverage
powerful tools from modern coding theory such as density evolution to minimize
the sample complexity of the algorithm. As a concrete application, by addressing
the fundamental challenge of scale in the theory of group testing, the proposed
work aims to develop active user detection schemes for large-scale communication
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.