* 1755326
* RUI:  Collaborative Research: Do nearby surfaces limit the food uptake of microscopic sessile suspension feeders- 3D feeding flow measurements?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Rachel Pepper, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2024
* USD 402,593.00

Most of earth is covered by water, and it is essential to keep these ocean and
freshwater ecosystems healthy. To do so, scientists must understand how they
stay clean and in balance. A critical part of healthy bodies of water are
microscopic organisms, which process waste and keep water clean by eating
bacteria and debris. The feeding rate of these tiny organisms (how much water
they clean per time) determines the impact they have on the health of their
environments. Therefore, understanding this feeding rate is important both to
predicting how bodies of water will react to change (e.g., pollution, sewage
leaks, climate change) and determining how to promote the recovery of unhealthy
bodies of water. One type of microscopic organism that is important for clean
water and is ubiquitous in freshwater and marine environments is the surface-
attached protist. These organisms live in dense aggregations attached to under-
water surfaces, such as rocks, plants, and sinking debris and create feeding
currents that draws their food to them. The investigators will use a novel
holographic microscope to make the first three-dimensional measurements of
feeding currents of these organisms in realistic conditions. The findings will
be used to validate existing mathematical models of the feeding rates of these
microscopic organisms and will inform the development of strategies to clean
bodies of water and improve wastewater treatment plant performance. This project
will also provide interdisciplinary opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, including those from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic sessile
suspension feeders (MSSFs) are surface-attached protists that are a ubiquitous
and critical component in aquatic ecosystems, performing the vital ecological
function of removing bacteria and contaminants and serving as a key trophic
intermediate between algae/bacteria and higher eukaryotic taxa. Previous studies
of the feeding activity of these surface-attached protists have been limited to
confined conditions that distort the flow and 2D measurements do not capture the
non-axisymmetric nature of the current. Further, theory predicts that feeding is
restricted by closed eddies in the flow caused by the surface of attachment, and
that the impact of these eddies on feeding rate depends strongly on the angle of
the MSSF with respect to the surface. The researchers will use Vorticella, a
sessile ciliate, to determine whether food uptake of MSSFs is limited by the
hydrodynamics of feeding attached to surfaces. Using a novel 3D holographic
microscope, they will determine: (1) how the 3D feeding flow field of a single
MSSF changes with body orientation of the organism relative to the surface, (2)
how the dynamics of body orientation for Vorticella in culture compares to those
in nature, (3) how feeding flows and body orientations affect food uptake, and
(4) how the feeding flows are affected by ambient environmental flows. The
measurements will be used to validate hydrodynamic models of MSSFs that can
predict clearance rates. The resulting mechanistic understanding of microscopic
interactions will ultimately build a foundation to scale up to community- and
ecosystem-level processes to inform efforts to protect the health of aquatic
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.