* 1755847
* CRII: AF: Towards Faster Algorithms for Large-scale Constrained Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ruoyu Sun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

With the ever-growing amounts of data collected by ubiquitous sensors in today's
world, there is an increasing need for efficient methods that can solve large-
scale optimization problems. In the past few years, much effort has been spent
on solving large-scale unconstrained optimization problems, where the decision
variables are free (unconstrained). However, in a wide variety of applications,
the decision variables must satisfy certain constraints, which could be physical
constraints and/or the needs of the system designer. Classical methods such as
interior-point methods can solve small- to medium-size constrained problems
quite well, but for large-scale problems, they are unsuitable due to high per-
iteration costs and high storage requirements. This project aims to design and
analyze efficient algorithms for solving large-scale constrained optimization
problems. This research will significantly broaden the current understanding of
large-scale constrained optimization, and offer a new computational toolbox to
practitioners in various fields such as computer science, engineering,
healthcare, and economics.

This research combines successful ideas in large-scale unconstrained
optimization such as block decomposition with the special structure of
constrained optimization. The emphasis is on the fundamental understanding of
the convergence behavior of the algorithms. The investigator explores this
approach by (1) designing efficient block decomposition versions of classical
constrained optimization methods such as augmented Lagrangian multiplier methods
and (2) developing a new convergence analysis framework for large-scale
constrained optimization and analyzing the convergence behavior of the proposed
methods. The investigator aims to apply the proposed methods to various
application problems such as Markov decision processes, neural networks, and
structured sparsity problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.