* 1755387
* Collaborative Research:  Expression and dynamics of reproductive tactics in a wild population of smallmouth bass
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Scott Egan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 253,272.00

In many animals, reproducing males fall into distinct categories and the males
in these categories can look quite different from one another. The hooknose and
jack males in salmon populations are well-known examples, where hooknose males
are big and aggressive while jacks are small and inconspicuous. These males
exhibit what are called alternative reproductive tactics. Alternative
reproductive tactics are typically not genetically inherited. They can depend on
the environmental conditions a male experienced as he developed. The behavior of
parents sometimes determines the tactic a male adopts and parental behavior can
even cause their young to express the tactic opposite that of their parents. In
general, alternative reproductive tactics are not well understood because it is
difficult to follow multiple generations of animals and determine the conditions
under which individuals develop before they reach adulthood. Project researchers
will identify causes of alternative tactic expression in smallmouth bass - an
economically important sport fish - from a previously collected, decade-long
dataset where multiple generations of males were followed and detailed
information on individual reproductive behavior was documented. Paternity
analysis will identify fathers, sons, and grandsons and developmental conditions
and individual growth will be determined from environmental data and scales
which, like tree rings, record growth histories. Undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in STEM and graduate students will be trained in
genetics, genomics, bioinformatics and fisheries techniques. Results will be
shared through an animated video made publicly available and distributed to
resource managers and others to display where fishing licenses are
sold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization that many, perhaps most, alternative
reproductive tactics, or ARTs, depend on individual condition sparked a general
interest in the proximate control of tactic expression and the ultimate control
of tactic frequencies within populations. How ARTs coexist within a population
is an evolutionary puzzle that is only partially resolved. ARTs were
hypothesized to result from genetic differences amongst individuals, balanced by
frequency-dependent selection, but appear to more generally depend on the
developmental conditions an individual has experienced. ARTs fit into a broader
category of investment strategies, which includes life history decisions, and
are evolutionary solutions to reproductive competition that account for
individual condition or status, products of an investment strategy that is
contingent the social and environmental situations under which individuals have
developed. In some instances, ARTs are controlled by non-genetic parental
effects, which can influence the dynamics of ARTs and facilitate or impede
adaptive evolutionary processes. Project researchers will detail ARTs in a
population of smallmouth bass (Micropterus dolomieu) where a non-genetic
parental effect is hypothesized to cause tactic alternation within lineages,
across generations. To detail parent and offspring tactic choices and test the
genetic basis of tactic polymorphism RADSeq from preserved tissue samples will
be used to generate thousands of SNPs across the genome and paternity analysis
will be applied to trace male tactic choices in 240-381 lineages, across 1-5
generations. Developmental conditions and growth histories will be determined
from field data and scale samples to identify environmental factors that exert
proximate control over the expression of tactics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.