* 1755038
* CRII: RI: Memory-efficient Representations for Robot Tasks: Lower Bounds and Scalable Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Anirudha Majumdar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Micro aerial vehicles (MAVs) with highly rich perceptual systems (e.g., vision
or laser scanners) have the potential to perform important tasks, such as long-
duration search and rescue missions. However, due to their limited computational
resources, most existing approaches either use memoryless approaches, such as
reactive obstacle avoidance, or highly memory-inefficient approaches that build
and store accurate geometric representations. An important question, therefore,
is what is the minimal representation a robot must create of its environment in
order to achieve its task. A related question is what are the fundamental
tradeoffs between how memory-efficient the representation is and how efficiently
the robot can accomplish the task. An understanding of these issues has the
potential to dramatically increase the type of tasks that MAVs can
perform.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the need for memory-efficient
algorithms, this project is developing principled and general techniques for
establishing the memory resources required by robots in order to perform their
tasks. Specifically, the project will investigate: (i) techniques for
establishing lower bounds on memory requirements, and (ii) algorithms for
creating memory-efficient and task-centric representations for robot tasks. The
key insight is to leverage and extend ideas from the theory of streaming
algorithms and communication complexity, establishing a connection between
streaming problems and robot perception by viewing a robot's sensory inputs as
constituting the data stream. This analogy enables application of powerful
techniques, originally developed by the theoretical computer science community,
for proving lower bounds on memory requirements and using the vast suite of
memory-efficient algorithms from the streaming algorithms literature. The
resulting tools will be applied to MAVs with limited computation performing
various tasks such as search, exploration, and navigation in search-and-rescue
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.