* 1755425
* Collaborative Proposal: RUI: Dynamic ant networks: How environmental constraints and ecological context shape resource transport systems
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Matina Donaldson-Matasci, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2024
* USD 407,008.00

Many ants distribute their colony members and resources across multiple nests;
movement between nests is maintained by a network of persistent trails. These
ant transportation systems, common among beneficial and pest species, are
similar to human transportation systems in many ways. Like subway systems and
road networks, their goal is to move resources and individuals quickly and
efficiently from place to place. Having alternative routes within a
transportation system can make travel faster and more reliable, especially
following disruptions or backlogs on particular routes. Yet extra routes cost
additional resources. Designing an efficient and reliable transportation system
at minimal cost is a difficult problem even for human engineers, who can take a
system-wide perspective. Ant colonies, in contrast, build their transportation
networks with no central vision or overarching plan. Certain species are
nonetheless able to create systems that are remarkably reliable, efficient, and
low-cost. This research will develop a new framework to explain how ant colonies
create such well-functioning transportation systems via a process of gradual
modification rather than design. Undergraduates, graduate students and two
postdoctoral researchers will be mentored as part of an interdisciplinary,
international team. High school students from groups underrepresented in STEM
will be mentored by undergraduates with guidance from the PIs. This research
could help inspire new management strategies for invasive ant pests, and new
design algorithms for human transportation systems. Results will be shared with
the public via a series of short films, exhibits and presentations at Florida
state parks, and an established undergraduate-authored
blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the ubiquity of biological and human-
engineered transportation networks, there is no unifying framework for
predicting how they respond dynamically and adaptively to external pressures in
a way that balances infrastructure cost, transportation efficiency, and
robustness. The central objective of the project is to develop a general theory
for how environmental constraints and opportunities shape dynamic transportation
networks, emphasizing the interactions between network structure and function. A
generative agent-based network approach will be used to create a general model
of dynamic transportation networks. The model will explore how networks respond
effectively to environmental challenges via processes of dynamic network
restructuring that operate under a range of ecological constraints. The model
will be parameterized and tested initially with existing data for terrestrial
wood-ant networks, and refined based on the results. Predictions will then be
generated by the model for the substantially different region of the parameter
space occupied by arboreal turtle ants, and tested with new field data on turtle
ant network structure and usage. Finally, the model will be challenged with
field and laboratory experiments using turtle ants, where the dynamic response
of their transportation network will be tracked following changes to resource
distributions, disturbance patterns, and spatial constraints. The project
targets the development of theory with the potential to unify research on
dynamic transportation networks across biological systems, with possible
applications to a variety of natural and human
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.