* 1755430
* Mechanisms and evolutionary origins of germ-soma specification in a multicellular green alga, Volvox carteri
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* James Umen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2023
* USD 840,432.00

The majority of the biosphere is populated by microscopic, single-celled
bacteria and protists. Yet, in a few rare instances single-celled organisms
acquired the ability to aggregate or to remain associated after cell division
and form collectives, thus setting the stage for the remarkable evolution of
large complex multicellular life including animals, plants and a few other
multicellular groups like fungi and macroalgae. This project aims to understand
an important but largely mysterious step that has repeatedly occurred in
conjunction with the transition to complex multicellularity: the evolution of
distinct reproductive and non-reproductive cell types. In most cases this key
transition is so ancient that its origins are difficult or impossible to
reconstruct. By investigating cell-type specialization in a much more recently
evolved multicellular species, the green alga Volvox, and comparing it to a
closely-related single-celled relative, Chlamydomonas, the research team aims to
understand in unprecedented genetic and genomic detail the evolutionary pathway
and genetic mechanisms that enabled separate reproductive and non-reproductive
cell types to arise. This project will not only address fundamental questions
underlying one of evolution's most enigmatic transitions, but also has practical
implications for understanding how coordinated metabolic reprogramming and
specialization might be engineered into economically valuable green algae in
order to tune the balance between resources allocated to cell growth versus
allocation towards increased production of biofuels or high-value products that
are enhanced when cell growth is minimized. The project includes graduate
student and postdoctoral associate training in interdisciplinary scientific
research. Outreach to local middle school students will enable students to
participate in scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this research is to understand the origins and genetic mechanisms associated
with multicellular organization and germ-soma division of labor. Volvox carteri
'Volvox' exhibits a streamlined and experimentally tractable form of germ-soma
differentiation. Each spheroidal individual contains just two cell types: ~2000
sterile somatic cells that furnish motility and produce extracellular matrix,
but which are destined to senesce and die; and ~16 large reproductive cells
called gonidia, each of which undergoes a stereotyped pattern of cell divisions
and morphogenesis to produce a new spheroid. It has been hypothesized that the
germ-soma dichotomy in Volvox evolved by cooption of temporally-regulated and
transiently-expressed differential gene expression programs from a unicellular
ancestor; but this idea has not been tested on a genome-wide scale. Under this
project new molecular-genetic and genomics resources will be leveraged to
elucidate gene expression networks that control cell Volvox differentiation and
to decipher their origins. The approaches involve: 1) Comparative analyses of
cell-type transcriptomes obtained from synchronized wild-type Volvox and from
cell differentiation mutants regA- and lagA- to elucidate cell-type
specification networks with high spatio-temporal resolution; 2) Identification
of direct targets of RegA, a nuclear-localized transcription factor and master
regulator of somatic differentiation, using chromatin immunoprecipitation and
deep sequencing or similar approaches; 3) Characterization and cloning of lag-
mutants whose gene products suppress somatic differentiation of germ cells.
Together these approaches will define the regulatory networks and control
mechanisms involved in Volvox cell-type specification and critically test their
origins by comparison with temporal expression programs in close relatives such
as Chlamydomonas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.