* 1755477
* Attention and Neural Oscillations in Perceptual Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Tony Ro, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 574,252.00

Sensations and perceptions of the world are typically accurate, especially with
focused attention. However, they are sometimes inaccurate, which can lead to
damaging consequences. Understanding how the human brain processes sensory
information to form coherent and representative perceptions of the world is
therefore scientifically important and has broad implications for national
health (e.g., radiologists detecting a tumor), security and defense (e.g.,
accurately responding to a perceived threat), and general safety and well-being
(e.g., correctly perceiving the color of a traffic light). With funding from the
National Science Foundation, this research assesses how attention and associated
changes in brain activity facilitate the successful combination of different
types of sensory information into accurate perceptions. By focusing on errors in
perceptual binding, such as misperceiving the color of one object as being the
color of another nearby object, these studies will provide insights into the
brain states that allow perception to proceed with precision and those that
cause perception to fail. In addition to advancing scientific knowledge about
the brain, this research will provide training opportunities to many students,
including high school and undergraduate students as well as underrepresented
students in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments will
examine the cognitive and neural mechanisms involved with visual feature binding
and multisensory integration. The investigators will use converging methods to
test whether modulations of attention and neural oscillations affect sensory
integration. These methods include structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to measure neural activity during successful and unsuccessful
visual feature binding and multisensory integration, electroencephalography
(EEG) and fast signal optical imaging to measure changes in oscillatory neural
activity prior to and after sensory integration, and rhythmic transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) to alter sensory integration by modulating and
inducing phase-controlled neural oscillations. These studies will shed light on
how sensory information that is processed in discrete regions of the human brain
might be combined through neural oscillations to produce coherent
representations of the external world. They will also provide a better
understanding of failures in perception. By examining how different brain
regions integrate information through synchronized neural activity, these
studies may also provide important clues for generating strategies and
rehabilitative tools for individuals with a variety of congenital,
developmental, and acquired impairments that affect sensory
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.