* 1755423
* RUI:  Identifying the Neural Mechanisms of Vocal Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Erik Zornik, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 694,800.00

Animal behaviors are as diverse as the species that produce them. Behaviors are
generated by circuits of interconnected neurons in the nervous system, and
behavioral diversity often arises from differences in these circuits. In closely
related species that have only recently diverged, the underlying circuits
producing distinct behaviors are likely to contain relatively few differences
responsible for the observed variation. The goal of this project is to identify
functional differences in the brain that contribute to vocal variation between
three closely related African clawed frog species. Two general approaches are
used: recordings of the electrical signals of individual vocal neurons, and
genetic profiling of these neurons. By combining these two complementary
approaches, both the functional basis of behavioral differences and the genes
responsible for these differences, are being identified. Participation in this
project provides students intensive training in physiological, molecular, and
computational methods. An inquiry-based research module also is being
incorporated in the teaching of the lead investigator, allowing a large number
of students from diverse backgrounds to directly engage in neurobiology
research. To broaden access to neurobiology training beyond Reed, the lead
investigator hosts a laboratory teaching workshop for neuroscience professors
around the Pacific northwest. Finally, the lead investigator also convenes a
panel of neuroscientists, computer scientists and journalists to develop a new
publication platform for efficiently disseminating scientific progress, in which
new discoveries can be regularly incorporated into existing "living documents."
Together, these efforts aim to accelerate the discovery and dissemination of
fundamental principles underlying brain function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vertebrate hindbrain includes many neural circuits that generate rhythmic
behaviors including vocalizations. Male African clawed frogs produce courtship
calls that are unique to each species and differ in temporal patterns. This
study investigates neurons that appear to control distinct temporal patterns of
vocalizations across three species. Vocal nerve recordings from isolated brains
reveal the same pattern of activity that can be recorded in awake, calling
frogs. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from these 'singing brains' has led to
the discovery of premotor neurons that appear to generate the male advertisement
call. Because of their apparent importance in the vocal circuit, it is likely
that evolutionary changes to these premotor neurons have been important drivers
of Xenopus vocal evolution. Whole-cell recordings in the three Xenopus species
are used to identify cellular and network properties that correlate with
species-specific vocal patterns. To link the physiological bases of behavior
differences to their underlying genetic causes, transcriptomes of the premotor
nucleus and individual premotor neurons are being generated to identify
differentially expressed genes. The studies provide the groundwork for assessing
whether certain properties and genes in the vocal circuit are more readily
exploited during evolution. Such insights should contribute to novel hypotheses
regarding rules and principles of evolution that can be tested across a wide
range of species and behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.