* 1755314
* Collaborative Proposal: RUI: Obliquely striated muscle: A soft-bodied invertebrate solution for tuning length-force properties to meet functional demands?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Joseph Thompson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2024
* USD 289,096.00

Three types of muscle cells (smooth and the cross-striated cardiac and skeletal
muscles) are well known from any introductory text, yet few biologists are
familiar with obliquely striated muscles. Obliquely striated muscle cells are
common in soft-bodied animals, occurring in members of at least 17 phyla, yet
the implications of oblique striation for the function and performance of this
important muscle type are unknown. It has been assumed for decades that oblique
striation permits relatively high force output over an extraordinary range of
muscle lengths. Recent work, however, suggests that the contractile properties
and operating length ranges of obliquely striated muscles are very diverse, even
among muscles within the same individual animal. The project will investigate
the contractile properties and operating length ranges of obliquely striated
muscles from diverse animals. This research is likely to reveal fundamental new
principles of the structure and function of muscle that would otherwise remain
obscure, and provide new insight into the diversity of function and the
evolution of this fiber type. The project will provide opportunities for
undergraduates, especially first-generation college students and those from
underrepresented backgrounds, to gain experience in physiology, biomechanics,
and science communication. In partnership with the Maine State Aquarium
Discovery Center, the project will develop programs for K-12 students and the
general public. The project will also impact secondary education through
collaboration with the UNC Baccalaureate Education in Science and Teaching (UNC-
BEST) program, which offers undergraduate Biology majors opportunities to obtain
licensure as a secondary school teacher in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although obliquely striated muscle occurs in at
least 17 animal phyla, the functional implications of this striation pattern
remain unclear. Early studies suggested that oblique striation allows high force
output over a much wider range of muscle lengths than possible in cross-striated
muscle. Recent work, however, shows that many obliquely striated muscles are
incapable of such wide operating ranges and instead, there is considerable
variation in this parameter. The current understanding thus fails as a general
explanation for the functional significance of oblique striation. The goal of
the investigation is to test a new model, based on mathematical analysis of the
geometry of the myofilament array, which suggests that oblique striation evolved
to allow adjustment of the length-force relationship in animals with hydrostatic
skeletons. The model predicts that the length-force relationship can be adjusted
by altering the stagger angle (i.e., the degree of stagger of the myofilaments),
with greater stagger resulting in a wider operating range. Measurements of
length-force properties, in vivo muscle activation and length changes, and
muscle fiber ultrastructure will be used to test the model predictions and
assess the functional significance of oblique striation. The initial
investigation will focus on the myofilament stagger and the length-force
relationship of muscles in the squid Doryteuthis pealeii that vary widely in
function and operating length range. In addition, muscles with similar roles and
length-force relationships among select taxa that span the range of Bilaterian
diversity will be studied, thus identifying structural and functional
convergence in obliquely striated muscles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.