* 1755795
* CRII: CHS: Training and Feedback Systems to Improve Vehicle Cybersecurity
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shannon Roberts, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,996.00

Although modern vehicles have many computing components, they are not designed
with cybersecurity in mind. Consequently, they are susceptible to cyberattacks.
For example, in 2015 two hackers remotely exploited a vulnerability in an SUV's
entertainment system to send the vehicle into a ditch. Though many technological
solutions to improve vehicle cybersecurity have been proposed, the PI argues
real progress toward achieving that goal will require including the human
(driver) in the loop. Thus, this research will combine findings from
cybersecurity and transportation safety to develop training and in-vehicle
messaging systems to improve drivers' awareness of and responses to
cyberattacks, which ultimately should help reduce crash-related costs and
potentially save lives. The effectiveness of the new systems will be tested in a
driving simulator study. Project outcomes will yield quantitative evidence as to
how drivers respond to unintended events that occur in their vehicles. More
importantly, the work will create systems that can warn drivers of dangers
associated with vehicle hacking, and provide information on how these dangerous
situations can be mitigated. Similar systems will be applicable in other
transportation safety contexts (e.g., automated driving).

This research will proceed in two phases. Phase I will focus on the iterative
development of the training and in-vehicle message systems using methods
essential to the human-centered design process (e.g., interviews and co-design
sessions). Phase II will evaluate the training and new in-vehicle messaging
systems though a driving simulator study. During the experiment, drivers will be
exposed to various situations that are indicative of a vehicle cyberattack while
their driving behavior is recorded. Drivers' responses to the scenarios
according to quantitative measures of driving performance along with their
subjective evaluation of the systems' effectiveness will be used to determine
the extent to which the training and/or in-vehicle messages have a positive
impact on driver performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.