* 1755377
* Comparative functional genomics of innate immunity in deuterostomes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 535,278.00

Animals use an innate immune system to protect themselves from pathogens, such
as viruses and bacteria. Receptors of the innate immune system that recognize
such pathogens are important for starting the process of pathogen clearance, and
are unchanged over an individual's lifetime. Moreover, several genes involved in
innate immunity appear to be evolutionarily conserved across major animal
groups. Researchers have little understanding of how innate mechanisms of
immunity recognize and defend against the wide diversity of microbes and viruses
encountered by different animals in different environments. To explore this
question, as well as to more fully understand the genetic setting that led to
the evolution of the adaptive immune system in vertebrates, researchers will
explore the diversity and conservation of innate immune mechanisms across
deuterostome animals (a group that includes acorn worms, sea stars, sea
cucumbers, sea squirts, and vertebrates). To undertake this work, researchers
will employ novel genomic data, develop bioinformatic tools, and use an
experimental approach to understand which innate immune genes are activated, or
repressed, when various antigens are presented to the study animal. Acorn worms,
relatives of chordates for which little is known, will be a main focus of
experimental work. Additionally, investigators will train undergraduate and
graduate students drawn form diverse backgrounds. Workshops focused on
elementary and middle schools students will transfer knowledge and excitement
about biodiversity, genomic tools, and immunology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pattern
Recognition Receptor (PRR) pathways are part of an ancient innate immune defense
system spanning Metazoa, and are known to react to conserved molecular motifs
exhibited by common pathogens (e.g., viruses, bacteria, fungi). Pattern
Recognition Receptor-facilitated defenses include pathways initiated by Toll-
Like Receptors (TLR), RIG-I like Receptors, and NOD-like receptors.
Unfortunately, the evolution of innate immune systems across invertebrates,
including the ancestral state for deuterostomes, is unclear. Moreover, the
breadth of TLR-facilitated ligand-specificity has been suggested to be fine-
tuned to the niche an organism occupies, despite exhibiting evolutionary
conservation across lineages and thus, evolutionary time. The functional novelty
of Pattern Recognition Receptors, origins or associated pathways, and degree of
evolutionary conservation are open questions. This study combines informatics
and experimental tools to, 1) gain insight on the ancestral state of innate
immunity in hemichordates, ambulacrarians, and ultimately deuterostomes, 2)
further understand the setting of organismal pathogen-defense systems preceding
the genesis of adaptive immunities, and 3) quantitatively assess variation and
divergence of innate immunity elements over evolutionary time. Differential gene
expression and in situ hybridization will be used in controlled settings to
assess deployment and responsiveness of innate immunity pathways. Functional
conservation will be assessed with experimental rescue of human TLR-/- cell
lines with the corresponding hemichordate orthologs. The project will promote
career development for a Beginning Investigator, graduate students, and
undergraduates. A set of outreach workshops (with immunology, genomic and
evolution themes) is specifically proposed that will reach K5-8 and their
parents. This work seeks to support participation of under-represented groups
and summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.