* 1755871
* CRII: RI: Using Large-Scale Neuroanatomy Datasets to Quantify the Mesoscale Architecture of the Brain
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Eva Dyer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Methods for revealing the global connections of the brain typically start by
tracing a small number of neurons at a time. It is through performing many
experiments, in different brain areas, and across many brains, that information
can be aggregated and consolidated to produce detailed maps of the brain's
global networks and architecture. The aim of this project is to develop new
computational approaches for modeling the connectivity of the mouse brain, in
order to reveal principles of wiring and information routing. The project will
leverage whole-brain imaging datasets from the Allen Institute for Brain Science
that each provide a small piece of the puzzle but when combined, can yield a
picture of whole-brain connectivity. The outcomes of this research will be new
maps of the global connectivity of the mouse brain, and a framework for studying
the impact of disease and aging on whole-brain
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel framework for
analyzing whole-brain connectomics datasets to model high-level (mesoscopic)
principles of wiring and architecture. To do this, tools from matrix
factorization will be used to decompose large datasets from many brains into a
collection of learned neural pathways or "parts" that, when combined, describe
large volumes of data as succinctly as possible. To address the size of the
datasets, the use of subsampling-based approaches and randomized methods will be
explored for massive-scale machine learning applications. Through intelligent
and adaptive subsampling of the data, in combination with online methods for
factorization, methods will be developed to process and learn from the entire
Allen Institute Mouse Connectivity Atlas at less than 10-micron resolution. The
outcomes of this project will be new tools for large-scale matrix factorization,
models of the whole brain connectome, and discovery of wiring principles that
could be useful in the development of next generation architectures for machine
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.