* 1755134
* Collaborative Research:  Evolutionary reversals in hormonal modulation of growth-regulatory gene networks
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Christian Cox, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 335,195.00

The hormone testosterone is classically viewed as a promoter of growth, but this
generalization is based on model species in medicine, agriculture, and
aquaculture. In most of these model species, males also happen to be larger than
females. However, in several lizard species in which females are larger,
testosterone inhibits growth. This raises the intriguing possibility that, far
from being hard-wired, the effects of testosterone (and other hormones) on
growth and other processes may change considerably during evolution. This
project will test for such "evolutionary reversals" in the hormonal regulation
of growth across lizard species. These species have been selected to span
repeated evolutionary shifts between those in which males are larger and those
in which females are larger. By simultaneously characterizing the effects of
testosterone on the expression of thousands of genes, this project will also
determine how such "evolutionary reversals" in the hormonal regulation of growth
are accomplished at the genetic level. The results of this collaborative study
will broaden understanding of the endocrine system. It may also challenge
generalizations derived from traditional animal models by investigating how
closely related species evolve different responses to the same hormone. The
project will also contribute to filling national teaching needs and will involve
high school teachers in research experiences in an intensive summer program.
Research training opportunities are being provided for a post-doctoral fellow, a
PhD and an MS graduate student, and two undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Collaborative project addresses an issue of
current debate in comparative endocrinology: whether the highly conserved
vertebrate endocrine system tends to constrain adaptation, or whether key
evolutionary changes in the coupling of hormones to gene networks instead
facilitate rapid evolution. This project will combine hormone manipulations and
high-throughput RNA sequencing aimed at (1) characterizing how the expression of
growth-regulatory gene networks differs with respect to age, tissue, and hormone
treatment using detailed experiments on three focal lizard species, (2) testing
for evolutionary reversals in the hormonal regulation of growth and gene
expression by extending these methods to a broader, phylogenetically informed
sampling of related lizard species with variable patterns of sexual dimorphism
in body size (male-larger or female-larger), and (3) characterizing rates of
sequence evolution for thousands of expressed genes to test whether the
specificity of expression that is achieved by hormonal regulation also frees
coding sequences themselves to evolve more quickly. This research will support
development of the recently sequenced genome of the Eastern Fence Lizard as an
emerging resource for the fields of comparative endocrinology and evolutionary
genetics. This project enhances the professional development of science
educators through Teacher Workshops and Teacher Fellowships administered through
an ongoing education program, which fosters teacher-scientist collaboration and
authentic scientific discovery in the K-12 classroom. In addition, research
training opportunities and funding are provided for a post-doctoral fellow, a
PhD student, a MS student, and for two undergraduates each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, the Evolutionary Processes Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, and the Rules of Life Venture Fund of the Emerging Frontiers Program in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.