* 1755737
* CRII: CSR: Toward Understanding and Automatically Detecting Specious Configuration in Large Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Peng Huang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2021
* USD 174,955.00

Software configurations allow users to customize a software system for different
needs. Today, it is not uncommon for a system to expose hundreds of parameters
to users for customizing configuration. Such high customizability comes at a
price, as errors in configuration are a major source of system failures. While
various solutions have been developed to tackle misconfiguration, they mainly
focus on invalid configurations, which violate some correctness criteria.
Unfortunately, many misconfigurations are technically valid, yet cause severe
production problems such as poor performance. These are called specious
configurations. The goal of this project is to systematically investigate and
proactively prevent specious configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the project will study specious configuration from both open-source and
commercial systems to understand its broad scope, traits and how it affects
system execution. Informed by this study, this project will then design
algorithms and techniques for modeling the risk of a configuration change by
using static analysis and selective symbolic execution to construct
parameterized impact tables and then enhance them with offline profiling data.
Based on this model, this project will develop an online risk assessment tool
which can alert expert operators about specious configuration before
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specious configuration is frequently cited for
lost productivity. This project will further our understanding of underlying
factors behind specious configuration and help practitioners reduce
misconfiguration-induced failures in large-scale systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will be distilled into graduate
seminars and classes on Operating Systems. The resulting dataset, software,
publications and course materials will be maintained in an open-source
repository for at least five years beyond the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.