* 1755913
* CRII: CSR: Energy-Aware Resource Management for Edge Computing: An Algorithmic Perspective
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Lena Mashayekhy, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Many Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications such as autonomous vehicles and
augmented reality require offloading tasks to a more powerful computing
infrastructure--cloud. These applications require low latency and fast response
time, which are often difficult to attain due to the physical distance and
bandwidth limitations between users and the cloud. To cope with these
limitations, edge computing has been introduced as a new paradigm that optimizes
cloud computing to provide distributed computing solutions at the edge of the
network, where IoT users utilize the computing resources in their vicinity
(sometimes called "cloudlets"). Driven by the surging demand for edge computing,
the energy consumption of clouds, cloudlets, and devices becomes increasingly
important both from an environmental and cost viewpoint. Most of the existing
energy consumption improvements in clouds come from improved engineering rather
than improved algorithms. Such a practice fails to incorporate significant
optimization opportunities available for clouds/cloudlets/devices to reduce
their energy consumption. This two-year project focuses on developing resource
management systems to significantly improve energy efficiency in edge computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of the following research thrusts: 1)
understanding energy consumption in edge computing by exploring recurrent energy
consumption patterns and identifying potential improvements; 2) introducing
energy-aware data and job decomposition algorithms by developing mathematical
and scalable computational models that seamlessly integrate multiple system
objectives; 3) developing energy-aware placement of jobs to the edge components
based on matching theory, graph theory, and distributed online algorithm design;
and 4) evaluating the system on the National Science Foundation-funded CloudLab
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable more efficient use of
cloud computing at the edge, while reducing energy consumption, which leads to
cost reduction in edge services. It also benefits IoT users by extending battery
lifetime of their smart devices and by improving their application performance.
This project may lead to societal benefits such as promoting livable communities
and smart cities. This research will be integrated into the into classroom
teaching via a cloud computing course. Specialized outreach activities of this
project are aimed at increasing participation of students from groups
underrepresented in science and engineering. The project will maintain a
dedicated website for dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.