* 1755960
* CRII: CIF: Learning Hidden Structures in Networks: Fundamental Limits and Efficient Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Jiaming Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2019
* USD 174,351.00

The problem of learning hidden structures in network data arises in many
contemporary applications such as recommender systems, network privacy, and
genomics. This problem intersects high-dimensional statistical inference and
large-scale network analysis. On the one hand, classical statistical paradigm
focuses on optimal statistical performance of learning algorithms, while it
neglects computational complexity that becomes increasingly critical as network
data gets big. On the other hand, computer scientists mostly focus on
computationally efficient approximation algorithms for worst-case instances,
while they neglect the underlying statistical structures that can be potentially
exploited to improve the algorithm performance. This research combines both
statistical and computational perspectives to characterize fundamental
performance limits and develop efficient optimal algorithms for learning hidden
structures in networks.

This research has two interrelated thrusts: graphon estimation and graph
matching. Graphon estimation learns the underlying generating mechanism of a
network from a single snapshot of the network. Graph matching matches the vertex
sets of two graphs with correlated edges to minimize the number of adjacency
disagreements. This research involves: (1) developing efficient algorithms for
graphon estimation and graph matching by exploiting insights from spectral graph
theory, convex relaxations, and statistical physics; (2) deriving sharp
statistical performance limits by drawing tools from information theory, convex
duality theory, and random matrix theory; (3) identifying fundamental
computational barriers which limit computationally efficient procedures from
attaining the optimal statistical performance. The investigator also deploys the
algorithms developed in this research to real network data, leading to fast and
accurate algorithms for preference elicitation in recommender systems, de-
anonymization in social networks, and DNA assembly in genomics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.