* 1755086
* Shrimp predator defense efficiency under ocean acidification and warming
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Dimitri Deheyn, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 571,410.00

Shrimp are a key food source worldwide for fish, birds, marine mammals, and
humans, and consequently, many shrimp species face strong predation and fishing
pressures. Potentially aggravating these pressures is their sensitivity to
changes in environmental conditions, such as those occurring seasonally or over
longer time periods. The tolerance of shrimp to declining ocean pH (ocean
acidification) and increasing temperature (ocean warming) will factor into
population health, abundance and distributions in the future. However, limited
research on crustaceans precludes understanding of the potential impacts that
changing environmental climates will have on commercially important species such
as shrimp. This project takes a unique approach to ocean acidification research
by (1) examining multiple, closely-related shrimp species to disentangle
species-specific versus general responses, and (2) studying multi-scale
responses, from stress physiology to predator defenses, to establish a broader
scope of impacts on shrimp (from physiological to ecological). This study will
thus provide a timely, comprehensive and realistic assessment of the
susceptibility of commercially and ecologically important shrimp species to
future ocean conditions, with clear applications to fisheries, aquaculture and
the food industry. Findings from this research will reach people of all ages and
broad backgrounds through website and social media promotion, public and
professional seminars, classroom activities, and hands-on workshops. In
addition, this research will contribute to the scientific development of high
school and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds through established
research experience programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A great diversity
of marine organisms are experiencing increased changes in environmental
conditions associated with ocean acidification and warming. Such changes in
global climate induce a variety of ecological and biological responses,
including physiological stress and altered calcification. Increased stress
typically affects energy storage and allocation, ultimately cascading in
reactions that can impact everything from metabolism and growth to reproduction
and behavior. Changes in calcification can affect the integrity and
functionality of calcified structures. This outcome may be especially severe for
crustaceans, because the calcified exoskeleton is crucial for nearly every
aspect of their biology and ecology. A realistic understanding of the potential
impacts of ocean acidification and warming on crustaceans thus requires an
integrative approach. The primary objective of this project is to determine how
forecasted ocean changes will affect stress levels and predator defenses of
commercially important Pandalid shrimp. The specific aims will assess the effect
of pH and temperature on shrimp (1) physiological oxidative stress, (2) cryptic
coloration, (3) tail-flip escape behavior, and (4) exoskeleton armor. Juveniles
of three closely related shrimp species with different geographical ranges will
undergo long-term exposure to a combination of altered, near-term predicted
conditions. The extent of oxidative stress response, exoskeleton spectral
properties, tail-flip escape kinematics, and exoskeleton composition and
material properties will identify how this ecologically and economically
important group of shrimp responds to ocean acidification, and the potential
impact of this response on their biology and ecology, but also their use as a
food source supporting ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.