* 1755318
* MicroRNA Regulation of Insect Diapause
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Julie Reynolds, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 411,352.00

Understanding insect diapause is essential for predicting when and where insect
populations will be active and abundant. Diapause is an internally regulated
dormant state that allows insects to "escape" during seasons, such as winter,
when the environmental conditions are harsh and unsuitable or normal growth and
activity. Diapause is characterized by changes in development, metabolism, and
environmental stress resistance. Although there have been studies that
characterized physiological, biochemical, and molecular changes that occur
during diapause, the understanding of diapause regulation is far from being
complete. This research will provide new information about how diapause is
regulated by investigating how small noncoding RNA molecules (microRNAs),
regulate diapause. This study will improve our understanding of this important
adaptation to changing environmental conditions. This research also has the
potential to provide new tools for managing medically and economically important
insects. For example, if microRNA function in insect diapause can block or
induce diapause entry at a time of year that would be detrimental for their
continued survival. This research has the potential to provide novel therapies
for human medical disorders, such as cancer and diabetes, which share common,
microRNA-associated regulatory mechanisms in humans and insects. Finally, the
project will also provide integrative training and mentoring opportunities for
multiple undergraduate students, while also broadly disseminating the findings
to the public via informal science education to school children and
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying insect diapause provides a conceptual
frame work for understanding how insects, and other animals, perceive
environmental cues and translate them into phenotypic changes that allow them to
survive biotic and abiotic challenges they encounter. MicroRNAs (miRNAs, ~22
nucleotide, noncoding RNAs) are evolutionarily conserved, regulatory molecules
that have important roles in diapause-relevant biological processes (e.g.
developmental arrest, metabolic repression, and stress-resistance) in
evolutionarily diverse species. Numerous miRNAs are deferentially regulated
during pupal diapause in the flesh fly, Sarcophaga bullata, but their functional
relevance is currently unknown. The aim of this project is to identify, and
experimentally validate, mRNA targets of diapause-relevant miRNAs using
computational and biochemical approaches. Specifically, the project focuses on
miRNA:mRNA pairs that may have a role in environmental stress-resistance, a
defining feature of the diapause phenotype. It also investigates the
evolutionary context of miRNA:mRNA regulatory networks and their contribution to
the diapause phenotype in multiple insect species. Together, the results from
the proposed research are expected to provide an entirely new dimension to the
understanding of insect diapause as well as insights concerning the evolutionary
conservation of miRNA:mRNA interactions across
Insecta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.