* 1756417
* Neural Mechanisms of Semantic and Episodic Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Sean Polyn, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 642,214.00

The human episodic memory system supports the ability to remember one's past
experience, while the semantic memory system supports memory for one's general
knowledge about the world and the people, places, and things within it. These
systems are interrelated: The semantic memory system allows one to construct
representations of the features and details making up an experience, and the
episodic memory system binds these semantic representations to a unique
spatiotemporal context. Despite the critical importance of these systems, there
are major gaps in our knowledge regarding the nature of the neural and cognitive
mechanisms that allow us to flexibly access, manipulate, and retrieve episodic
and semantic memories. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Sean Polyn of Vanderbilt University is developing the Control of Semantic and
Episodic Memory (CSEM) model, a novel theory designed to explain the how the
brain mediates episodic and semantic memory search and retrieval. This project
will involve undergraduate students, graduate students, and research staff at
every level: data analysis, theory development, and presentation of results to
the broader scientific community. The project's objectives will make key
contributions to infrastructure for research and education, as the simulation
software and the database of anonymized behavioral and neural data will be
distributed to the broader scientific and academic community via the internet,
along with a repository of behavioral and neural analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSEM model is a computational model of human
memory designed to test hypotheses regarding the specific mechanisms carried out
by particular brain regions in the storage, retrieval, and flexible use of
semantic and episodic memories. The research team will use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to record blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) activity
as participants perform semantic and episodic memory tasks. Multivariate pattern
analysis, representational similarity analysis, and advanced statistical
techniques will be used to characterize the representational structure and
dynamics of neural activity, supporting the development of functional,
mechanistic computational models of the cognitive system of participants as they
perform the memory tasks. The first study examines neural signals for evidence
of an integrative contextual representation that allows information about recent
experiences to persist in neural activity patterns. The second study examines
how the neural system constructs a retrieval cue that can be used to target
particular sets of memories. The third study examines how memories interfere
with one another during retrieval, and the mechanisms used by the neural system
to resolve this interference. Data from these experiments will support the
development of a unified theoretical framework to understand how general-purpose
executive processes control the semantic and episodic memory systems to give
rise to flexible, goal-directed behavior.