* 1756306
* CSBR:   Natural History: Big Data From Small Fossils: Curation and Digitization of Major Microvertebrate Paleontology Collections at The Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* David Blackburn, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 05/31/2023
* USD 499,767.00

The Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) at the University of Florida
houses the third largest cataloged collection of vertebrate fossils in the
United States. This collection provides a basis for study of vertebrates that
occurred in the eastern United States and the circum-Caribbean Basin over the
past 65 million years. This project will secure and improve accessibility of
material in this collection, with an emphasis on small mammals, birds, reptiles,
and amphibians that are traditionally understudied in museum fossil collections.
Data on an estimated 60,000 significant vertebrate fossils specimens will be
made available for scientific research, education, and public outreach,
including several hundred 3D models (scanned using micro-CT
technology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new cabinetry and
improve storage conditions for many unstudied fossils from the early-to-late
Miocene (5-18 million years ago) of Florida, making this material available for
accelerated research by scientists studying the evolutionary and ecological
history of micro-vertebrates in the circum-Caribbean realm. The project will
support a graduate student, five undergraduate assistants, and volunteers, all
of whom will receive mentoring in museum methods and scientific research. K-12
teachers from around the US will also be hosted annually for professional
development sessions on fossils and paleontology that will include the
development of Biology and Earth/Environmental Science lesson plans aligned with
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and other equivalent state standards.
Fossils images will be posted to an online database
(www.floridamuseum.ufl.edu/vertpaleo-search/) and iDigBio (www.idigbio.org). The
3D models of fossil specimens can be used in fossil identification keys as well
as 3D-printing, which will be publicly available through MorphoSource
(www.morphosource.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.