* 1756860
* Collaborative Research: Iron Bioavailability in High-CO2 Oceans: New Perspectives on Iron Acquisition Mechanisms in Diatoms
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Katherine Barbeau, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 420,995.00

Collaborative Research: Iron Bioavailability in High-CO2 Oceans: New
Perspectives on Iron Acquisition Mechanisms in Diatoms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron
is critically needed for growth of all marine phytoplankton, the microscopic
plants at the base of the ocean food chain. Consequently, lack of iron in large
regions of the global ocean limits phytoplankton growth and commercial
fisheries. Ocean acidification (OA) is the ongoing decrease in seawater pH due
to the ocean absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. OA is predicted to
affect seawater chemistry by reducing the concentration of carbonate ions.
Carbonate ions are required for phytoplankton to take up iron from their
environment, which suggests that OA might inhibit iron nutrition. Further
complicating the scenario, pH changes affect iron chemistry in seawater, such
that OA is predicted to shift the relative abundance of various forms of iron.
But despite these expectations, little is known about how the changes in ocean
chemistry due to OA will impact the availability of iron to phytoplankton.
Changes in phytoplankton iron uptake and associated growth rates would likely
have large effects on how the ocean captures atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2).
This has important consequences for ecosystem productivity and for global cycles
of critical chemical elements, such as carbon and nitrogen, and their chemistry.
This project aims to help us understand how shifts in seawater pH and the
chemistry of dissolved inorganic carbon will affect both iron uptake rates and
iron acquisition strategies in the laboratory and in natural communities. This
project also includes development of educational outreach activities which
target primary school students in the areas of microbiology, biogeochemical
cycles and current global change topics. These science outreach activities
benefit from collaborations with the following San Diego-based organizations:
the League of Extraordinary Scientists and Engineers (LXS), The Birch Aquarium
at Scripps (BAS), and The Ocean Discovery Institute
(ODI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand the differential
sensitivity of diatom iron acquisition strategies to changes in seawater pH and
carbonate chemistry. Ultimately a more thorough and detailed mechanistic
understanding of diatom iron uptake pathways will facilitate a much-improved
ability to forecast the impact of anticipated changes in ocean pH and inorganic
carbon chemistry on rates of iron uptake by diatoms. This critical
biogeochemical issue is addressed through trace metal clean manipulation
experiments incorporating state-of-the-art analytical methodology to probe
phytoplankton cellular physiology and biogeochemistry in laboratory cultures and
natural communities. In the first year, laboratory experiments with a model
pennate diatom leverage a collection of targeted knockout transgenic lines to
evaluate the substrate specificity and relative importance of distinct iron
assimilation pathways under a range of pCO2 and iron availability conditions.
Additionally, quantitation of mRNA and proteins for key diatom iron assimilation
pathways in natural communities in the Southern California Current further
clarify the relative importance and sensitivity of distinct iron assimilation
pathways in relation to pCO2 and iron availability. In year two a Lagrangian
study of iron uptake rates and associated mRNA and protein abundance is
performed on upwelled high pCO2 water over the course of offshore advection.
Additionally, the investigators are conducting mesocosm experiments using
naturally elevated high pCO2 seawater as well as laboratory experiments on
multiplex knockout lines. Year three is dedicated to data analyses and overall
project synthesis. Overall aims of the research activities include, 1)
development and validation of a refined conceptual model of iron uptake in key
marine phytoplankton and subsequent utilization of the model to characterize the
sensitivity of distinct iron uptake pathways to the effects of ocean
acidification, and 2) determination of the effects of acidification on iron
uptake, and quantification of the relative contribution of distinct iron
acquisition pathways in high pCO2 phytoplankton communities.