* 1756073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Youth and Humanitarian Futures in Post-Conflict Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Matthew Sebastian, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 11,717.00

Youth in post-conflict societies frequently come to represent two contradicting
forces. On the one hand, they represent hope for a more peaceful future. On the
other hand, because there is frequently large-scale unemployment, particularly
among young men, youth may also personify anxiety about a return to conflict.
The research supported by this award, which trains a graduate student in methods
of scientific data collection and analysis, explores how young people navigate
the limits and possibilities of post-conflict life and the multiple
interventions that are designed to help them do so. Previous research has
emphasized how peace-building projects transform social life under the
expectation of peace-after-war. But young people looking at their own futures,
rarely see such a clean break with the past. When governmental and non-
governmental intervention programs attempt to make young people "productive" in
the aftermath of violence, what exactly does that entail? And how do youth both
within and outside of such programs make sense of their social position as
marginal? Answering these questions has important implications for both security
and development in post-conflict situations worldwide, including at smaller and
more local scales in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duke University
anthropology doctoral candidate, Matthew Sebastian, under the supervision of Dr.
Charles Piot, will pursue the research through16 months of ethnographic
fieldwork on how young people experience and respond to vulnerability and
security in post-conflict northern Uganda. He has chosen this site because
Uganda, where more than three-quarters of the population is under thirty, offers
a sharper view of how these transformations take place in real time than could
be obtained in the U.S. He will collect data with multiple ethnographic methods,
including participant observation, interviews, focus groups, and mapping
techniques. He has chosen three key sites for the research: (1) securitized
spaces where young men and women work as armed guards; (2) a local
nongovernmental organization that works to reintegrate formerly incarcerated
youth; and (3) a local governmental initiative that is designed to combat youth
idleness. These data will allow him to evaluate the carry-over of humanitarian
and other interventions in the everyday lives of young people and whether or not
they succeed in improving the lives of youth and securing contemporary society
and long-term peace. Findings will help to develop new theories of how post-
conflict situations can have sustained peaceful outcomes. They will also be of
interest to policy makers concerned to assure security after hostilities cease.