* 1756270
* CSBR: Natural History: Essential Improvements for the Vertebrate and Invertebrate Zoology Collections at Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Molly Hagemann, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 497,265.00

Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum (BPBM) is the world's largest repository of
biological material from Hawaii and the Pacific region. This collection
represents a historical record of the many species that have been lost to
extinction in this ecologically sensitive region, and also serves as an
invaluable tool for research on the rich biodiversity resource that remains.
This project will support acquisition of modern cabinets and containers for two
of BPBM's natural history collections, Vertebrate Zoology (VZ) and Invertebrate
Zoology (IZ), that are urgently needed to rescue specimens from deteriorating
cabinets and inadequate shelving, and remain inaccessible to the scientific
community because there is no secure space to properly house them. The project
will also improve the quality and accessibility of the specimen information
within the collections' electronic databases. During the award period,
researchers will be providing twelve STEM undergraduate interns and eight high
school students with training in collections care and taxonomy, as well as
career mentoring. This collaboration will strengthen the museum's relationship
with local educational institutions and increase public engagement with science,
technology, and Hawaii's unique natural history.

During this two-year project, 64 new cabinets will be installed to provide
improved storage for 43,800 specimens and 9,051 specimen lots. The improvements
will relieve hazardous overcrowding and allow for the completion of long needed
curatorial projects. While cataloged specimens are pulled from old cabinets and
placed into new ones, their corresponding data records will be cleaned, updated,
and expanded. Other material will be digitized anew, including an estimated
10,000 specimens from the VZ collection and 4,000 specimen lots from the IZ
collection. Researchers and educators across the globe will be able to access
new and updated records via BPBM's website and other online data aggregators,
including VertNet, iDigBio, and GBIF. Additionally, each specimen that is
touched during this process will receive a QR code. These codes will vastly
improve the ability of staff to locate specimens within the collections and
track specimens as they are used for research and outreach. The transfer of
specimens from old to new equipment also presents an ideal opportunity to assess
the conservation status of each specimen. With help from BPBM's assistant
conservator, the specimens will receive the care and attention to maintain their
integrity well into the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.