* 1756822
* Testing Unpredictability with Multiple Worlds
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 335,000.00

This project uses a "multiple worlds" experimental paradigm to test the
prediction that divisions of opinion between political or demographic groups may
be arbitrary and unpredictable as cultural fads have been shown to be. Recent
research shows that the popularity of cultural artifacts, such as books, music,
and movies, may be contingent on initial opinions. These are often arbitrary and
unpredictable, yet subsequently can drive huge opinion cascades. A similar
dynamic may explain the divisions that emerge between political partisans or
demographic groups (e.g. young and old, men and women). That is, when an initial
group of visible partisans disagree, subsequent opinion generators from each
side may take this a cue to how they should act, furthering the divide between
the groups in a cascading fashion. Findings will serve the national welfare by
shedding light on arbitrary social processes that may amplify societal discord
and so offering the possibility of ameliorating their effects.

The hypothesis of this project is that division between groups can be driven by
a dynamic similar to that found by Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006) in their
investigation of the fickleness of cultural success. They created an
experimental music download site, with multiple worlds in which users could only
see the downloads of those in their same experimental world. Findings were that
the opinions converged more in the worlds where users could see the activity of
others around them. To test the hypothesis of this project, a website will be
created where experiment participants will be asked to register their political
and demographic affiliations. They then will be divided into different
experimental worlds, including one independent world (a control). In all worlds,
users will vote on various issues. In experimental conditions, users will be
able to see the opinions for all in-group and out-group members in their world.
By contrast, those in the control condition will vote without seeing other
people's opinions. The prediction to be tested is that initial opinion
differences between groups will be arbitrary, such that the direction of the
association between opinions and groups will vary between worlds, but that the
group influence will amplify these differences, leading variations to be
stronger than expected by chance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.