* 1756799
* Collaborative Research: Investigations into microbially mediated ecological diversification in sponges
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Jose Lopez, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2019
* USD 237,692.00

Coral reefs represent a paradox because, despite their immense productivity and
biodiversity, they are found in nutrient-poor habitats that are equivalent to
"marine deserts." High biodiversity is often associated with a division of
resources that allows many types of organisms to coexist with minimal
competition. Indeed, unlike many other organisms on coral reefs, sponges are
adapted to efficiently remove bacteria, phytoplankton, and dissolved organic
matter from seawater by filter-feeding. Sponges are a dominant component of
coral reefs worldwide and in the Caribbean, where their biomass exceeds that of
reef-building corals. For almost a quarter century, the success of sponges in
the Caribbean has been linked to their filter-feeding ability. However, recent
work demonstrated that coexisting sponges on Caribbean reefs host unique
communities of bacteria that might allow sponges to access multiple pools of
nutrients that are not available to other organisms. In this project, the
investigators will test the hypothesis that ecologically dominant sponge species
in the Caribbean have unique metabolic strategies that are mediated by their
associations with microbes that live within the sponge body. This research will
combine manipulative field experiments with a novel combination of modern
analytical tools to investigate both filter-feeding by sponge hosts and the
metabolic pathways of their microbes. This work will advance our understanding
of the ecological and evolutionary forces that have helped shape the species
present on Caribbean coral reefs. Additionally, this project will support three
early-career investigators and provide training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students at Nova Southeastern University, Appalachian State
University, Stony Brook University, and Smithsonian Marine Station. The
investigators will also develop innovative outreach programs that expand
existing platforms at their institutions to increase public engagement and
scientific literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine sponges have been widely
successful in their expansion across ecological niches in the Caribbean, with
biomass often exceeding that of reef-building corals and high species diversity.
However, whether this success is linked to efficient heterotrophic filter-
feeding on organic carbon in the water column or to their evolutionary
investment in microbial symbionts is yet to be fully elucidated. Microbial
symbionts expand the metabolic capabilities of host sponges, supplementing
heterotrophic feeding with inorganic carbon and nitrogen, mediating the
assimilation of dissolved organic matter, and facilitating recycling of host-
derived nitrogen. Despite these benefits, microbial symbiont communities are
widely divergent across coexisting sponge species and there is substantial
variation in host reliance on symbiont-derived carbon and nitrogen among host
sponges; therefore, these associations likely mediate the ecological
diversification of coexisting sponge species. The goal of this project is to
test this transformative hypothesis by adopting an integrative approach to
assess the individual components of holobiont metabolism (i.e., microbial
symbionts and sponge host) in ten of the most common sponge species in the
Caribbean. The investigators will isolate autotrophic and heterotrophic
metabolic pathways and explore potential links between microbial symbiont
community composition and the assimilation of particulate and dissolved organic
matter (POM and DOM) from seawater. This project will elucidate whether
Caribbean sponge species are on similar or divergent evolutionary trajectories,
and will provide information that is critical for our understanding of how
conditions in the Caribbean basin have shaped the evolution of benthic
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.