* 1756517
* Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT): 2018-2023
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 9,029,111.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT):
2018-2023&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic long-term (greater than a few decades
in length) time-series observations of aquatic and terrestrial environments have
led to a more comprehensive understanding of the natural ecosystem variability
and have enabled an assessment of human impacts on ecosystem dynamics. Because
of their ability to store and transport large amounts of heat and to absorb
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, the world's oceans play a critical role in
modulating environmental conditions for the sustained well-being of both land-
based and marine organisms including humans. Despite their recognized scientific
and societal importance, long-term records of key ocean processes are rare. In
1988, two ocean time-series programs were established: one in the North Atlantic
near Bermuda and the other, the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) program, near
Hawaii. For the past three decades, teams of scientists based at the University
of Hawaii have made critical measurements of the 'state of our sea.' These long-
term observations have established a baseline against which future states can be
compared. The ship-based HOT program complements other diverse ocean observation
programs including remote-sensing via satellites, moored buoys, profiling
floats, and autonomous underwater vehicles. All HOT program data are publicly
available and are frequently used by researchers and policy makers around the
world. Education, outreach, and training will continue to play prominent roles
in the HOT program. HOT provides a unique teaching and learning platform for
high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students and teachers
from Hawaii and around the world. The frequent cruises provide opportunities for
students to gain first-hand exposure to ocean research. In addition, HOT is a
community resource that helps to support the efforts of numerous scientists
worldwide who rely on the program's infrastructure (ship time, staff,
laboratories, equipment) to conduct their own research, education, and outreach
activities. HOT program data are also widely used in classrooms and appear in
textbooks on ocean science. These sustained, interdisciplinary measurements are
crucial for the validation of models that seek to predict global environmental
change and its impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
mission of HOT is to investigate temporal dynamics in the cycling of carbon (C)
and associated bioelements, and to observe the variability of hydrographical and
ecological properties, heat fluxes, and circulation of the North Pacific
Subtropical Gyre (NPSG), one of the largest biomes on Earth. The proposed
research will rely on shipboard measurements and deployments of in situ arrays
conducted on 10 separate 5-day expeditions per annum, observations from a fleet
of remotely operated vehicles, near-continuous moored platform measurements, and
deep-moored sediment traps. These diverse modes of observation, in conjunction
with the extant HOT database, will document variability in ocean properties and
processes over time scales ranging from diel to decadal. This project maintains
the high quality suite of biogeochemical and physical measurements required for
the assessment of ocean C and nutrient pools and fluxes, plankton community
structure, ecosystem productivity, and inherent optical properties of the water
column. Extending the length of program observations by an additional five years
improves the value of the data sets for deciphering how low-frequency natural
and anthropogenic signals influence ecosystem structure in the NPSG. The HOT
site is one of only a few in the world where sustained air-sea carbon dioxide
flux, primary production, export fluxes, upper ocean physical data, and
meteorological observations are routinely made. Such efforts continue to aid on-
going modeling efforts required for predicting how future habitat perturbations
may influence ecosystem dynamics in the NPSG and are crucial for the validation
of models that seek to predict global environmental change and its impact on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.