* 1756049
* The Role of Raw Material Control in the Development of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Charles Knight, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 107,984.00

Dr. Charles Knight, of the University of Vermont, will conduct archaeological
research to investigate how the extraction of an important, widely used raw
material was organized and who may have benefited from the control over its
extraction and processing at local and regional scales. Much like any system of
resource extraction (e.g. oil and natural gas, minerals, precious gems) there is
the opportunity for accumulating great wealth and power by controlling the
production, distribution, and consumption of a highly sought after raw material.
Obsidian, a widely used volcanic glass, was the principal material used for all
cutting, scraping, and piercing tools for over three millennia throughout pre-
Hispanic central Mexico. However, previous archaeological studies into obsidian
political economies have focused on the systems of obsidian distribution and
consumption, due to the types of sites investigated, ignoring the initial
systems of extraction and production. As a result, the means by which resource
distribution networks develop and how commodity production is connected to
consuming populations is poorly understood. Likewise, the details of how
economically and political centralized polities might gain from their control
over such resources and the nature of that control have not been vigorously
researched. Since raw material quarrying was common throughout the ancient
world, the questions addressed in this study have universal applicability, while
the methodology can be replicable across the globe in similar
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Knight and his research team will examine
whether obsidian extraction was the result of centralized control by a regional
polity, or organized by local populations asserting their territorial rights to
the land. Obsidian from the Zaragoza-Oyameles source in eastern Puebla, Mexico
dominates chipped stone assemblages at sites throughout much of south eastern
Mexico from ca. 400 B.C. to A.D. 1000, and is found in lesser amounts well
beyond this region. The ancient, regional center of Cantona may have had its
economic clout underwritten by its control over this obsidian source. However,
the nature of that control has never been investigated or even modeled. The data
collected by Knight and his team of archaeologists, osteologists and faunal
experts from broad-scaled excavations at the Zaragoza-Oyameles obsidian quarries
and associated habitation sites, will directly address the assumption of
political and economic control. Utilizing the strengths of several disciplines,
they will reconstruct who and how many were involved in obsidian extraction, the
methods used to quarry the material, what types of tools were produced and in
what quantity, and the nature and degree to which obsidian extraction and
production benefited local inhabitants, as opposed to, and/or in addition to the
Cantona elite. Since archaeological investigations of quarries are relatively
rare, the interdisciplinary approaches developed here can be used universally as
a template for future research and student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.