* 1756381
* Collaborative Research: Pattern and process in the abundance and recruitment of Caribbean octocorals
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Howard Lasker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,138,175.00

Coral reefs are exposed to a diversity of natural and anthropogenic
disturbances, and the consequences for ecosystem degradation have been widely
publicized. However, the reported changes have been biased towards fishes and
stony corals, and for Caribbean reefs, the most notable example of this bias are
octocorals ("soft corals"). Although they are abundant and dominate many
Caribbean reefs, they are rarely included in studies due to the difficulty of
both identifying them and in quantifying their abundances. In some places there
is compelling evidence that soft corals have increased in abundance, even while
stony corals have become less common. This suggests that soft corals are more
resilient than stony corals to the wide diversity of disturbances that have been
impacting coral corals. The best coral reefs on which to study these changes are
those that have been studied for decades and can provide a decadal context to
more recent events, and in this regard the reefs of St. John, US Virgin Islands
are unique. Stony corals on the reefs have been studied since 1987, and the soft
corals from 2014. This provides unrivaled platform to evaluate patterns of
octocoral abundance and recruitment; identify the patterns of change that are
occurring on these reefs, and identify the processes responsible for the
resilience of octocoral populations. The project will extend soft coral
monitoring from 4 years to 8 years, and within this framework will examine the
roles of baby corals, and their response to seafloor roughness, seawater flow,
and seaweed, in determining the success of soft corals. The work will also
assess whether the destructive effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria have
modified the pattern of change. In concert with these efforts the project will
be closely integrated with local high schools at which the investigators will
host marine biology clubs and provide independent study opportunities for their
students and teachers. Unique training opportunities will be provided to
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral researcher, all
of whom will study and work in St. John, and the investigators will train coral
reef researchers to identify the species of soft corals through a hands-on
workshop to be conducted in the Florida Keys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how changing environmental conditions will affect the community structure of
major biomes is the ecological objective defining the 21st century. The holistic
effects of these conditions on coral reefs will be studied on shallow reefs
within the Virgin Islands National Park in St. John, US Virgin Islands, which is
the site of one of the longest-running, long-term studies of coral reef
community dynamics in the region. With NSF-LTREB support, the investigators have
been studying long-term changes in stony coral communities in this location
since 1987, and in 2014 NSF-OCE support was used to build an octocoral "overlay"
to this decadal perspective. The present project extends from this unique
history, which has been punctuated by the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria,
to place octocoral synecology in a decadal context, and the investigators
exploit a rich suite of legacy data to better understand the present and
immediate future of Caribbean coral reefs. This four-year project will advance
on two concurrent fronts: first, to extend time-series analyses of octocoral
communities from four to eight years to characterize the pattern and pace of
change in community structure, and second, to conduct a program of hypothesis-
driven experiments focused on octocoral settlement that will uncover the
mechanisms allowing octocorals to more effectively colonize substrata than
scleractinian corals on present day reefs. Specifically, the investigators will
conduct mensurative and manipulative experiments addressing four hypotheses
focusing on the roles of: (1) habitat complexity in distinguishing between
octocoral and scleractinian recruitment niches, (2) the recruitment niche in
mediating post-settlement success, (3) competition in algal turf and macroalgae
in determining the success of octocoral and scleractian recruits, and (4) role
of octocoral canopies in modulating the flux of particles and larvae to the
seafloor beneath. The results of this study will be integrated to evaluate the
factors driving higher ecological resilience of octocorals versus scleractinians
on present-day Caribbean reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.