* 1756691
* SBP: Network Connections in Formal Hiring Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Catherine Albiston, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 709,515.00

This project looks at how network effects may bias the apparent qualifications
of applicants and thereby may affect hiring outcomes. It goes beyond, therefore,
well-known direct effects of attributes of applicants irrelevant to their merit
on hiring processes. This project looks at specific demographic attributes in
the STEM faculty hiring process at the University of California, but the results
will apply to hiring more broadly, both within and outside of the academy.
Finding the hypothesized effect of networks will constitute an important advance
because this is a hidden source of bias that would be present even if more
direct biases could be eliminated. Results of the study will have clear
implications for hiring practices that will help to make hiring in STEM more
meritocratic and, therefore, broaden participation in STEM. This project was
supported jointly by the Education and Human Resources Core Research Program,
the Sociology Program, and Science of Broadening
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study develops indicators of individual-
level network connections among actors involved in STEM faculty hiring processes
at research intensive universities. It uses these data to test hypotheses about
the influence of network connections on hiring processes and how networks work
to reinforce inequalities by key demographic attributes in the academic labor
market. To accomplish these goals the researchers will enhance the Evaluating
Equity in Faculty Recruitment (EEFR) data, which includes detailed measures of
the faculty hiring process, by adding multiple measures of the person-to-person
ties between individuals involved in the faculty hiring processes. Three kinds
of individual-level network connections between the actors in the hiring network
are measured, those indicated by co-authorship relationships, by direct citation
of scholar's work, and by indirect citation, i.e., the extent to which the
authors cite similar bodies of literature. Multivariate statistical analyses
examine the effects of network connections in formal hiring processes by testing
the presence, extent, and correlates of differences by demographic attribute in
professional networks and by identifying the influence of network connections on
individual outcomes in STEM faculty hiring. The result will be the first
systematic analysis of how inequalities according to demographic attribute are
influenced by network connections in the STEM faculty hiring
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.