* 1756665
* NSFGEO-NERC Caldera-forming eruption-generated tsunamis
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Annette Grilli, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 488,653.00

Tsunamis create major geohazards for populated coastal areas, whose mitigation
requires understanding of the generation mechanisms. Numerical models of tsunami
generation and propagations are used in support of warning systems and for the
creation of inundation maps for hazard assessment. Tsunamis can be attributed to
seismic (i.e., earthquakes and submarine landslides) or non-seismic sources
(i.e., volcanic eruptions). The latter are prevalent in some areas around the
world (e.g., Aleutian arc for US West Coast). Our understanding of tsunami
generation from mechanisms such as earthquakes, landslides, and volcanic
collapse, has largely resulted from devastating events (e.g., Papua New Guinea,
1998; Indian Ocean, 2004; Japan, 2011), which combined have caused over 300,000
fatalities and US $30B of damage. Due to lack of a major recent event, eruption
generated tsunamis (the focus of this study) remain largely under-studied. In
this multi-disciplinary study, the US/UK team will perform collaborative field
and modeling research, to improve our understanding of tsunamis generated by
volcanic eruptions, especially those from large-volume, caldera-forming events
close to the sea, which are among the most devastating geohazards. Work will
focus on the 1883 Krakatau eruption-generated tsunami, which caused over 33,000
fatalities in Indonesia. Although this eruption was well studied, there is still
controversy over the tsunami generation mechanism and, since 1883, apart from a
surge of interest during its 100-year anniversary, there has been little new
data, which would be a basis for a major project on the event. The new
understanding/modeling resulting from this project will improve tsunami hazard
assessment and warning from such sources, and could improve operational tsunami
hazard assessment and inundation mapping work as tsunami warning systems for
non-seismic sources with significant implication in population safety. Project
results will be disseminated to the scientific and broader communities at
professional conferences, in peer-reviewed journals, by building an extensive
website (with project metadata, news, podcasts/videos, and auxiliary
information), and through the visualization of scientific data (targeting a K-12
audience). A workshop will be organized in Indonesia at the outset to engage
local people and scientists (support from Newton funds is being sought). There
will be active collaboration with colleagues at Greek/Caribbean/Mediterranean-
based institutions/organizations, facing similar eruption-tsunami
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a large-volume, caldera-forming event Krakatau is
representative of similar other well studied historical events (e.g., 3500BP
Santorini and 7500BP Kikai), and includes diverse tsunami generating mechanisms:
pyroclastic density current (PDC) discharges into the sea, caldera collapse, and
explosions. It also has an exceptional eruption and tsunami record from
observations at the time. The objectives of the study are to: 1) apply improved
numerical models of tsunamis from volcanic eruption mechanisms (including
seafloor deposits), mainly PDC and caldera collapse; 2) perform new field
surveys of on land tsunami sediment deposits, to discriminate individual tsunami
events and their impact; 3) perform new PDC field surveys, complementing a pilot
offshore seismic database showing that individual PDC flows can be identified
and mapped, and their runouts and volumes estimated; 4) use these estimates to
understand physical properties of PDCs as they enter the sea; and 5) use the new
data (sediment, PDC) as a basis for applying the new numerical tsunami models.
Tsunami simulations will be carried out iteratively by comparing model outputs
(inundation limits, runups; PDC deposits/runouts) with historical documentation
of impacted areas along the coasts of Sumatra and Java, and both old and newly
acquired PDC and sediment deposit field survey data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.