* 1756065
* Imaging the Effects of Psychosocial Stress on Cognitive Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Elizabeth Tricomi, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 408,699.00

Stress and evaluations of performance are commonplace in domains such as
education, yet&lt;br/&gt;surprisingly little research in humans has investigated
the effects of stress on cognition. Although&lt;br/&gt;academic success is often
attributed to innate ability, how individuals respond to situational factors,
such&lt;br/&gt;as stress, may have an even greater influence on cognitive
performance. Thus, it is particularly important&lt;br/&gt;to investigate how
stress influences the neural processes supporting cognitive performance.
Research&lt;br/&gt;suggests that too much stress may cause an increase in
distraction and an accompanying shift away from&lt;br/&gt;engagement of the
brain's cognitive control network (CCN), which guides attention outwardly toward
the&lt;br/&gt;task, toward greater engagement of the default mode network (DMN),
which guides attention inwardly. As&lt;br/&gt;cognitive control is often
required to maintain high performance, especially on difficult tasks, this shift
may&lt;br/&gt;result in a decrease in task performance. The project will
investigate how stress affects levels of the stress&lt;br/&gt;hormone cortisol
as well as brain activity in the CCN and DMN during the performance of a
difficult task&lt;br/&gt;requiring cognitive control. The research is important
because it may identify neural mechanisms by which&lt;br/&gt;stress may prevent
students from performing to their potential. This information may aid in
effectively&lt;br/&gt;developing approaches to minimize the negative impact of
stress on cognitive performance. Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in scientific
research, as&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers-Newark is consistently rated as having the most
diverse undergraduate population in the nation.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, through
an established program at Rutgers-Newark, local high school students
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority groups will assist with the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines physiological measurements
of the stress hormone cortisol with functional&lt;br/&gt;magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to investigate how psychosocial stress influences cognitive
control&lt;br/&gt;processes and task performance. We aim to determine the
effects of the Trier Social Stress Test, a known&lt;br/&gt;psychosocial stressor
involving social-evaluative threat that reliably elevates cortisol release, on
task&lt;br/&gt;performance and brain network engagement during a Go/No-Go task.
This task is ideal because it requires&lt;br/&gt;cognitive control and sustained
attention, and distraction leads to a suboptimal response. The
project&lt;br/&gt;combines levels of analysis to provide links between the
cognitive, physiological, and neural effects of&lt;br/&gt;stress. By
investigating the relationship between psychosocial stress and the engagement of
DMN and&lt;br/&gt;CCN, this research will provide important insights into how
factors other than intelligence, such as how a&lt;br/&gt;potentially stressful
event is experienced, drive the brain processes that determine cognitive
performance&lt;br/&gt;and academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.