* 1756768
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Civil Asset Forfeiture, Urban Policing, and Criminal Justice Reform
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Jackson Smith, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 10,230.00

For scholars evaluating the efficacy of legal reform initiatives around the
nation, Philadelphia's criminal justice system has been at the center of several
important debates. This debate is motivated by the city's history of law
enforcement policies and practices that disproportionately impact residents
living in various neighborhoods. Nowhere is this geographic pattern more visible
than in the practice of civil asset forfeiture between 2000 and 2015. This
particular practice permits law enforcement agencies to seize assets from people
suspected of crimes and to use those assets to fund further police work. In this
manner, civil forfeiture is consistent with other criminal justice practices,
such as cash bail, that may pose financial consequences even for those
defendants who are not convicted of crimes. Noting that forfeiture has taken
place almost exclusively in the city's poorest neighborhoods, this research,
which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection
and analysis, asks how police and prosecutorial agencies in Philadelphia make
decisions about the seizure of cash and property. What criteria is used to
determine whether or not an asset is forfeitable? What impact does this practice
have on the everyday financial wellbeing of Philadelphians? The data collected
through this research will be instructive to those debating new criminal justice
policies. It will also advance new social scientific understandings of how the
criminal justice system intersects with financial wellbeing in low-income
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Jackson Smith, under the supervision of Dr.
Michael Ralph of New York University, will explore the impact of civil asset
forfeiture on criminal justice and policing in urban communities. Situating this
research in Philadelphia is especially timely given the progress of criminal
justice reform efforts there. It was widely used by the city between 2000 and
2015, and is not likely to continue under the leadership of the new district
attorney. The city is also currently undertaking a multi-year initiative to
reduce its incarcerated population, which had been the highest among the U.S.'s
ten largest cities. Because of this, Philadelphia represents an ideal laboratory
for testing the hypothesis that that civil asset forfeiture institutionalizes
socioeconomic differences. This research will utilize a rich set of
interdisciplinary methods, including ethnography, archival research, and GIS
visualization, to chart the recent history of these criminal justice issues,
geographically visualize the impacts of policing throughout the city, and
appraise the early achievements of criminal justice reform. Research will
include a systematic review of court records documenting the city's use of
forfeiture prior to 2015, as well as interviews with stakeholders to illuminate
the challenges and successes of recent reforms. This research will advance a
more holistic and integrated understanding of the criminal justice system by
focusing on how it shapes financial wellbeing. In doing so, it will also offer
timely insight into proposals for criminal justice
reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.