* 1756223
* Collaborative Research: Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic-the Irminger and Iceland Basins
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 274,536.00

Variability in the transport of heat, freshwater and mass in the North Atlantic
has been linked to a number of societally relevant factors including sea level
change, the melting of sea and glacial ice, and anthropogenic carbon storage in
the deep ocean. However, the current understanding of the drivers of such
changes is limited, making an investigation of overturning in the Sub-polar
region a key ocean research priority. This field program explicitly addresses
this gap. Furthermore, by engaging the larger international community studying
the North Atlantic, Overturning in the Sub-polar North Atlantic Program (OSNAP)
is playing a key role in catalyzing scientific progress by promoting
international collaborations, synthesis, and the sharing of resources and by
training future generations. Key to the latter is a network of early career
scientists whose professional growth will continue to be facilitated through
targeted activities that have been tested and improved during OSNAP's initial
phase. Graduate students and post-docs will be trained in seagoing operations
and in the processing and analysis of observational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this field project, in
conjunction with other measurements in the North Atlantic, is to establish
determination of the linkage between intermediate and deep water formation and
the overturning circulation--a connection that is present in climate models, but
has yet to be observed. This project will also provide the first comprehensive
view of spreading pathways for the deep waters in the Sub-polar basin. Starting
in 2014, the US-led international project, Overturning in the Sub-polar North
Atlantic Program (OSNAP), provides a continuous record of the full-water column,
trans-basin fluxes of heat, mass and freshwater in the Sub-polar North Atlantic,
in partnership with the UK, Netherlands, Canada, Germany and China. Data from
the first 21 months of the full OSNAP observing system has been used to produce
an initial time series of the meridional overturning, heat and freshwater fluxes
for the Sub-polar basin. These preliminary results reveal a highly variable
overturning in the basin, interior pathways for overflow waters, surprisingly
energetic boundary current systems on timescales from days to months, and a
strong overflow plume in the Iceland Basin. The additional two years of OSNAP
observations will cover a time frame sufficient to make comparisons with other
overturning time series and optimize the OSNAP measurement system--all necessary
tasks prior to a request for longer term measurements. This component of OSNAP
(OSNAP East) is for the eastern array between Greenland and Scotland in
coordination with the UK and the Netherlands. The US contribution includes the
East Greenland inshore and offshore arrays, the Iceland Basin array, and the
integration of all OSNAP measurements. The sub-goal for OSNAP East is to
quantify the structure and transport of the boundary currents off the east coast
of Greenland and within the Iceland Basin, as well as determine their
variability and forcing mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.