* 1756816
* Collaborative Research: Diatoms, Food Webs and Carbon Export - Leveraging NASA EXPORTS to Test the Role of Diatom Physiology in the Biological Carbon Pump
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Bethany Jenkins, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 724,796.00

This project focuses on a group of microscopic single-celled photosynthetic
organisms in the ocean called diatoms. Diatoms float in the surface ocean as
part of a group of organisms collectively called phytoplankton. There are
thousands of different species of diatoms distributed across the global ocean. A
famous oceanographer Henry Bigelow once said "All fish is diatoms" reflecting
the importance of diatoms as the base of the food chain that supports the
world's largest fisheries. Despite their small size, diatom photosynthesis
produces 20% of the oxygen on earth each year. That's more than all of the
tropical rain forests on land. The major objective of the research is to
understand how the metabolic differences among diatom species affects the amount
of diatom organic carbon that is carried, or exported, from the surface ocean to
the deep ocean. As diatoms are photo-synthesizers like green plants, their
biological carbon comes from converting carbon dioxide dissolved in seawater
from the atmosphere into organic forms. Diatoms also require a series of other
nurtrients supplied by the ocean such as nitrogen and phosphorous and, uniquely
for diatoms, the silicon used to construct their glass shells. This research
will investigate how genetic and physiological differences among diatoms
influence how each species react to changes in nutrient levels in the ocean and
how those shifts affect the export of diatom carbon to the deep sea. The link
between diatoms' physiological response and their carbon export comes about
because shifts in physiology affect diatom attributes like how fast they sink
and how tasty they are to predators. So if we can relate the physiological
condition of different diatoms to the food-web pathways followed by different
species, we can ultimately use knowledge of diatom physiological status and food
web structure to predict how much diatom carbon gets to the deep sea. The
research involves investigators with expertise in the physiology and genomics of
diatoms and in the ocean's chemistry. The work will initially take place in the
subarctic North Pacific in conjunction with the NASA Export Processes in the
Ocean from RemoTe Sensing (EXPORTS) field program. The EXPORTS program is using
a wide variety of methods to quantify the export and fate of photo-synthetically
fixed carbon in the upper ocean. The research supports the training of
undergraduate students, graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar. The
research will also serve as the basis for activities aimed at K-12 and junior
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will broadly impact our
understanding of the biology of the biological pump (the transport of photo-
synthetically fixed organic carbon to the deep sea) by forming a mechanistic
basis for predicting the export of diatom carbon. It is hypothesized that the
type and degree of diatom physiological stress are vital aspects of ecosystem
state that drive export. To test this hypothesis, the genetic composition, rates
of nutrient use and growth response of diatom communities will be evaluated and
supported with measurements of silicon and iron stress to evaluate stress as a
predictor of the path of diatom carbon export. The subarctic N. Pacific
ecosystem is characterized as high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC) due to low
iron (Fe) levels that are primary controllers constraining phytoplankton
utilization of other nutrients. It has been a paradigm in low Fe, HNLC systems
that diatoms grow at elevated Si:C and Si:N ratios and should be efficiently
exported as particles significantly enriched in Si relative to C. However, Fe
limitation also alters diatoms species composition and the high Si demand
imposed by low Fe can drive HNLC regions to Si limitation or Si/Fe co-
limitation. Thus, the degree of Si and/or Fe stress in HNLC waters can all alter
diatom taxonomic composition, the elemental composition of diatom cells, and the
path cells follow through the food web ultimately altering diatom carbon
export.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.