* 1756089
* Determining the neurons and neuromodulatory pathways underlying the prefrontal control of visual signals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Behrad Noudoost, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 107,656.00

Attention is the means by which we focus on behaviorally relevant information,
to select and enhance a subset of sensory information for further processing
while ignoring the rest. Several decades of research have implicated the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the control of attention. Previous studies have
showed that the manipulation of DA-mediated activity within the frontal eye
field (FEF) part of PFC enhances the strength of signals in visual areas,
raising the hypothesis that prefrontal control of attention is mediated by the
actions of DA within the FEF. With support from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Noudoost and colleagues will pair electrophysiological recordings with local
pharmacological manipulation of neural activity to reveal the neural mechanisms
underlying DA's contribution to attention. One set of experiments will determine
the functional characteristics of prefrontal neurons involved in the control of
attention and visual signals. Using an improved technique, the prefrontal
neurons projecting to visual areas will be identified, the content of their
outgoing signal will be characterized, and the impact of this signal on
representations in visual areas will be determined. A second set of experiments
will use local pharmacological manipulations to directly examine the sufficiency
of FEF DA to produce the perceptual and neural enhancements due to attention.
Collectively, the proposed experiments aim to determine the neurons,
neuromodulators, and interactions between prefrontal and visual cortices that
underlie the flexible allocation of neural resources according to task demands;
such an understanding will provide insight into how changes in these processes
underlie the attentional deficits seen in mental illnesses, potentially
indicating new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
imbalance in PFC dopamine (DA) has long been a suspect in the etiology of
attentional impairments in mental illnesses such as attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, and dopaminergic drugs have played a central role in the
treatment of these attentional impairments. A better understanding of the basic
neural mechanisms underlying these processes will ultimately help develop
diagnostics and treatments improving the well-being of affected individuals.
Part of this proposal involves hardware development in collaboration with
Neuralynx Company, which is located near the lab and is one of the foremost
companies in data acquisition and signal processing industry, thus fostering a
partnership between industry and academia for developing new tools and enabling
new experimental techniques. Through the support of the National Science
Foundation, three female scientists will be trained by the PI in cutting-edge
neurophysiological research techniques and data analysis. They will also have
the opportunity to publish their research in top tier academic journals, and
present their research to colleagues at national and international conferences.
The PI and colleagues will also present the results of this research in public
presentations at the university, and widely advertised to the entire
undergraduate population, thereby raising public awareness of and appreciation
for scientific research. Attention is critical for learning, and thus a better
understanding of the mechanisms of attention can also guide educational
professionals toward more effective pedagogic approaches.