* 1756682
* Collaborative Research: Examining the links between Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation and Atlantic Multidecadal Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Alexey Fedorov, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 288,528.00

It is well recognized that the meridional overturning circulation in the
Atlantic Ocean (referred to as the AMOC) is an important factor controlling
ocean heat transport in the North Atlantic, changes in this transport can affect
ocean surface temperatures, atmospheric circulation and hence climate. Another
notable feature of the North Atlantic seen in observations and models is the
pronounced, spatially coherent, variability in the North Atlantic sea surface
temperatures on decadal to multi-decadal timescales referred to as Atlantic
Multidecadal Variability (AMV). With a typical periodicity of about 50 years,
the AMV sea surface temperature variability impacts key climate characteristics,
ranging from precipitation to tropical cyclone activity. The extent to which
AMOC variability and the AMV are independent, and to which the latter reflects
the former, remains hotly debated. One difficulty in resolving this debate is
the short duration of available observations; another is that across the models,
AMOC variability, including its periodicity, amplitude, and effect on SST,
varies broadly. Accordingly, the main objective of this project is to establish
the robust mechanisms of AMOC variability and its connection with the AMV, and
at the same time to systematically explore the causes of these inter-model
differences. This is of strong practical value as the AMOC is shown to be the
most predictable component of the climate system on decadal timescales -
progress in decadal prediction requires a better understanding of AMOC
variability and its impacts. Funding from this grant will support the career
growth of a female early career scientist, a graduate and undergraduate student
and two postdoctoral associates. The project will enhance the climate modeling
capacity by graduate and undergraduate students at both George Mason and Yale,
and will facilitate the exchange of expertise between the two universities. This
project will support several educational broader impacts including participation
in GMU's Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship Program, benefiting high-school
students and undergrads, public lectures and Teacher Development workshops at
the Peabody Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
modeling proposal to study decadal to multi-decadal variability of the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and its effect on climate in the North
Atlantic, specifically on AMV, also referred to as the Atlantic Multidecadal
Oscillation (AMO). The core approach lies in exciting or isolating AMOC internal
modes and assessing their contribution to the AMV. The project will include
several interrelated components: (i) Multi-decadal numerical experiments using
several global climate models selected to represent inter-model differences in
AMOC characteristics, in which we will excite AMOC variations by prescribing
specifically chosen initial conditions - oceanic optimal initial perturbations
in temperature or salinity. (ii) An analysis of the CMIP5 dataset focusing on
AMOC internal modes and their effect on the AMV. (iii) A complementary analysis
of an ocean eddy-resolving climate simulation. (iv) Observational analysis
identifying periods of possible AMOC mode activity that we will then simulate
with decadal reforecast experiments initialized by different ocean reanalysis
products, thereby testing the impact of ocean state on the decadal evolution of
the North Atlantic SST anomalies and the AMV. Throughout these analyses the
properties of AMOC internal modes and the links between the AMOC and AMV will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.