* 1756617
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Socioeconomic and Cultural Variation of Neurotrauma Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Rebecca Seligman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 8,587.00

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), or neurotrauma, is a disruption in brain function
caused by a blow or jolt to the head that can produce a wide range of physical,
cognitive, and psychosocial aftereffects. TBI also represents a critical global
health issue with high personal, societal, and economic costs to patients,
caregivers, and communities as a whole. Although global health officials have
recognized TBI as "silent epidemic," public health approaches have seldom paid
attention to the specific cultural and socioeconomic circumstances of this
injury. In particular, understandings of life after trauma may vary across
cultural contexts, with potentially powerful implications for TBI care within
and outside clinical settings. This project, which trains a student in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, asks how TBI
patients and their families engage popular and medical framings about injury,
and how societal and medical understandings of brain injury are differentially
affected by constraints of public care and new perspectives on mind and brain.
In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in
anthropology, the project would enhance scientific understanding by broadly
disseminating its findings to organizations and institutions invested in
ameliorating the social and medical costs associated with traumatic brain
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research supported by this award, doctoral
student Livia Garofalo, under the supervision and guidance of Dr. Rebecca
Seligman, will investigate how Traumatic Brain Injury is cared for and
experienced in a context of high TBI incidence, healthcare shortage, and
increased attention towards neurological conditions. Through ethnographic
research in public hospitals in the greater Buenos Aires area, the researcher
will collect data through participant observation in clinical spaces and semi-
structured interviews with patients, caregivers, and medical professionals, and
conduct archival and media research. Triangulating this data will provide an
assessment of the socioeconomic and political circumstances in which brain
injury occurs, as well as the repercussions of neurotrauma at a broader societal
level in the Argentine context. Buenos Aires, in particular, provides an apt
site to investigate these issues as a large metropolitan area with a high influx
of patients, thus providing a model for other dense and highly unequal urban
contexts in the United States. Twelve months of ethnographic research will be
conducted at two different hospitals with trauma centers, and their surrounding
communities. Data will be collected through participant observation, interviews,
and case studies and clinical histories, with medical professionals, TBI
caregivers and their families, and TBI patients, with appropriate stratification
based on age, gender, class, education, and hospital affiliation. Contributing
to interdisciplinary conversations between cultural anthropology, science and
technology studies, and global health, findings from this research will offer a
multi-level anthropological perspective on how TBI incidence is stratified along
socioeconomic lines, how emerging notions of "brain health" affect the attention
towards brain injury, and how access to care is crucial for marginalized
individuals and families to rebuild lives after
trauma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.