* 1756756
* Cybersecurity and Organizational Science Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Reeshad Dalal, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,995.00

Cyber threats to organizational networks have become increasingly common, and
demanded the need for a robust scientific literature devoted to the
organizational science aspects of cybersecurity. To facilitate the development
of such a literature, the proposed workshop will bring together researchers,
practitioners, and policymakers in organizational science and cybersecurity.
This workshop will facilitate interdisciplinary integration by: (1) targeting
leading experts in core organizational science topic areas who also have
interests in cybersecurity; (2) connecting these experts to cybersecurity
researchers, practitioners, and policymakers who also have interests in
organizational science; (3) hosting presentations at the intersection of
organizational science and cybersecurity; (4) breaking through disciplinary
barriers to knowledge generation; and (5) developing a concrete agenda for
future research. Space in the workshop will be reserved for graduate students
from groups underrepresented in cybersecurity and the organizational sciences.
To build the overall research capacity of the community, space will also be
reserved for faculty from local, non-research-intensive universities. These
products from the workshop will be disseminated to a wide variety of
stakeholders, so as to inform public policy and enhance national security.

The proposed interdisciplinary workshop addresses the human aspect of
cybersecurity in organizational settings, focusing both on employees with
cybersecurity-relevant jobs (e.g., analysts working in Security Operations
Centers) and the end-users of technology (i.e., essentially all employees in the
organization). Workshop attendees will include organizational science
researchers and practitioners who study topics relevant to cybersecurity at the
micro (e.g., individual employee or end-user), meso (e.g., team or multiteam
system), and macro (e.g., organization or country) levels of analysis, along
with cybersecurity researchers, practitioners, and policymakers. The absence of
direct communication between the organizational sciences and cybersecurity has
arguably harmed both fields, and so the workshop will focus on cross-
pollination, identification of roadblocks, and the joint development of a future
agenda. To that end, the workshop will include keynote presentations (targeted
at various levels of analysis), interdisciplinary reactions to keynote
presentations, panel discussions, information sharing exercises, breakout groups
on specific interdisciplinary topics (e.g., insider threat, collaboration in
multiteam systems), and semi-structured networking opportunities. The workshop
aims to identify and overcome barriers to collaboration between the
organizational sciences and cybersecurity, identify avenues for external funding
as well as various publication outlets for research at the intersection of the
two disciplines (e.g., high-impact organizational science journals, high-impact
cybersecurity journals, ?translational? outlets aimed at disseminating
organizational science research to cybersecurity policymakers and managers), and
develop a concrete agenda for future interdisciplinary research. Deliverables
from the workshop will include: (1) a website containing the workshop program,
speakers? (and other attendees?) names and biographical information, background
reading on the organizational sciences and cybersecurity, and copies of workshop
presentations; (2) an overall technical report (also made available on the
workshop website) delineating the conclusions, recommendations, and research
agenda generated during the workshop; and (3) a press release and a flier
containing information and a link to the overall report.