* 1756276
* CSBR:  Natural History: Expansion and Curatorial Support of the T.M. Sperry Herbarium at Pittsburg State University to Enhance Teaching, Research and Outreach in the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Neil Snow, Pittsburg State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 307,203.00

The Theodore M. Sperry Herbarium at Pittsburg State University houses
approximately 65,000 specimens of plants, which help document the relatively
rich plant diversity of southeast Kansas and adjacent areas. It is the third
largest herbarium in Kansas and a seat of active research in plant systematics
regionally and globally. The herbarium has fully implemented modern curatorial
standards in the past five years and involved students in all aspects of this
transition, including curatorial techniques such as specimen preparation, data
basing, and digital imaging. The newly created Kansas and Regional Reference
Collection is a stand-apart collection used to expedite and confirm tentative
identification of specimens by students and other users of the herbarium. The
Sperry Herbarium also houses important historical collections of past curators,
voucher specimens of previous regional, national and international research
projects, and research material of the present curator. Specimen usage
internally and externally has increased in recent years following internal
efforts to digitize information. The availability of data online significantly
augments the value of specimens for current and future uses in systematics,
ecology, land-use management, and other disciplines that rely on the
distributional data of plants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project provides
support for infrastructure upgrades and expansion for the T.M. Sperry Herbarium.
The acquisition of 67 new full and 12 half-sized herbarium cabinets will expand
its specimen capacity significantly, enhance the long-term security and
preservation of collections, and allow for moderate but sustained expansion for
approximately thirty years. It also supports moving the Sperry Herbarium next
door to the Hartman Building into a larger and more suitable location, which
will increase overall workspace and enhance work-flow efficiencies. The project
plant includes data basing, georeferencing, and digital imaging of specimens and
the accessibility of all data online through the NSF-funded iDigBio project
(idigbio.org) and other portals such as The Consortium of Northern Great Plains
Herbaria. Support for student training includes funding for a Masters student
and four undergraduate students to assist with curation and move of the
herbarium to its new facilities. As a regional state-supported rural university,
Pittsburg State University serves many first-generation college students and
many from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Overall, the project will
significantly enhance teaching, research, and outreach of the T.M. Sperry
Herbarium and provide numerous experiential learning opportunities in one of the
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.