* 1756863
* The Dynamics behind Subinertial Variability along the Southeast Greenland Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas Haine, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 401,410.00

Oceanic circulation along the southeast Greenland coast has climate impacts of
global significance. The spillage of dense water over the Denmark Strait sill
into the main North Atlantic basin, contributes to a global circulation that
distributes heat over the globe. In addition, warm water from the deep Atlantic
basin intrudes into the cold fjords along the Greenland coast, where it melts
glaciers and thus contributes to global sea level rise and potentially to
changes in the regional ocean circulation. The intensity of these flows varies
with a frequency of several days and the cause of this variability is not known.
The main goal of this project is to determine the underlying dynamics causing
this variability, and specifically the role played by waves known as coastal-
trapped waves. Shedding light on what causes this dominant mode of variability,
this work will aid to improve climate predictions and help design observational
monitoring programs in the region. The results from this work will benefit
physical oceanographers and climate scientists, as it will provide a fundamental
understanding of variability in key climatic processes operating in Greenland.
The project will support a female early career scientist, the training of a
graduate student in numerical ocean modeling, and undergraduate student
education through the development of individual research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mid-depth and deep exchange flows along the southeast
Greenland coast play a key role in the global climate system. Recent
observational evidence of two such exchange flows (the deep Denmark Strait
Overflow and fjord-shelf exchange in the mid-depth range) suggests that they are
both governed by sub-inertial variability (time scale of several days).
Furthermore, our preliminary results suggest that variability in the Denmark
Strait Overflow and fjord-shelf exchange along the southeast Greenland coast are
connected, which leads us to propose that they should be studied holistically.
Despite sub-inertial variations being ubiquitous along the southeast Greenland
coast, the underlying dynamics of these variations are not clear. We hypothesize
that they are the imprint of coastal-trapped waves, and will study their
properties, forcing mechanisms and impact on exchange flows using a combination
of realistic high-resolution numerical model simulations and idealized process
studies, synthesized with existing observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.