* 1756839
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Air-Sea Energy Exchange in the presence of Surface Gravity Waves by Measurements of Turbulence Dissipation, Production and Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 616,640.00

Understanding of air-sea boundary layer processes requires a quantitative
description of mixing and transport in the ocean. The development and
improvement of ocean models rely on results from comprehensive observation
programs that capture mid- to small-scale turbulence which is associated with
energy transfer from the atmosphere to the ocean. In this project, the role of
surface gravity waves in energy transfer is studied by linking the atmosphere
and ocean through a unique set of turbulence measurements. These are carried out
simultaneously both on the air and water sides. To elucidate air-sea wave driven
turbulence, the research teams will measure the vertical structure of the
turbulence kinetic energy (TKE) dissipation rate across the air-sea interface
from the Air Sea Interaction Tower at Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory. The
proposed measurements of turbulence will enhance the understanding of coupled
boundary layer dynamics and will improve existing and future air-sea interaction
parameterizations. The field campaign will also create a data set for the
community that we will be shared through an open-access data system. This will
accelerate the development of high-resolution wave coupled ocean numerical
models and improve both weather and ocean conditions forecasts. Outreach through
education is also a focus of this program. In addition to the support and
training of a graduate student and a post-doctoral researcher, undergraduate
research experiences (REU) will be provided through an existing NSF-REU program
(URI) and new collaborations with local schools to expose high school students
to earth sciences (UConn).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the energy
transfer from the atmosphere to the ocean and how this occurs across the air-sea
interface. Indirect and direct observations of the energy flux divergence (wave-
induced transport) on the atmospheric side will be used to constrain the
magnitude of the air-sea TKE transfer rate and to provide an upper bound to the
TKE injection by wave breaking (i.e. the breaker work). Direct estimates of
active breaking and the resulting foam on the ocean surface will be used to
provide complementary estimates of the subsurface TKE dissipation rate. On the
ocean side, measurements of TKE dissipation rate and the TKE production and
transport terms throughout the water column will be made using several
complementary techniques. Using these measurements, the researchers will explore
the expected TKE dissipation rate deficit/surplus at the interface relative to a
rigid wall and assess the role of surface gravity waves in the deviations.
Furthermore, an attempt will be made to elucidate and differentiate the effects
of wave breaking and Langmuir Circulation driven turbulence and define
characteristic turbulent scales to improve present and future mixing
parameterizations in the upper ocean. On the atmospheric side, deviations from
the law-of-the-wall are expected to be correlated to the energy flux divergence,
which arises from wave motion creating an energy flux into the wave field. This
study will characterize the wave signature on the air velocities and pressure on
the atmospheric side, further elucidating the physics of the energy
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.