* 1756444
* Probing Facet Dependent Properties of Crystalline Nanomaterials and Interactions with Biomolecules using Hybrid AFM
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2022
* USD 409,999.00

Metallic semiconductor nanomaterials or nanoparticles, such as cerium dioxide,
zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, are produced in high volume and have broad
applications in commercial products and processes such as sunscreens,
antimicrobial agents, solar energy conversion and catalysis. These nanomaterials
exhibit remarkable properties important to their industrial applications.
However, the same unique properties may also cause unexpected biological
consequences (e.g., cellular injury and cell membrane disruption), which are
commonly attributed to the intrinsic and/or extrinsic properties. Intrinsic
properties include size, shape, surface area, chemical composition,
crystallinity, electronic, and surface reactivity. Extrinsic properties include
radical formation and dissolution, which depend on intrinsic properties and
environmental factors. Understanding of the roles of nanomaterial properties in
toxicity mechanisms is critical for establishing regulatory and manufacturing
frameworks for safe and sustainable nanotechnology. This project will encompass
a suite of innovative scanning probe approaches to unravel facet-level material
properties and true "nano" effects. Ultimately, the research findings may not
only promote the "safety-by-design" of nanotechnology, but also facilitate the
tailored fabrication of functional nanomaterials in a wide array of applications
such as catalysis, biomedicine, phototherapy, and drug delivery, where crystal
facet engineering for nanomaterials plays a pivotal role. Other broader impacts
include (1) developing new teaching modules, laboratory manuals, and interactive
learning activities targeted at a diverse student population to increase the
STEM workforce. (2) organizing nanotechnology themed workshop series and hands-
on training on scanning probe microscopy. This effort will be made through
academic-industrial collaborations to build a focal point for regional research
and education consortium in sustainable nanotechnology. Remote participants will
be effectively involved through live streaming the workshops and other
interactive webinars; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a molecular level, any changes in
the size or shape of nanomaterials could be associated with changes in their
exposed crystallographic facets or lattice planes. Different orientations and
distributions of crystal facets have been reported to vary surface charge,
surface tension or hydrophobicity, photocatalytic activity and surface
reactivity, which ultimately changes biological effects of nanomaterials. The
central hypothesis of this research is that the commonly characterized
nanomaterial properties (e.g., size, shape, and zeta potential) and their
environmental or biological impacts may originate from differences in exposed
crystallographic planes or facets and their associated surface structures,
atomic configurations and characteristics. To validate this hypothesis, this
project seeks to achieve the following specific objectives: (1) Investigate the
dependence of crystal facet distribution on highly crystalline semiconductor
nanomaterials with distinct morphologies (cube, octahedra and plate). (2)
Quantify facet-level intrinsic properties such as photo reactivity, band
structures, and hydrophobicity to better reveal facet-dependent or facet-
controlled surface properties. (3) Demonstrate hybridized scanning probe
techniques such as using an atomic force microscope combined with Raman and
infrared spectrometry in localized surface physical and chemical mapping of
nanomaterials. (4) Investigate mechanisms of biomolecular interactions
(adsorption, binding and degradation) at exposed facets of nanomaterials to
provide new insight into potential biological implications. Furthermore, these
research outcomes will be incorporated into STEM education and workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.