* 1756675
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Langmuir Supercells in the Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Dana Savidge, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 298,707.00

Langmuir circulation (LC) arises from the interplay of wind forcing and wave
dynamics, and consists of pairs of parallel counter-rotating vortices (or cells)
oriented approximately in the direction of the wind. Over the continental shelf
, where the water is shallow and relatively well-mixed, the passage of strong
storms can induce large Langmuir cells, the largest of which can span the entire
water column and have a strong influence on sediment re-suspension. These so-
called Langmuir supercells (LS) play an important role as vectors for the
transport of sediment and bioactive material on shallow shelves: their quasi-
organized nature makes them more effective than bottom boundary layer shear
turbulence at moving material out of the low-speed layer near bottom and into
the bulk flow for lateral transport. This study will analyze existing
observations from three different sites at 15, 26 and 40m depths as well as high
resolution numerical simulations to determine the influence on LS of a number of
factors such as large scale flows, tidal currents, less dense surface layers and
misalignment between wind and wave direction. Continental shelves are
biologically highly productive and LS have direct impact on processes affecting
this productivity or distributing its products. Thus, it is essential that shelf
models incorporate skillful parameterization of such dominant processes. This
study will improve parameterizations used to account for Langmuir circulation in
many coastal and regional models where the size of the domain precludes running
the model at a high enough resolution to capture Langmuir circulations directly.
One post-doctoral researcher, two graduate students and one undergraduate
student in each summer will be trained in physical oceanography, turbulence
dynamics and closures and numerical techniques. One of the students is from an
underrepresented minority group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the coastal ocean, LS
has been observed under tidal and geostrophic flow components, surface heat
fluxes and misaligned winds and waves serving to influence LS strength and
coherency, as measured through bottom-mounted vertical-beam acoustic Doppler
current profilers (VADCPs). Observation sites consist of the Rutgers LEO
observatory in 15m of water at the inner shelf off the coast of southern New
Jersey, the Navy's R2 tower in 26m of water at mid-shelf off the coast of
Georgia, and an additional site north of Cape Hatteras in 40m of water. Analyses
of the measurements at LEO and R2 have demonstrated differences in LS
characteristics, with more coherent and intense LS occurring at LEO. New
analysis of the Cape Hatteras data as well as large eddy simulations (LES) of LS
flows closely following the VADCP measurements at the three sites will elucidate
the dynamics by which tidal and geostrophic flows, surface buoyancy and
misaligned wind and waves combine to affect LS and associated vertical
transport. The LES will help provide key information missing from the field data
sets, such as detailed velocity structure in the surface and bottom
boundary&lt;br/&gt;layers, required to make definite conclusions regarding the
roles of the various forcing mechanisms influencing the LS at the different
sites. LES will be used to obtain a scaling of vertical velocity fluctuations
representative of the strength of non-local vertical mixing induced by LS under
the various processes affecting its strength and coherency. The scaling of
vertical velocity fluctuations will be used to inform a KPP (K-profile
parameterization) developed by the PI accounting for the local transport of the
overall Langmuir turbulence and the non-local transport induced by the LS. The
updated LS KPP will be implemented in the one-dimensional vertical water column
General Ocean Turbulence Model (GOTM) for validation via comparisons with the
LES and the field measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.