* 1756224
* Tied migration and anticipatory discrimination against military spouses seeking work
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Meredith Kleykamp, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,928.00

Military conflicts create challenges for enlistees and their families. One
challenge facing military spouses is that of finding work and maintaining a
career in the face of repeated moves and deployments. This project will reveal
whether and the extent to which the public and employers view military spouse
job seekers differently than their civilian peers, and if so, how frequent
geographic mobility in the past, or assumptions about moves in the future,
influence the perceptions of military spouses as job candidates. The project
studies how stereotypes of military spouses as frequent movers and job changers
may lead to anticipatory discrimination based on presumptions of future behavior
when seeking work. Because military spouse employment problems may influence the
retention decisions of their service member, this issue has implications for
recruiting and retention of a high-quality military force. In doing so, this
study offers evidence that may be useful in creating effective policy solutions
for military families, as well as other dual income households.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use complementary experimental and
qualitative methods, including survey vignette experiments with actual hiring
agents and a series of employer interviews, to identify whether and to what
extent hiring agents treat military spouses seeking employment differently than
similar civilian peers, and why. The project develops and tests a theory of
anticipatory discrimination by explicitly evaluating how past geographic
mobility and future expectations of geographic stability influence evaluations
of women job seekers, and whether past and future geographic stability accounts
for any differential evaluations of military spouse job seekers. The survey
experiment is complemented by interviews with actual hiring agents in four labor
markets to understand their past experiences with military spouse employees, how
they perceive them as applicants, and how hiring decisions are influenced by
anticipated futures of these applicants. The proposed research enhances the
study of military spouses and tied migrant labor market outcomes in several
ways. First, the project provides explicit attitudinal and behavioral evidence
of differential treatment of military spouses relative to civilian spouses.
Second, the study broadens the research base on military spouse and tied migrant
employment by locating employers as central influences on military spouse
unemployment. Third, the proposed research also tests how military spouses and
civilian tied migrants are evaluated across labor markets characterized by
different levels of military presence. While the case under study centers on one
type of worker, similar processes operate with other groups. The concept of
anticipatory discrimination may offer new ways to conceive of legal protections
for categories of workers based around presumed or actual future
statuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.