* 1756202
* CSBR:  Ownership Transfer of University of Maine Chytrid Fungal Collection to University of Michigan
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Timothy James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 107,563.00

This project will secure an endangered collection of approximately 500 diverse,
living strains of a fungal group known as chytrids. As the world's largest
collection of chytrids, it serves as a resource to the research community by
providing cultures to biologists in both academic and industrial settings,
resulting in biological insights found in over 200 published articles. Although
these microscopic fungi reproduce with a swimming spore they occur in soils as
well as in fresh and saline waters; they fill important ecological roles as
parasites and also by degrading substrates such as pollen and other plant
material, insect exoskeletons, hair, etc. Chytrids are notorious for their role
in the global decline of amphibians; the collection contains over 180 strains of
the amphibian pathogen from around the world. This collection was developed and
maintained by Joyce Longcore at the University of Maine without institutional
support for more than 25 years. To safeguard the chytrid collection, it will be
moved to the University of Michigan's recently remodeled Research Museums
Complex where it will be stored in a state-of-the-art cryopreservation facility
and managed by the University's Herbarium unit. The collection will be a
resource for the scientific community involved in research on chytrids and their
function in terrestrial and aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chytrid fungi
require special growth and maintenance conditions, because they are aquatic
fungi that reproduce with flagellated, wall-less zoospores. Most of the
University of Maine collection is cryopreserved, making inter-institutional
transfer in a frozen state possible, however, approximately 12% of the
collection is routinely transferred in liquid cultures, because it has not been
amendable to freezing. The first goal of the project is to move the collection
in Maine to the Research Museums Complex in Ann Arbor where fungal strains will
be stored in liquid nitrogen freezers. Cryopreservation in the vapor of liquid
nitrogen stabilizes samples at -193 degrees Celsius; because inadvertent
exposure to temperatures above -80 affects the viability of frozen cultures,
storage in liquid nitrogen is safer than storage in typical ultralow freezers
with electrical compressors. A second goal of this project is to develop methods
to freeze and secure the remaining 12% of strains that have been resistant to
cryopreservation. To verify taxonomic assignments of the culture collection and
to better characterize its contents, DNA barcoding will be performed by
sequencing and making accessible the 18S and ITS ribosomal RNA gene regions.
Finally, this project will transform the collection into a public resource by
making additional data about the strains accessible online and improving the
distribution and maintenance of the cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.