* 1756439
* CSBR: Living Stocks - Diversifying the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* David Somers, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 589,084.00

The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) at The Ohio State University
stores and distributes seeds, clones and other resources of Arabidopsis
thaliana, a ubiquitous model system for plant research. For the past 25 years,
the ABRC has propelled cutting-edge research and discovery in photosynthesis,
agricultural improvement, green technology, and basic medical research. This
award will support the ABRC's core mission to inexpensively distribute DNA and
seed resources to the plant biology community, and to support plant science
education by providing seeds and teaching resources free-of-charge to K-12
teachers. This project will diversify the resources held by the ABRC into
bioenergy and crop plants, aligning the ABRC with the future needs of the plant
biology community. Lastly, this project positions the ABRC to be a leader in
local, national and international outreach and education, providing
opportunities to inspire and train future generations of plant scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three specific goals of this project. The first
is to continue to provide cutting-edge resources to the global Arabidopsis
community at an accessible cost. This will be accomplished by increasing revenue
through new services offered and by decreasing expenses through improved
efficiency. The ABRC also aims to increase the number of users through a second
goal, which is to expand the utility of the ABRC collection by diversifying
beyond Arabidopsis. As data on other plants, including crops, are genome-
enabled, they will require resource repositories. To that end, the
infrastructure of the ABRC will be leveraged to support plant biology more
broadly than in the past. The third goal is to lead local and global efforts to
educate the public about plant biology. The ABRC will also engage a broader
plant science community in outreach efforts, increase awareness of plants among
the general public by creating interactive activities and provide a more user-
friendly online source of information for non-specialists. These aims will
function to maintain the ABRC's core mission, while strategically diversifying
the organization to meet the future needs of scientists and educators worldwide.
Consult the ABRC website for further information
(abrc.osu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.