* 1756738
* Prenatal Air Pollution Exposures and Early Childhood Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Emily Hannum, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 319,999.00

This study investigates impacts of air pollution exposure on birth outcomes and
early child development outcomes, with attention to gender and socioeconomic
disparities in risk as well as potential exacerbating or compensating impacts of
family resources and processes. The prenatal and early childhood periods are
extremely vulnerable phases of life, but the implications of early, high levels
of air pollution for children's development, and how they are affected by social
and economic context, are poorly understood. Data come from birth certificates,
hospital records, and a prospective birth cohort survey in a high air pollution
context. Findings will offer insights into the rising global public health
challenges associated with air pollution exposures among infants and children.
Further, findings regarding the differential risks and impacts of exposure
across gender and socioeconomic groups, and about effectiveness of avoidance
behaviors and compensatory investments, can inform policymakers and clinicians
about the design and targeting of interventions and thereby contribute to the
general well-being of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates
risks associated with prenatal air pollution exposure for birth outcomes and
multiple early child development dimensions, including physical, cognitive,
language, self-regulation, and social and emotional domains, in a region with
high but spatially variable air pollution levels. The project has four
objectives: 1: Produce three complementary datasets on air pollution and birth
and early childhood outcomes. 2: Estimate associations between air pollution
exposures and birth outcomes. 3: Investigate potential differences in
vulnerability to and impact of environmental exposure by gender and
socioeconomic status using birth certificate data and sample survey data. 4:
Estimate impacts of air quality on children's early human capital development
within a larger framework of parental investments in children and avoidance
behaviors, using sample survey data. The project links a) administrative data
from birth certificate databases and hospital records, b) pollution exposure
estimates derived from data-fusion methods combining monitoring observations,
remotely-sensed satellite imagery, land-use variables, and meteorology, and c) a
prospective sample survey of early health and development outcomes. Analyses
estimate impacts of air quality on children?s human capital within a larger
framework of parental investments in children. The study considers cumulative
risks, nonlinearities, and threshold effects of air pollution exposures, and
models interactions with other risk and protective factors with a focus on
sociological factors related to child gender and socioeconomic status and
parenting styles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.