* 1756473
* NSF/SBE-BSF: The role of sleep in memory consolidation: intracranial human electrophysiology and electrical stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Itzhak Fried, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 549,985.00

Memory loss is one of the most devastating afflictions of the human condition.
Sleep is important for learning and memory because it improves memory
consolidation - the transformation of new memories that are formed during
wakefulness into stable memories that are integrated into pre-existing long-term
memories. This is particularly true for memory for facts and events (declarative
memory), which depends on brain regions in and around the human hippocampus.
There is evidence that declarative hippocampus-dependent memories are
consolidated during a sleep-stage called slow-wave-sleep, where large slow waves
dominate brain activity. This consolidation is thought to be mediated by
interactions between the hippocampus and brain areas in the frontal cortex. In
this project, the researchers aim to study the effects of sleep on learning and
memory in epilepsy patients implanted with depth electrodes for clinical
monitoring. This setting provides a rare opportunity for direct recordings from
inside the human brain, including at the level of individual neurons. The
project also affords a unique opportunity to stimulate the brain during sleep,
which is necessary for establishing a causal relationship between sleep and
consolidation. This research will advance scientific knowledge on how specific
sleep processes aid memory consolidation, and benefit society by training
students in this integrative field, and developing new methods. The results may
have implications for individuals suffering from neurological disorders
affecting memory. Results will be disseminated broadly through participation in
conferences and workshops, as well as media channels and the internet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research studies the causal role that sleep
plays in memory consolidation, and is based on a an opportunity to record and
stimulate neuronal activity directly from the human brain down to the level of
single neurons. Upon informed consent, epilepsy patients at UCLA implanted with
intracranial depth electrodes will participate in learning/memory paradigms
combined with recordings and intracranial electrical stimulation during sleep.
The researchers intend to advance beyond the state-of-the-art by having
participants perform a learning task before sleep, record and manipulate brain
activity during sleep, and evaluate subsequent memory after sleep. First, they
will validate the behavioral benefits of sleep on memory consolidation. This
study will be performed at UCLA with epilepsy patients (PI: Itzhak Fried), and
in parallel in collaboration with Dr. Yuval Nir's lab in Israel (with healthy
volunteers). The study will develop and validate paradigms that are reliable and
sensitive to the beneficial effects of sleep, and short naps in particular, on
declarative memory among individuals with variable memory performance. The study
focuses on a learning task involving object-position associations, as well as
paired associations between object and person images. Second, the research team
will determine which sleep activities correlate best with learning and memory
improvements as compared to no-sleep conditions. Finally, the team will evaluate
causal mechanisms through intracranial stimulation to determine whether
stimulation locked to endogenous slow oscillations promotes memory
consolidation. A key prediction is that sleep in conjunction with such real-time
closed-loop stimulation will benefit memory performance to a greater extent than
undisturbed sleep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.