* 1756072
* The Movement for Corporate Political Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Edward Walker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 242,489.00

This project will study the sources and effects of the social movement that has
been pressuring major corporations to disclose more information about their
political expenditures. This social movement, involving both conventional
outside activist groups and insider investor-activists, has been building for
over a decade now. The primary research goals of this project are to understand
which firms are targeted by activists, which have changed their specific
disclosure practices, which have gone even further and started restricting
certain expenditures, and whether information related to political disclosure
affects firms in the stock market and in terms of investor perceptions. The
findings of this project will inform policy proposals, both internal and
external to firms, regarding political disclosure requirements for U.S.
corporations, which have been an ongoing topic of debate among policymakers.
Results of these investigations will be disseminated widely through scholarly
articles and writings for general-interest audiences including business and
political leaders and the broader public. The project will also train graduate
and undergraduate students and generate a variety of public-use datasets that
will allow for further investigations by other scholars, as well as by
journalists and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals will be
pursued in several ways. Original databases of protests and political
expenditure controversies (based on media reports) surrounding S&amp;P 1500
firms over the period from 2005-2016 will be created. One analysis will examine
how firms' past political activity and corporate interlock networks affect their
likelihood of being targeted by either outside or investor activists. Another
analysis will investigate how protests and corporate shareholder resolutions
affect firms' likelihood of changing their disclosure practices or restricting
expenditures. Interviews with leading shareholder-activists will be conducted. A
Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) event-study of how expenditure-related
controversies affect firms' stock prices will be performed. A series of
experiments will be conducted to examine how changes to political disclosure
practices affect investor perceptions of a firm's value. The project will
advance scholarship in political and economic sociology, particularly regarding
the political power of U.S. corporations in light of weakening corporate
networks alongside rising shareholder capitalism. It will also advance research
at the intersection of social movements and organizational theory. Lastly, the
study will draw attention to the diverse corporate lobbying strategies employed
by contemporary firms and how those strategies are perceived by investors,
publics, and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.