* 1756347
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social Organizing and Social Media
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* A. Cymene Howe, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2019
* USD 7,078.00

For many, social media are valuable because they allow a wider variety of voices
to be heard and more varied accounts of events to become part of the public
record. For social scientists interested in how social media are affecting our
society, these claims raise a number of important questions. How does the social
media record differ from a traditional archive? How do the "selves" that people
produce digitally compare to those they inhabit in ordinary interpersonal
contexts? The research supported by this award, which trains an American
graduate student in methods of conducting empirically-grounded scientific
research, will address these questions. The research is important because we
need to understand all aspects of how social media affect our society and our
institutions.

The research will be carried out by Rice University anthropology doctoral
student, Baird Campbell, with the guidance of Dr. A. Cymene Howe. The researcher
has chosen Santiago, Chile, as his research site. This is an appropriate site
because Chile went through a marked political transition in the late 1990s. This
created a unique boundary and clear contrast between past and present, and led
to the rise numerous groups trying to re-write history and change their own
public images through social media. The researcher will take advantage of this
contrast and activism to compare traditional and official written accounts with
contemporary digital archives. He also will conduct participant observation in
activist groups; interview a stratified sample of group members, comparing their
in-person narratives with their digital ones; conduct focus groups, stratified
by age, to account for generation differences; and collect data thorough an on-
line survey. Findings from this research will contribute to social science
theories of the relationship between social media, social memory, and history.
It will also help policy makers who must regularly evaluate the role of social
media in the society at large.