* 1756669
* Collaborative Research: Peptide deamination as a source of refractory dissolved organic matter in marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* David Burdige, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 333,549.00

Dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the ocean is one of the largest carbon
reservoirs on Earth. Much of this DOM is highly resistant to degradation
(refractory) and aged, but the nature and reasons behind the accumulation of
refractory DOM in the ocean is one of the unresolved mysteries of the marine
carbon cycle. While marine sediments have been shown to be a globally important
source of DOM to the ocean, the connection between sediment DOM dynamics and the
oceanic DOM cycle remains elusive, because information is lacking on the
molecular composition and reactivity of pore water DOM. To fill this knowledge
gap, this project will address the question of how refractory DOM is produced in
sediments and the fate of benthic DOM in the water column. The research will
focus on the relationship between protein/peptide dynamics and sediment DOM
cycling, examining peptide deamination as an important pathway for the
production of refractory and 14C-depleted DOM in continental margin sediments.
These objectives will be met through a combination of geochemical profiling of
sediment cores collected across a range of redox conditions, and long-term
sediment incubation studies conducted under controlled laboratory conditions. At
the heart of this proposed work is structural elucidation and quantification of
intact and deaminated peptides in pore-water DOM using state-of-the-art
analytical techniques. The study will help better understand how the present-day
carbon cycle operates, as well as how it may respond in the future. The proposed
work will integrate research and education using several approaches. All PIs
routinely integrate their research into their classes, which range from
introductory-undergraduate to advanced-graduate courses and will continue to do
so here. All three PIs are also committed to engaging women and underrepresented
minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine sediments are a globally
important source of dissolved organic matter (DOM) to the ocean. However, the
connection between sediment DOM dynamics and the oceanic DOM cycle remains
elusive because information about the molecular composition and reactivity of
pore water DOM is lacking. To help fill this knowledge gap, this project will
address the question of how refractory DOM is produced in sediments and the fate
of the benthic DOM flux in the water column. The proposed study explores a novel
and potentially transformative idea that deamination of peptides in sediments is
a source of refractory and 14C-depleted DOM in seawater. This idea is consistent
not only with the fact that the majority of seawater dissolved organic nitrogen
occurs in amide form, but also with recent reports about the widespread
occurrence of nitrogen-bearing formulas in deep-sea refractory DOM. The central
hypothesis will be tested through a unique blend of bottom-up (molecular level
DOM analyses) and top-down (bulk-level elemental and isotopic analyses, and
numerical modeling) approaches. This work will involve a combination of
geochemical profiling of sediment cores collected across a range of redox
conditions, and long-term sediment incubation studies conducted under controlled
laboratory conditions. At the heart of the proposed work is structural
elucidation and quantification of intact and deaminated peptides in pore-water
DOM using a state-of-the-art liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry system
(ultra-high performance liquid chromatography coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion
Tribrid Mass Spectrometer), which is expected to provide an unprecedented wealth
of molecular-level information about pore water DOM. The proposed work will lead
to an improved mechanistic understanding of organic matter decomposition and
benthic DOM cycling and shed light on the connections between the modern-day
oceanic and sedimentary carbon and nitrogen cycles as they relate to the
formation of refractory DOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.