* 1756277
* RUI:  CSBR:  Natural History Collections:  Modernization and Consolidation of the Natural History Collections at MSU into the Xeric Ecosystem Research Center (XERC)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Charles Watson, Midwestern State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 472,804.00

Maintaining an accessible record of biodiversity is of great importance,
especially given current ecological threats such as a rapidly changing climate,
invasive species, habitat destruction, and urbanization. This record is
particularly important for ecosystems whose species are underrepresented in
biological research collections, and therefore less understood. Among such
ecosystems within the continental United States are the Central Plains and the
Southwestern Deserts. The collections at Midwestern State University (MSU) in
Wichita Falls, Texas holds a robust sample of specimens from the Rolling Plains
ecosystem and the Chihuahuan Desert of the Trans-Pecos ecoregion. These
collections are currently maintained as three taxonomically separated entities.
By consolidating the vertebrate, terrestrial invertebrate, and plant collections
at MSU into the Xeric Ecosystem Research Center (XERC), modernizing the
infrastructure, and digitizing specimen data, the collection will become much
more useful and accessible to scientists and members of the public. XERC will
also, through outreach programs and special museum exhibits, increase the
understanding and appreciation of xeric ecosystem biodiversity among young
learners and highlight the historical significance of plants and animals to the
Native Americans who once occupied these ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Xeric Ecosystem Research Center will consolodate all specimens currently in
natural history collections at Midwestern State University. Many of these
specimen records were historically maintained as paper documents that will now
be digitized by student assistants and citizen scientists, validated by
curators, and made available to the public through iDigBio
(http://www.idigbio.org). Herbarium specimens will be photographed and digitized
to create a virtual herbarium that will also be publicly accessible. Specimen
cabinets will be repaired and upgraded to industry standards, the capacity to
maintain molecular data will be enhanced with upgraded environmental storage,
and an integrated pest management plan will be instituted. Midwestern State will
actively promote XERC to the broader scientific community and encourage broad
use of the specimens and data contained therein. To enhance the educational and
cultural value of XERC, an ADA accessible website and associated educational
materials aimed at young learners (K-5) will be produced and made widely
available. XERC will partner with the Wichita Falls Museum of Art (WFMA) to
produce two public exhibits that highlights biodiversity of the Trans-Pecos
ecoregion of Texas and the cultural significance of plants and animals of the
Central Plains to early Native Americans. Through these efforts, the Xeric
Ecosystem Research Center will serve as a hub for research, a record of
biodiversity, and a repository for important biological materials from xeric
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.