* 1756138
* Measurement of Helium Isotopes on the U.S. GEOTRACES Alaska-Tahiti Section (GP15)
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,10/31/2023
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2023
* USD 936,609.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. An
essential part of this effort is determining the sources of trace elements to
the oceans. One important such source comes from seafloor hydrothermal venting.
This project will support the measurement of helium isotopes on the 2018 U.S.
GEOTRACES expedition in the Pacific Ocean, running south from Alaska to Tahiti.
Helium isotopes provide important information on the presence and dispersion of
hydrothermal plumes. On a larger scale, they can also be used to calculate
global-scale inputs of hydrothermally-sourced trace elements and isotopes. Thus,
the proposed work is closely tied to many other projects associated with this
expedition. The measurement of helium isotopes will also allow enable the
investigation of physical mixing rates within the upper ocean to help interpret
the fate of other trace elements. At the northern end of the section, this
approach will also be used to investigate the rate at which other trace elements
and isotopes from seafloor hydrothermal venting are delivered to the more
biologically productive surface ocean. In addition to supporting the GEOTRACES
effort and participating in community-scale outreach efforts associated with the
expedition, the investigators will also work with a visual artist to communicate
their science to the public in new ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. GEOTRACES
Pacific Meridional Transect (56째N to 20째S, along 152째W) in late 2018 will
intercept: strong margin fluxes, sub-Arctic high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll
waters, the oldest deep waters in the world's oceans, the distal ends of
multiple hydrothermal plumes, oxygen minimum zones, subpolar and equatorial
upwelling, and, in the South Pacific near 20째S, some of the most oligotrophic
waters known. This section, together with the US GEOTRACES East Pacific Zonal
Transect (EPZT) conducted in 2013, will also close off a large volume of the
Pacific Ocean. Consequently, this work will facilitate new, improved evaluations
of regional-scale fluxes of hydrothermally-sourced trace elements and isotopes
(TEIs) to the oceans. Because the 2018 expedition will intercept multiple
hydrothermal plumes, this project will also allow the investigation of three key
questions emerging from the larger U.S. and international GEOTRACES programs: 1)
Is there a significant source of hydrothermally-sourced Fe and other TEIs to the
euphotic zone in the North Pacific, through upwelling, as was demonstrated for
the Southern Ocean from the 2013 EPZT results? 2) How do TEI:He-3 ratios in
hydrothermal plumes vary with different geologic settings of their vent-sources?
3) How do the TEI:He-3 ratios imparted to hydrothermal plumes vary along the
thermohaline conveyor as a function of varying water column chemistry?
Throughout the section the investigators will also combine upper-water column
helium-3 measurements with water column tritium concentrations (extrapolated
from data collected on past expeditions) to estimate water column ventilation
time scales that can be used to quantify rates of TEI transformation across the
wide range of biogeochemical regimes to be intercepted (tropical, subtropical,
subpolar). In regions characterized by upwelling, precise measurements of helium
isotopes can be combined with canonical gas-exchange rate estimates to make
flux-gauge determinations of upwelling rates for some key
TEIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.