* 1756633
* Collaborative Research: Further Continuity and Enhancement of MPOWIR
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Sonya Legg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 105,322.00

This proposal is for further continuation and enrichment of activities within
the Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention (MPOWIR)
program. This is a community-led program aiming at providing mentoring to junior
women in physical oceanography to improve their retention in the field. The
activities carried out as part of the program contribute to the creation of a
scientific workforce whose diversity more closely matches that of the student
and of the U.S. population. This is achieved by aiding the retention of women in
the field of physical oceanography and other geoscience disciplines. The program
was initiated in 2004, it was first fully funded by federal agencies in the
spring of 2007, and then renewed in 2009. The objectives of the program, as
determined by the community in a planning workshop in the fall of 2005, are to:
(1) provide continuity of mentoring from a young woman?s graduate career,
through her postdoctoral years to the first years of her permanent job, (2)
establish a collective responsibility within the physical oceanography community
for the mentoring of junior women in the field, (3) provide a variety of
mentoring resources and mentors, (4) cast a wide net to avoid exclusiveness, and
(5) open this mentoring program to all those who self-identify as a physical
oceanographer. Specifically, the following MPOWIR activities will be carried
out:&lt;br/&gt;1.Pattullo conference: A biannual conference that brings together
about 25 junior women physical oceanographers, and 12 senior physical
oceanographers, both male and female, for a 2.5-day meeting focused on
discipline-based mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;2.Mentoring groups: Groups of
approximately 6 junior women and 2 senior women physical oceanographers meet
monthly through a teleconference, for confidential, personalized
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;3.MPOWIR website: The website serves as a repository of
resources for mentoring and physical oceanography careers.&lt;br/&gt;4.Databases
and surveys: Regular surveys are conducted to assess the effectiveness of MPOWIR
activities, determine community mentoring needs, and evaluate progress in
retention.&lt;br/&gt;5.Town hall meetings and networking: Events at the Ocean
Sciences meeting facilitate networking between physical oceanographers and
provide career development information to junior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website and town hall meetings are open to
all, and great emphasis is placed on making material available via the website,
to ensure a gender-neutral benefit. Efforts to export the MPOWIR model to other
disciplines and institutions will be undertaken via links with the Earth Science
Women's Network, and through a quarterly newsletter. Social media will be used
to publicize MPOWIR activities, announcement and events. This work, through its
focus on the retention of women in the field of physical oceanography, will
allow further capitalization on the investment the funding agencies and
universities have made on the education of women students. Essentially, the
planned activities seek to stem the loss of intellectual capital for the
physical oceanographic field, as well as other geoscience
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.