* 1756610
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying trophic roles and food web ecology of salp blooms of the Chatham Rise
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Michael Stukel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 345,985.00

Salps are unique open-ocean animals that range in size from a few millimeters to
greater than twenty centimeters, have a gelatinous (jelly-like) body, and can
form long chains of many connected individuals. These oceanic organisms act as
oceanic vacuum cleaners, having incredibly high feeding rates on phytoplankton
and, unusual for consumers of their size, smaller bacteria-sized prey. This
rapid feeding and the salps' tendency to form dense blooms, allows them move
substantial amounts of prey carbon from the surface into the deep ocean, leading
to carbon dioxide removal from the atmosphere. However, salps are often
considered a trophic dead-end, rather than a link, in the food web due to the
assumption that they themselves are not consumed, since their gelatinous bodies
are less nutritious than co-occurring crustacean prey. Along with this, salp
populations are hypothesized to be increasing due to climate change. This
proposal addresses these questions: 1) Do salps compete primarily with
crustaceans (as in the prevailing paradigm) or are they competitors of single-
celled protists, which are the dominant grazers of small phytoplankton? 2) Do
salp blooms increase the efficiency of food-web pathways from tiny phytoplankton
to fisheries production in nutrient-poor ocean regions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the interdisciplinary education
of a graduate student who will learn modeling and laboratory techniques in the
fields of biological and chemical oceanography and stimulate international
collaborations between scientists in the United States and New Zealand.
Additionally, several Education and Outreach initiatives are planned, including
development of a week-long immersive high school class in biological
oceanography, and education modules that will serve the "scientists-in-the
schools" program in Tallahassee, FL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is commonly assumed
that salps are a trophic sink. However, this idea was developed before the
discovery that protists (rather than crustaceans) are the dominant grazers in
the open ocean and was biased by the difficulty of recognizing gelatinous salps
in fish guts. More recent studies show that salps are found in guts of a diverse
group of fish and seabirds and are a readily available prey source when
crustacean abundance is low. This proposal seeks to quantify food web flows
through contrasting salp-dominated and salp-absent water parcels near the
Chatham Rise off western New Zealand where salp blooms are a predictable
phenomenon. The proposal will leverage previously obtained data on salp
abundance, bulk grazing impact, and biogeochemical significance during
Lagrangian experiments conducted by New Zealand-based collaborators. The
proposal will determine 1) taxon- and size-specific phytoplankton growth rate
measurements, 2) taxon- and size-specific protozoan and salp grazing rate
measurements, 3) compound specific isotopic analysis of the amino acids of
mesozooplankton to quantify the trophic position of salps, hyperiid amphipods,
and other crustaceans, 4) sediment traps to quantify zooplankton carcass sinking
rates, and 5) linear inverse ecosystem modeling syntheses. Secondary production
and trophic flows from this well-constrained ecosystem model will be compared to
crustacean-dominated and microbial loop-dominated ecosystems in similarly
characterized regions (California Current, Costa Rica Dome, and Gulf of
Mexico).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.