* 1756692
* A General Synthetic Control Framework of Estimation and Inference
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Alberto Abadie, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 280,594.00

Over the past decade, synthetic control estimators have found wide applicability
in empirical research in economics and the social sciences as tools to evaluate
the effects of public policies and other interventions or events of interests.
For each unit (e.g., city, state, or region) affected by the intervention of
interest, a synthetic control is a combination on unaffected units chosen to
resemble the characteristics of the treated units before the intervention.
Synthetic controls are used to estimate the outcomes that affected units would
have attained in the absence of the intervention of interest, providing a
benchmark against which researchers can evaluate policy impacts. The synthetic
control method was originally developed for cases with one or a small number of
aggregate units affected by the policy of interest. However, the applied
literature has surpassed the methodological contributions in this area. In
particular, many current applications focus on settings with a large number of
affected units. As a result, additional methodological research is needed to
guide the empirical implementation of the method. This research will provide
empirical researchers with a robust and general framework for estimation and
inference with synthetic controls as well as freely available software with
which to implement it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When disaggregated data are
available, constructing separate synthetic controls for each treated unit helps
avoid interpolation biases. However, the problem of finding a synthetic control
that best reproduces the characteristics of a treated unit may not have a unique
solution, and multiplicity of solutions is a particularly daunting challenge in
settings with many treated units. This research will provide a generalized
synthetic control framework for estimation and inference. The framework builds
on synthetic controls and introduces a penalization parameter that trades off
pairwise matching discrepancies with respect to the characteristics of each unit
in the synthetic control against matching discrepancies with respect to the
characteristics of the synthetic control unit as a whole. It can be shown that,
as long as the penalization parameter is positive, the generalized synthetic
control estimator is unique and sparse. The investigators propose data driven
choices for the penalization parameter, as well as inferential methods for
synthetic controls in settings with many treated
units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.