* 1756870
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Rebuilding after Disaster
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Mark Whitaker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,181.00

How do damaged or destroyed communities rebuild themselves after disasters, such
as war and extreme weather events? Does the extent of destruction matter? Does a
totally destroyed community rebuild in the same way and as successfully as a
less extensively damaged one? The research supported by this award addresses
these questions through an ethnographic study of post-disaster community
rebuilding. The researcher takes up the questions by looking at the what it
means to reconstitute a place, not just as a physical location but as site where
people can once again feel at home. In the wake of multiple disasters that have
torn people from their homes and damaged communities throughout the United
States, people are asking if they can return, if they should return, if indeed
there is a community to return to. It is critical that policy makers and social
scientists better understand what it will take to put people's lives back
together, not just as households but also as communities.

The research will be carried out by University of Kentucky anthropology doctoral
student, Pathmanesan Sanmugeswaran, who is supervised by Dr. Mark Whitaker. The
research takes a comparative design approach. The researcher has identified two
post-disaster communities in Sri Lanka. One community was totally destroyed and
the inhabitants are returning to rebuild after 26 years, and the other was
physically damaged and social disrupted but nonetheless remained intact. This
contrast in an otherwise similar socio-cultural and geographic environmental
context provides a scientifically useful and rare experimental opportunity that
would not be available in the United States, although the results will be
generalizable to many other contexts. Data will be gathered through semi-
structured interviews, participant observation, and cultural mapping. Sampling
will be structured to represent the full range of socio-cultural variation,
including caste, gender, and age. Particular attention will be paid to how
traditional notions of community, which centered around combined ideas of
community and religion, are remade in the two contrasting post-disaster
situations.