* 1756029
* CRII: SCH: A Framework for Optimizing Exoskeleton-Assisted Walking Performance in Children with Cerebral Palsy
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Zachary Lerner, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 190,285.00

The ability to walk is essential for health and well-being, particularly during
childhood development. Children with cerebral palsy have neuromuscular
impairments that often diminish walking capacity. Wearable exoskeletons may
offer a compelling compliment to surgery and standard physical therapy. However,
to be effective, exoskeleton assisted rehabilitation must be finely tailored to
each individual. By seeking to improve the effectiveness of exoskeleton-assisted
gait training, knowledge gained from this proposal will provide the basis for
future exoskeleton intervention studies that will seek to improve underlying
gait function and increased levels of habitual physical activity in cerebral
palsy. The outcomes of this research have the potential to transform the
treatment of pediatric gait disorders, lead to improved health, and reduce the
economic burden for individuals with cerebral palsy. In addition to the
scientific and societal impacts, this project seeks to broaden research
participation from individuals underrepresented in STEM fields by offering
interdisciplinary training to a diverse cohort of students. This research will
positively impact Northern Arizona University by elevating the research profile
of the Center of Bioengineering Innovation and Bioengineering PhD
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning techniques have begun to
demonstrate potential in improving human-wearable robot interactions but
investigations to date have focused on single joints and short durations. The
purpose of this proposal is to utilize computational intelligence to establish a
framework suitable for optimizing patient-specific assistance and enhancing
neuro-muscular participation during training with wearable exoskeletons.
Investigators will implement, in an exoskeleton platform, an optimization
framework that can learn from biomechanical responses to exoskeleton assistance
to quickly converge on an optimal control strategy for the timing and magnitude
of assistive joint torques. The first goal is to establish the optimization
algorithms and parameters of an exoskeleton control algorithm that suitably
adapts knee and ankle assistance based on walking performance. The second goal
is to conduct a pilot study to determine how knee and ankle exoskeleton
assistance, optimized for improving lower-extremity posture, affects gait
biomechanics and neuromuscular control during consecutive daily gait training in
children with cerebral palsy. It is anticipated that this research will lead to
an improved understanding of the algorithm parameters needed to account for
stride-to-stride and session-to-session variability for longitudinal
optimization of exoskeleton control for gait
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.