* 1756646
* Collaborative Research: Linking behavior and transport of larvae using waves and turbulence as cues
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Robert Chant, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 565,343.00

Many bottom-dwelling marine species have larvae whose behavior in the water
column impacts dispersal and adult distributions. Snail larvae swim up with more
effort or sink in response to cues from waves and turbulence, and it remains
unclear whether larvae can use these physical cues for retention within or
navigation among habitats. Larvae that swim up under waves may be retained over
the continental shelf by wave-induced shoreward drift in surface waters.
However, ocean warming causes larvae to be released earlier in spring when waves
are larger and coastal upwelling is weaker, potentially carrying larvae into
shallower waters that exceed the adults' temperature tolerance. The
investigators will use a physical model of the Middle Atlantic Bight and
adjacent estuaries to test hypotheses about how waves and turbulence affect
transport patterns, retention near adult habitats, and climate-induced shifts in
adult distributions. The project will produce simulations of ocean circulation
and larval tracking codes that include waves both as behavior cues and as a
transport mechanism; these products will be made publicly available. A graduate
student will do a related dissertation. Undergraduate students will be involved
through an NSF-funded REU program, the Aresty Program, which engages Rutgers'
diverse undergraduates in research to boost retention in STEM majors, the
Rutgers Research in Science and Engineering program, which targets
underrepresented minorities, and the Skidmore Summer Research program. Model
outputs will be used to develop learning materials for undergraduates, packaged
as a case study for distribution through the National Center for Case Study
Teaching in Science. Research results will also be presented to adult (55 and
over) learners through the Skidmore Encore lecture
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waves are unique in providing planktonic larvae
with a behavior cue directly tied to a horizontal transport mechanism, and newly
discovered larval responses to waves could have counter-intuitive impacts on
larval transport and species distributions. Wave climates differ in the adjacent
habitats of two congeneric snails: Tritia obsoleta occupies turbulent inlets and
estuaries where waves are small, while Tritia trivittata occupies the
continental shelf where waves are much larger. These two species' larvae sense
waves and turbulence separately as acceleration and vorticity-induced body
rotation, respectively. Late-stage estuarine larvae mainly exhibit turbulence-
induced sinking that could reduce transport out of inlets and estuaries, whereas
shelf larvae also exhibit wave-induced upward swimming that could aid retention
over the shelf via Stokes drift. Since the 1960s, the shelf species' range has
shifted into warmer water, opposite to predictions based on thermal tolerance.
This shift may be driven by wave-induced larval transport; as ocean warming
induces earlier spawning, larvae will encounter larger waves and weaker
upwelling in spring, intensifying Stokes drift and onshore transport toward
warmer, shallower waters of the inner shelf. The project will use numerical
models to test hypotheses linking flow-induced larval behaviors to transport
pathways, local retention, and climate-driven range shifts. Waves will be
included as a source of both behavior cues and advection through acceleration
and Stokes drift, respectively. Results will help resolve uncertainties about
how Stokes drift, Eulerian return flow, and upwelling interact to transport
larvae. Numerical experiments will describe how climate-driven changes in
spawning phenology affect larval transport, potentially identifying the
mechanism behind perplexing range shifts of shelf species into warmer
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.