* 1756616
* NSFOCE-BSF: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Elucidating adaptive potential through coral holobiont functional integration
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Debashish Bhattacharya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2023
* USD 611,311.00

The remarkable success of coral reefs is explained by interactions of the coral
animal with its symbiotic microbiome that is comprised of photosynthetic algae
and bacteria. This total organism, or "holobiont", enables high ecosystem
biodiversity and productivity in coral reefs. These ecosystems are, however,
under threat from a rapidly changing environment. This project aims to integrate
information from the cellular to organismal level to identify key mechanisms of
adaptation and acclimatization to environmental stress. Specific areas to be
investigated include the role of symbionts and of epigenetics (molecular "marks"
on coral DNA that regulate gene expression). These aspects will be studied in
Hawaiian corals to determine whether they explain why some individuals are
sensitive or resistant to environmental perturbation. Results from the proposed
project will also provide significant genomic resources that will contribute to
fundamental understanding of how complex biological systems generate emergent
(i.e., unexpected) properties when faced with fluctuating environments. Broader
impacts will extend beyond scientific advancements to include postdoctoral and
student training in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM).
Data generated in the project will be used to train university students and do
public outreach through live videos of experimental work, and short stop-action
animations for topics such as symbiosis, genomics, epigenetics, inheritance, and
adaptation. The research approaches and results will be shared with the public
in Hawaii through the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology education department
and presentations at Hawaiian hotels, as well as at Rutgers University through
its 4-H Rutgerscience Saturdays and 4-H Rutgers Summer Science
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbiosis is a complex and ecologically
integrated interaction between organisms that provides emergent properties key
to their survival. Such is the case for the relationship between reef-building
corals and their microbiome, a meta-organism, where nutritional and
biogeochemical recycling provide the necessary benefits that fuel high reef
productivity and calcification. The rapid warming and acidification of our
oceans threatens this symbiosis. This project addresses how relatively stress
resistant and stress sensitive corals react to the environmental perturbations
of increased temperature and reduced pH. It utilizes transcriptomic, epigenetic,
and microbial profiling approaches, to elucidate how corals respond to
environmental challenges. In addition to this profiling, work by the BSF Israeli
partner will implement powerful analytical techniques such as network theory to
detect key transcriptional hubs in meta-organisms and quantify biological
integration. This work will generate a stress gene inventory for two
ecologically important coral species and a (epi)genome and microbiome level of
understanding of how they respond to the physical environment. Acknowledgment of
a role for epigenetic mechanisms in corals overturns the paradigm of hardwired
genetic control and highlights the interplay of genetic and epigenetic variation
that may result in emergent evolutionary and ecologically relevant properties
with implications for the future of reefs. Furthermore, clarifying the joint
contribution of the microbiome and host in response to abiotic change will
provide an important model in metazoan host-microbiome biotic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.