* 1756994
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of Exogenous and Endogenous Information Acquisition on Giving
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Silvana Krasteva, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2021
* USD 20,055.00

An important question in the study of charitable organizations is what motivate
people to contribute more? This proposed research will use theory and
experiments to investigate whether providing more information about the value of
the proposed public good at the fundraising stage will encourage more donations.
The researchers will develop a theoretical model which predicts that providing
more information to people who do not generally donate will encourage them to
donate, while providing more information to those who normally donate decreases
their donations. The researchers will use new and sophisticated methods to test
this theory. Early test results confirm the predictions of the theory. The
results of this research project are useful for formulating fundraising policies
for charities---share more information with communities which would otherwise
not donate. The research results also provide guidance on how governments can
generate support for providing public goods. The research project also
contributes to US global leadership in economics research by supporting graduate
student research in economics and thus increases US?s research
capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will use theoretical and
experimental methods to investigate the impact of providing more information
about the value of a public good on voluntary cooperative giving. The research
first develops a theoretical model to investigate the effects of providing
information about the project's value on expected contributions. The model
predicts that the generosity level of the population plays an important role in
how agents respond to information; information has the potential to increase
average contributions in less generous populations but may decrease it in more
generous populations. The PIs will then use laboratory experiments to test this
model as well as measure people?s willingness to pay for such information.
Preliminary experimental results confirm the theoretical predictions. The
results of the research project have important policy implications for how
charities provide information on the outcomes of their activities to generate
more donations. It also provides guidance on how governments may generate
support for the provision of public and merit goods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.