* 1756169
* CSBR:  Ownership Transfer:  Transfer of the orphaned University of Minnesota Paleontology Collection to the Cincinnati Museum Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Brenda Hunda, Cincinnati Museum Center
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 404,909.00

Natural History collections, including paleontology collections provide a
foundational resource for biological science research. An award is made to the
Cincinnati Museum Center (CMC) to transfer and secure the University of
Minnesota (UM) paleontology collection, consisting of over 15,000 invertebrate
and 5,500 vertebrate fossil specimens. This collection is currently at risk due
to lack of curation, poor storage conditions, and imminent removal to offsite
storage. The project will unite two scientifically significant Midwest US
collections and facilitate achievement of two major goals: (1) secure the
collection in a dedicated storage facility with appropriate climate controlled
conditions, and (2) curate and disseminate the collection to the scientific and
broader community for research and education. Paleontology collections excite
the imagination of public audiences and inspire the next generation of
scientists. Cincinnati has a long history of paleontological research and
education beginning in the mid-1800s. This tradition will continue under this
project by training undergraduate and graduate students in curatorial skills
through student internships. In addition, collaboration with CMC's successful
STEM Girls Program will provide girls (ages 7 to 14) the opportunity to be
"Curator for a Day" and have authentic experiences behind the scenes of the
Museum working with real objects and scientists in a collaborative
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the physical
transfer, rehousing, digitization, and dissemination of a scientifically
significant and endangered UM paleontology collection. The UM collection
contains a significantly high proportion of type and figured specimens.
Taxonomic, geographic, and stratigraphic overlap, and the historical connections
between UM and Cincinnati Museum Center (CMC) paleontology collections, make CMC
the natural place to house and care for UM's orphaned collection. As CMC's
collection is dynamic and growing, this transfer will exponentially increase the
visibility, use, and access to the UM paleontology collection. This award
facilitates the support of a dedicated staff member to oversee the curatorial
requirements of this project. Specimens will be catalogued, entered into CMC's
existing electronic database, and integrated into CMCs current collection.
Additionally, UM specimens will undergo imaging, georeferencing, and sharing of
digital data to CMC's website (www.cincymuseum.org/research/invertebrate) and
iDigBio (iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.