* 1756976
* RUI: Mechanisms Regulating Facultative Migrations of the Pine Siskin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/16/2017,04/30/2020
* Heather Watts, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 173,758.00

Proposal Title: RUI: Mechanisms regulating facultative migrations of the Pine
Siskin&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Loyola Marymount University, and a partnership
with UC-Davis&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 03/13/2015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migratory
behavior can be characterized by regular and predictable seasonal and
directional movements, or the movements may be much less predictable with
respect to both timing and direction. The less predictable movements, known as
facultative migration, are much more difficult to study. This project will
investigate the drivers of facultative migration in a captive species of bird,
the pine siskin (Spinus pinus). The goals of the project are to assess 1) What
cue(s) trigger the development of a migratory stage; and 2) What endocrine
hormones mediate the migratory response? Four cues (photoperiod, food
availability, population density, and mate availability) and two hormones
(corticosterone and testosterone) will be investigated. Understanding how
animals respond to environmental variability is critical in today's changing
climate. The project will train a post-graduate researcher at a primarily
undergraduate institution, and will involve large numbers of undergraduates,
including those from underrepresented groups. The lead investigator is a
beginning investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will systematically and
comprehensively investigate the mechanisms underlying facultative migration, a
suite of behaviors that are taxonomically widespread. It is the captive avian
model organism that enables this research. Four different hypotheses will be
investigated as part of the first goal of the project: (i) an increasing
photoperiod stimulates facultative migration in the spring; (ii) declining food
availability stimulates the development&amp;#8232;of migration; (iii) high local
population density, prior to a decline in food availability, can trigger the
transition to a migratory&amp;#8232; stage; and (iv) that a shortage of
potential mates can stimulate migration around the time of breeding. Two
additional hypotheses will be investigated as part of the second goal: (i)
increased circulating corticosterone levels stimulate &amp;#8232;the development
of a migratory stage; and (ii) the transition to a migratory stage is
stimulated&amp;#8232; by increased circulating testosterone levels. Experiments
will include manipulating the environmental triggers and tracking behavioral and
physiological responses, and direct manipulation of the endocrine hormones. The
combined approaches will provide significant opportunities for research training
at a primarily undergraduate institution. The team will work with the Loyola
Marymount University Center for Urban Resilience to develop and disseminate
materials to be used in Los Angeles area schools.