* 1756912
* REU Site in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Sanford Research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Lance Lee, Sanford Research/USD
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 329,000.00

This REU Site award to Sanford Research, located in Sioux Falls, SD, will
support the training of ten students for ten weeks during the summers of 2019 -
2021. The objectives are to provide exceptional research experiences in Cellular
and Molecular Biology to undergraduate students, support the pursuit of graduate
degrees and research careers, and increase diversity in the scientific
community. Students will perform cutting-edge research on projects in diverse
areas, including signal transduction, intracellular trafficking, organelle
function, cell proliferation and differentiation, and development. The program
is comprised of research experience, career and professional development
workshops, ethics training, a GRE preparation workshop, presentation
opportunities, and outreach activities. At the end of the program, students will
present their research in a poster format at an end-of-program symposium.
Recruitment will focus on students interested in pursuing research careers with
an emphasis on underrepresented minority students and students from
socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds. Students may apply online at the
program website. A selection committee will interview the top candidates by
videoconference and make acceptance decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Emphasis is placed on
underrepresented minority students and students more broadly underrepresented in
science, such as first-generation college students, students from low-income
households, students with disabilities, and veterans. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Students will also engage with the community through
outreach activities, which increases public scientific literacy and inspires
younger people to consider science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. This will be supplemented by surveys administered by an
external evaluator and consultation with an advisory board. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.sanfordresearch.org/education/undergraduates/spur/ or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Pearce at David.Pearce@sanfordhealth.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Lee at
Lance.Lee@sanfordhealth.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.