* 1756831
* The Role of Workplaces in Changing Conventional Definitions of Ideal Workers
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Elizabeth Hirsh, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 244,893.00

Workers have increasingly been expected to work long hours in American
workplaces, yet doing so carries negative consequences for their health and
family life. This overwork culture stems from the expectation that ideal workers
should put work before family and demonstrate unlimited and undivided commitment
to work. This norm may be especially problematic for American women, whose time
availability is more likely to be limited by caregiving responsibilities. This
study investigates this ideal worker norm, and the conditions under which the
norm might change. The project studies organizational policies that allow time
off and flexibility in work schedules and locations, as well as conditions under
which these policies are implemented. It also investigates female managerial
representation in the organization, which may be important for organizational
adoption of new policies to help women in the workplace. The project will also
examine how these organizational conditions affect employee outcomes, such as
employee assessment of their fit to the ideal worker norm, and their careers and
health. This project shows how changes in the overwork culture may be possible
in contemporary American workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project conducts a
nationally representative, probability-based survey of employees and then
matches employee data to organization-level data drawn from the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) EEO-1 database. EEO-1 data offer workplace gender
and race composition at the establishment level, as well as basic workplace
characteristics, such as industry and establishment size. This linked employee-
employer data will allow examination of how the ideal worker norm varies by
workplace characteristics, and how different organizational conditions influence
employee outcomes while controlling for other organizational characteristics.
The probability-based employee sample allows findings to generalize to employed
adults working in medium to large organizations in the United States. The
employee-employer linked data set will provide a unique opportunity to address
questions that span the individual and the organization-level, and in
identifying the macro conditions that may reshape the ideal worker norm and its
impact on individual workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.