* 1756440
* CSBR:  Natural History:  Expanding capacity and collections in invertebrate biodiversity at the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Gustav Paulay, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 401,941.00

Understanding the natural world and our place in it depends on accurate
information about life on Earth. Much of this knowledge comes from the
scientific collections accumulated over centuries. These large collections in
turn are partly an amalgam of many smaller ones, made and donated by research
institutions and naturalists that no longer have the capacity to care for them
or make them available to users. The goal of this project is to provide for the
long-term care and accessibility of three important collections received by the
Florida Museum. About 67,000 specimen lots (each "lot" contains one or more
specimens) representing more than 300,000 specimens of diverse marine organisms
will be archivally rehoused, and made available online, through loans, and to
visitors. The Florida Museum invertebrate collection (FLMNH-IZ) will be expanded
with new shelving and cabinetry to accommodate recent growth. A cadre of
undergraduate students will help to carry out this work, as they also learn
about marine life, biodiversity, and museum science in short courses organized
as part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new shelf
and cabinet space for the greatly increased at FLMNH-IZ. The collection has
doubled in size in 15 years as a result of an active field program, and rescue
and curation of valuable relinquished collections. The FLMNH-IZ is a major
research node for studies on mollusks and tropical marine invertebrates. It
serves the third largest collection of specimen-data on non-insect invertebrates
in the world and is used broadly by the research community. The collection
averages 35-40 visitors, 75-80 loans, and is the basis of 40-50 publications a
year. The project will also allow the curation of three high-quality
relinquished collections. The Harry Lee collection is perhaps the most important
private shell collection in the US and includes specimens of 12,000 identified
species. The Maturo and McKinney Bryozoa collections are among the largest in
the country of the poorly known but highly diverse "moss animals". The NOAA-
NCRMP collection is an alcohol-fixed, wet collection of reef invertebrates
holding several thousand species taken from 26 islands across the tropical
Pacific over the past decade, including from several remote, uninhabited, and
virtually unknown islands. It offers a wealth of material for systematic and
molecular genetic studies of Pacific biodiversity. These collections will be
available physically and online, through resources such as iDigBio (idigbio.org)
together with the more than 600,000 specimen records already
digitized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.