* 1756807
* Collaborative Research: Influence of Surfactants on Air-Sea Gas Exchange: 3He/SF6 Experiments in the Baltic Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 491,869.00

Gas exchange, the movement of gases between the atmosphere and the surface ocean
(in both directions), is an important process to understand in global
biogeochemistry. A particular area of interest is the rate of exchange of gases
such as carbon dioxide and dimethyl sulfide, which play important roles in
Earth's climate. Understanding and modeling air-sea exchange on a global scale
requires understanding of how gas exchange rates vary in response to a number of
factors such as temperature, wind speed, and the presence of surface chemical
films (known as surfactants) in the ocean. Over the past 25 years, major
advances have been made in understanding air-sea gas exchange in the open ocean,
mainly due to improvements in methodologyÂ and a number of successful process
studies. However, some important questions remain, such as what happens near
coastal areas (including inland seas), and how surfactants affect gas exchange.
The Baltic Sea Gas Exchange Experiment (Baltic GasEx) is a collaboration between
scientists from the US and Germany designed to address these questions.
Participants in Baltic GasEx will measure the air-sea gas exchange rates with
different techniques in the Baltic Sea before and after the spring bloom, when
concentrations and compositions of surfactants will be different. The
expeditions will be conducted on a German ship (Alkor), with the ultimate goal
of quantifying the relationship between wind speed and gas exchange in an inland
sea, and understanding the impact of surfactants on air-sea gas exchange. The
project will involve significant international collaboration, public education
and outreach through both participating U.S. institutions, and substantial
student training in partnership with the international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will support helium-3 and sulfur
hexafluoride measurements during Baltic GasEx to determine the gas exchange
rate. German colleagues are independently funded to quantify surfactants with AC
voltammetry, surface tension, and sum frequency generation; to determine
chemical characteristics of the micro layer; and to estimate the gas exchange
rate using eddy covariance flux measurements of CO2 and DMS. The proposed
experiment is designed to address the question of whether open ocean wind
speed/gas exchange parameterizations can be applied to inland seas like the
Baltic. Also, the effect of surfactants on gas exchange has been studied
extensively in the laboratory, but there is little direct field evidence for the
effect of surfactants on gas exchange. The proposed experiment, with expeditions
at times with both high and low surfactant concentrations, should shed new light
on the effect of natural surfactants on gas exchange. Finally, some wind
speed/gas exchange parameterizations proposed for the Baltic Sea appear to be
higher than typical open ocean parameterizations. These are typically based on
eddy covariance flux measurements of CO2. However, in open ocean experiments
where both the helium-3/sulfur hexafluoride approach and eddy covariance of CO2
have been deployed, there seems to be a discrepancy between gas transfer
velocities measured with the two techniques. This experiment should show whether
a similar difference in gas transfer velocities measured via these two
techniques also exists in the Baltic Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.