* 1756853
* Legitimacy in the Workplace
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Cathryn Johnson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/28/2023
* USD 248,000.00

Legitimacy is critical for the effective performance of authorities in workplace
settings. Legitimated authorities have secured support from their superiors and
subordinates, who accept them as appropriate in their positions and are likely
to comply with their requests. In contrast, authorities who are not legitimated
are likely to be challenged, resisted, and scrutinized. This project addresses
two questions: 1) How do authorities gain legitimacy? and 2) How can members of
groups that have not typically held positions of authority gain legitimacy,
necessary to ensure the productive and smooth operations of the organization?
The hypotheses integrate knowledge about how fairness and power affect
legitimacy, how trust is involved, and how status characteristics, i.e.,
personal attributes such as gender, may condition the process. These are tested
in a series of three studies. Results will allow development of strategies for
authorities, especially women, to ensure their legitimacy in the workplace,
thereby improving the effectiveness of modern
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses drawn from theories of procedural
justice, resource-based power, and status processes are tested via two vignette
experiments and one survey study, involving adult samples from the U.S.
population. These studies build on a recently completed vignette study, using
undergraduates, that manipulated an authority's use of procedural justice and
benevolent power to examine their effects on perceptions of legitimacy. The
first study replicates the completed vignette study with employed adults, taking
into consideration characteristics of their work experience. A second vignette
study manipulates the gender of the authority along with her or his behavior to
examine what is required to ensure the legitimacy of female authorities. The
third study surveys working adults about their own experiences with authorities
in their organizations. Cumulative results from these studies will identify
potential strategies for authorities, especially women, to ensure their
legitimacy in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.