* 1756956
* Collaborative Research: Observations of Three-dimensional Transport Pathways and Biogeochemical Fluxes in the Southern Ocean using Autonomous Gliders
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Andrew Thompson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 764,696.00

The Southern Ocean is often referred to as the window to the deep ocean. This
vast ocean around Antarctica is the primary location where the waters that fill
the deep ocean are brought to the surface where they interact with the
atmosphere and with sea ice. Because of this unique role in the global climate
system, the physical and biological processes that occur in the Southern Ocean
have a disproportionately large impact on the properties of the global ocean,
including the amount of heat and carbon dioxide that is trapped in the deep
ocean for hundreds to thousands of years. Extremely sparse observations of both
the Southern Ocean?s circulation structure and biological properties, such as
nutrient and biomass concentrations, have presented a significant barrier to
understanding the modification of near surface waters and their subsequent
exchange with the deep ocean. In recent years, the SOCCOM (Southern Ocean Carbon
and Climate Observations and Modeling) project has used innovative robotic
technologies, namely autonomous profiling floats, to provide observations of
biogeochemical properties in the Southern Ocean with unprecedented coverage in
space and time. This advance marks a step change in our ability to
mechanistically understand the Southern Ocean?s role in the global carbon cycle
but many of the physical and biological processes responsible for generating the
observed biogeochemical distributions are not adequately captured by the floats
because of their relatively coarse sampling interval (10 days). In this project,
two ocean gliders will be piloted to track individual floats in order to measure
the oceanic circulation features that impact exchange between the surface and
interior ocean. Gliders sample the upper 1000 meters of the ocean once every 4
to 5 hours and are able to resolve variations in fluid motion on time scales of
about a day. On these scales, the variability of vertical velocities are quite
large and thus the circulation at these shorter temporal and smaller spatial
scales significantly influences the vertical transport of ocean properties. An
improved characterization of motions at these scales, and their impact on heat
and carbon transport, will lead to a better understanding of the role the
Southern Ocean plays in the global carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
autonomous ocean gliders will be deployed in the Indian sector of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current, coincident with one or more semi-Lagrangian Argo floats
equipped with biogeochemical sensors through the SOCCOM project. The gliders
will be piloted to track the Argo float for a period of at least four months,
resolving the mesoscale and submesoscale structure surrounding the float as well
as variability occurring at periods shorter than the float?s 10-day sampling
interval. Measurements of the upper ocean hydrographic and velocity fields will
permit an analysis of hydrodynamical instabilities within the mixed layer and
their impact on vertical transport and exchange across the base of the mixed
layer. The glider data will also be combined with the float observations and
remote sensing products to derive vertical tracer fluxes, with the goal of
quantifying the partitioning of export between sinking and advective pathways.
Ultimately, this project will provide observations of the physical processes
that contribute to high-frequency spatial and temporal variability in Southern
Ocean tracer distributions and will provide a significant step towards
describing the mechanisms that influence physical and biogeochemical
distributions and transport pathways in the Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.