* 1756218
* CSBR:   Natural History: Enhancing paleontology collections in coordination with a new Burke Museum facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Caroline Stromberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 226,029.00

An award is made to the University of Washington to support the Burke Museum
paleontology collection. The Burke's paleontology collection includes
approximately 3 million objects, but a substantial number of these are not
easily accessible to the public or even to researchers and scholars because they
are currently housed offsite at a variety of locations. A primary goal of this
project will be to bring together all of these offsite collections into a new
facility. The new Burke Museum building will maximize accessibility to the
collections, as well as to provide the best environment, with modern temperature
and humidity controls (not available at some of the current offsite facilities).
In addition, the design of the new building features labs and collections
facilities visible to the public as well as two classrooms, which will further
enhance the accessibility of the paleontology collections to the general public
and students at the University of Washington.

The Burke Museum consolidation of three collections form three offsite storage
facilities will offer increased safety for the fossils and enhanced
accessibility and potential for research and instructional use. As currently
housed, the paleontology collections are severely compressed and the space
available for research-related growth is limited. Recent 5-year growth rates for
the three main collections (invertebrate paleontology 3%, paleobotany 46%, and
vertebrate paleontology 20%) demonstrate remarkable productivity from the
ongoing research of the PIs, their students, and other Burke-associated
researchers. Funds from this award will be used for storage equipment, primarily
cabinets and open-shelving units, to assure sufficient space for continued
productivity. As a university-based natural history museum, the Burke places
great importance on training future paleontologists in a museum environment.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be employed throughout the proposed
collections improvement project, giving them greater insight into how
collections are created, maintained, and used.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.