* 1756367
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Models of Socio-ecological Resilience in Response to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Emily Hite, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Theories of socioecological resilience have attempted to understand how and why
systems return to an equilibrium state after a disturbance. More recent research
has demonstrated resilience to be more fluid, a dynamic and adaptive response
that develops create capacities over time. Using a panarchy model of resilience,
which recognizes the ongoing tensions between stability and change, this project
seeks to understand how events of varied temporal and spatial and speeds can
reciprocally influence produce unpredictable outcomes. The project, which trains
a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis,
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating findings to
organizations engaged in modeling socio-ecological resilience and mitigating the
impacts of environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emily Hite, under the
supervision of Dr. Jerry Jacka of the University of Colorado at Boulder, will
explore the processes by which a diversity of perspectives at multiple scales
inform the development and implementation of policy, and the ways in which
policy implementation relates to social-ecological resiliency and the production
of space and place through time. The research will be conducted in Costa Rica,
an ideal site for asking these questions because it is an international leader
in renewable energy production and sustainable development, and a policy
commitment to becoming one of the world's first carbon neutral countries. This
plan relies on completing the Diquís Hydroelectric Project in southwestern
Puntarenas Province. However, the Térraba indigenous peoples living in the area
have conflicting perspectives regarding the project's potential social,
environmental, and economic transformations on their culture, livelihoods, and
landscape. The researchers will conduct anthropological research in Térraba and
the capital, San José, to better understand the diversity of perspectives of and
responses to climate policy, how they are formed, and how they inform policy
development. The research team will collect social, ecological, and ethnographic
data using participant observation, interviews, household surveys, focus groups,
and surveys of plant and animal species used by Térraba peoples. The diversity
of qualitative and quantitative data will provide a more comprehensive
understanding of how local people are impacted by universal climate policy
mechanisms and attempts at the nation-state level to implement those mechanisms.