* 1756208
* Collaborative Research: Effects of multiple aspects of climate change on marine biodiversity and ecosystem functioning
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Kristy Kroeker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2022
* USD 91,896.00

This project addresses fundamental gaps in our knowledge of how changing
environmental conditions will impact the earth's species and ecosystems. One of
the main challenges is predicting impacts of multiple environmental stressors
changing at the same time within highly dynamic ecosystems. Climate simulations
in coastal marine habitats will, therefore, yield critical information about
likely future changes in biodiversity and ecosystem health. This project is a
partnership between institutions with a strong focus on serving underrepresented
communities of students, and the investigators are committed to participating in
K-12 and undergraduate mentorship programs through their respective
institutions. Furthermore, the research will be based in Sitka, Alaska, where
investigators will collaborate with the Sitka Sound Science Center to
incorporate research into the Scientist in the Schools program and a summer day
camp for elementary age children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to uncover
the trajectory of climate change impacts and interactive responses to multiple
climatic stressors on coastal marine species, communities, and ecosystem
functioning. To uncover these links, the investigators will (1) quantify
seasonal and diel dynamics under ambient conditions in a benthic marine
community, (2) conduct factorial manipulations of two climatic stressors -
increased carbon dioxide concentrations and temperatures - and measure impacts
on physiology, diversity, and productivity, and (3) conduct a second field
experiment to evaluate whether productivity responses are due to changes in
physiology or biodiversity. Climatic changes have the potential to influence
ecosystem functioning by altering physiology, abundance, and community structure
(i.e., biodiversity), and this research specifically aims to partition these
different pathways, leading to more effective predictions of impacts on benthic
marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.