* 1756567
* Residential Mobility, Neighborhood Change, and Income Segregation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* John Logan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

This study will improve knowledge of trends in income segregation in
metropolitan regions in the post-2000 period. The first goal is to measure more
accurately how residential segregation by income has evolved in the last decade.
The second goal is to analyze how changes in the income composition of
neighborhoods ? such as neighborhoods that are gentrifying or becoming more
impoverished ? are tied to outcomes for individual families. What kinds of
people are entering, leaving, and staying in changing neighborhoods? Where do
they come from and where do they go? What are the implications for their
welfare? Neighborhood changes, changing forms of separation between more
affluent and less affluent families, and minority access to better neighborhoods
have a strong bearing on urban development related to housing inequality,
affordable housing, and school disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
analyzes trends in income segregation since 2000, addressing two aspects of
these trends. The first question is how measures of segregation are affected by
the reduction in sample sizes in the American Community Survey (ACS), which
scholars now rely on for data at the census tract level. There is good reason to
believe that direct measures are biased upwards as sample sizes decline, so that
results may show increasing segregation even if there has been no real change.
The project will apply new methods of correcting for sample bias to the original
sample data in a federal Research Data Center. Working with confidential data
ameliorates other methodological limitations in published data including: 1) the
suppression of data by race/ethnicity in tracts with small numbers of minority
residents and 2) top-coding of the income distribution. The second question is
how changes in the income composition of neighborhoods are produced through
patterns of residential mobility. The project will make use of the original
records from Census 2000 and 2010 and the 2008-2012 ACS that can be linked over
time. The study will select neighborhoods that have experienced gentrification,
poor neighborhoods that have become poorer, and affluent neighborhoods that have
become more exclusive. In each type of neighborhood, it is possible to identify
the number and characteristics of residents who remain from 2000 to 2010, who
leave, and who enter. This research will offer new insight into how individual-
level (mobility) behaviors aggregate to macro-level (neighborhood) outcomes,
which is an enduring issue in social science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.