* 1756776
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Cultural Significance of Informal American Commemorative Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Laurence Ralph, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,172.00

Commemorative sites are an essential part of American cultural life, as they
provide a space for reflecting, sustaining, and challenging deeply held values
and beliefs. Public memorialization often emerges in the aftermath of fraught,
sometimes violent, encounters. The spaces dedicated to preserving those social
memories can therefore function as much to resolve conflicts as to erase or
remember particular identities or histories. This has been well-documented
within formal, public spaces, but we know less about the informal mechanisms
through which commemorative spaces are established, maintained, and contested.
This project, which trains a student in methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, conducts a case study of informal forms of
memorialization in an American city in order to understand what impact the
establishment and maintenance of a commemorative sites has on identity
formation, civil society, and violence reduction. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations engaged in policy dialogues related to understanding the origins
and motivations for urban violence, and to what extent memorialization
attenuates its prevalence. Harvard University anthropology doctoral student
Samantha Hawkins, under the supervision of Dr. Laurence Ralph, will explore the
inner-city as a complex, affective landscape, wherein urban memorials function
as tools of cultural recollection in a context marked by violence. These
memorials are also sites of regulation and contestation, made evident by their
ongoing obliteration and reinscription. She will conduct ethnographic fieldwork
in Baltimore, which is an ideal site to conduct the study as it has the second
highest per capita murder rate in the U.S. The makeup of and changes to
memorials in Baltimore, the different levels of engagement and investment, the
varying reasons that they are erected and/or destroyed, the patterns of
aesthetic composition, demonstrate something significant about material claims
to space and identity. The project asks how social relations and political
ideologies are woven into a topography of memory. Can a material object both
reflect political authority and social hierarchies, while also serving efforts
of urban black populations to preserve a cultural identity? The investigator
will employ a range of qualitative ethnographically-grounded techniques,
pursuing three key areas of inquiry: how the memorial functions as an object of
argument through which survivors of those lost to violence seek to legitimize
their lived experience and assert value; the role of urban space in re-
presenting material traces of memory and defining personhood; and the impact of
violence in the formation of identities. This research will produce a critical
account of memory politics in Baltimore's inner-city, contributing both to the
anthropology of race and class, as well as broader scientific debates about
memorialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.