* 1756512
* CSBR: Natural History: Consolidating, modernizing and harnessing the full potential of two herbaria collections at New Mexico State University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Zachary Rogers, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 422,960.00

New Mexico has five major plant museums or herbaria, which contain a combined
300,000 specimens of dried, pressed plants that are invaluable scientific
resources used to promote education, research and public engagement. More than
30% (or 120,000) of these unique specimens are housed in two herbaria at the New
Mexico State University (NMSU), one of which is the State's oldest herbarium.
Together the NMSU herbaria represent the premier plant reference resource for
the southern half of New Mexico, adjacent states, and northern Mexico. The goals
of the project are to consolidate the NMSU herbaria, modernize their collections
data management infrastructure, and update their management procedures,
ultimately preserving the collections long-term, while broadening the data
accessibility for education, research, and public use. With a multidisciplinary
team of botanical researchers and local science educators, a series of academic
and outreach initiatives will be implemented to increase literacy in the plant
sciences within different sectors of the population. At NMSU, an official
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), researchers will pursue the recruitment and
engagement of students, using hands-on experiences aimed at the care, protection
and use of herbarium specimens and their associated data. Skills learned will
improve participation in further education and training opportunities (e.g.,
graduate school) in STEM fields, while increasing downstream employment
prospects. Through partnership with a local scientific education non-profit
organization, the project will develop comprehensive botanical outreach
materials to increase awareness and interest in natural history collections,
plant biology and biodiversity, and biogeography among at least 1,500 K-12
students in an underserved Hispanic region located in southern New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities and expected outcomes include: 1)
physical preservation, curation, and integration of herbarium specimens into a
unified online digital herbarium (e.g., all specimens databased, barcoded, and
imaged), 2) update of currently insecure, disparate databases of the herbaria
into a single modern natural history collection management system, 3)
acquisition of specimen data from a backlog of important uncurated specimens, 4)
development of comprehensive botanical outreach and educational kits for local
K-12 students, 5) training of undergraduate research assistants, and 6)
implementation of professional workshops, and a crowdsourcing online campaign,
all specifically tailored to a wide variety of stakeholders (e.g., students via
NMSU's Graduate Certificate in Museum Studies, curators of other natural history
collections on campus, land managers and owners, researchers, and citizen
scientists). The collaborative nature of the project across campus and the
region leverages knowledge and expertise in efficient and exciting directions,
creating new research and outreach opportunities that make use of these
important herbarium collections and their valuable and unique biodiversity
information. Specimen data will be shared with and made available through
iDigBio (idigbio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.