* 1756544
* Conferences on Economic Activity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Stock, Brookings Institution
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,001.00

This award provides partial funding for the Brookings Conference on Economic
Activity and the accompanying conference volume, the Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity. The conference is designed to bring together economic
scientists to focus on the scientific analysis of economic policy issues. These
issues include the changing labor market, financial institutions, global
economic policy, heath care, data improvement, inequality, and long run economic
growth. The papers presented at the conference are available online to the
public. They develop empirical analysis, employ a wide range of research
methods, and focus on real world problems that affect the US economy, including
the future of growth and productivity in the U.S. and abroad, challenges facing
the labor market, improving economic data, and scientific examination of the
effects of economic policies on trade, financial markets, health, taxes, energy,
and regulation. The award promotes the national interest by improving the
quality of the economics used in making policy decisions, and provides better
evidence for policies that contribute to the competitiveness of the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BPEA conferences are marked by a high degree
of interaction among the organizers, researchers, discussants, and attendees.
Each researcher invited to present engages in an intensive process of three
rounds of review, criticism, discussion and editing. BPEA encourages scientists
to apply the best knowledge of the profession to pressing policy issues and uses
policy concerns to point the profession's way toward new
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.