* 1756005
* CRII:OAC: Novel techniques for improving convergence and scalability of a Monte Carlo radiation solver for large-scale combustion simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Somesh Roy, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,951.00

Combustion has been an important source of energy for ages and will continue to
be so for considerable future. With the help of high-performance computing
(HPC), predictive and accurate combustion simulations have a tremendous
potential to emerge as a cost-effective and reliable design, assessment, and
decision-making tool for practical systems (e.g., gas turbines, internal
combustion engines, furnaces, etc.).  Detailed predictive modeling of combustion
system requires, among other things, detailed and accurate modeling of thermal
radiation. However, models for thermal radiation used in combustion simulations
are usually over-simplified. The main bottlenecks in using detailed radiation
model are its high computational cost and poor parallel efficiency in HPC.  This
project explores several novel ideas to increase efficiency and robustness of a
high-fidelity radiation solver in HPC combustion simulations, leading to the
possibility of performing predictive and accurate simulations
of practical combustion systems in a realistic time-frame.  The ability to
perform such large-scale reliable predictive simulation is not only important in
the design process of real combustion devices but also essential to further our
understanding of fundamentals of combustion processes.  Considering the ever-
increasing need for cleaner combustion devices, this predictive capability can
potentially have a significant effect in academic research, as well as in
energy and transportation industry. The project will also have an impact in
popularizing computer programming in undergraduate students. Therefore, this
research aligns with the NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
radiation solver of choice in this project is a Monte-Carlo ray tracing-based
(MCRT) solver. It is one of the most accurate radiation solver available, and
typically outshines all other radiation solvers as the complexity of the problem
increases.  To achieve improvements in efficiency and
scalability of the MCRT solver in HPC simulations of large-scale
combustion systems, this research brings together ideas from different
disciplines of mathematics, statistical theory, and computer science and applies
them to solve an engineering problem.  Considering the fact that the performance
of an MCRT solver in HPC primarily depends on the underlying statistical
algorithm and computational load-balancing, the current research is divided into
three primary tasks. First, the project is developing new algorithms for
improved convergence using special statistical distributions with low
discrepancy. Second, novel strategies for MCRT load management, both in terms of
computational time and memory utilization, are being explored to improve
scalability of the solver in HPC simulations.  Third, the improved MCRT solver
are planned to be created as a modular, platform-
independent solver module with standardized interfaces so that it can be used
with any combustion and/or CFD solver without significant sacrifice of its
performance.  By enhancing efficiency and scalability of MCRT, this work aims to
enable more accurate predictive HPC simulations of large-scale combustion
systems in a realistic timescale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.