* 1756883
* The dynamics and multi-year predictability of La Nina
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 625,040.00

La Niña, a recurrent cooling pattern over the tropical Pacific Ocean, has been
linked to reduced wintertime precipitation across the southern tier of the
United States. Historical observations show that La Niña events can last two
years or longer, a feature that could make their associated drought impacts more
persistent. Forecast systems are generally able to predict the onset of La Niña,
as they virtually always follow El Niño. However, little is known about the
predictability of multi-year La Niña events because current operational ENSO
forecasts are limited to 8 months. This project addresses a series of questions
that are critical to improve our ability to predict these events. The project
will determine the processes, initial ocean states, and models that can produce
skillful multi-year predictions of tropical Pacific. Predicting whether La Niña
will return for a second year is critical for predicting the duration of
associated droughts throughout the world. Results from this project can
potentially improve our ability to predict both the strength and duration of US
droughts caused by La Niña.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations show that La Niña
events tend to last for an additional year, causing persistent drought and
flooding impacts in regions throughout the world. Forecasts of these 2-year La
Niña events are not routinely generated by operational prediction systems
because they focus on shorter lead times, typically up to eight months. This
project will demonstrate the feasibility of skillful predictions of 2-year La
Niña. Multi-year forecasts will be performed using the Community Earth System
Model Version 1 (CESM1), a model that simulates realistic and highly predictable
2-year La Niña. Model dependence of 2-year predictability will be explored using
decadal climate predictions performed by four climate models that participated
in Phase 5 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5). These
retrospective forecasts (hindcasts) performed with CESM1 and CMIP5 will be used
to explore the physical processes responsible for the predictability of
historical 2-year La Niña. Advanced diagnostics will be used to attribute the
processes causing forecast spread. Discrepancies in the hindcasts of historical
2-year La Niña events relative to their observed trajectory will be analyzed to
identify their predictable and unpredictable drivers. An existing suite of
seasonal predictions performed with CESM1 will be extended to produce 2-year
hindcasts initialized in March, June, and September. Together with the existing
suite of decadal predictions initialized in November, the proposed extension
will be used to explore the impact of different lead times, initial state, and
seasonality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.