* 1756308
* Partial Identification of State Dependence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Alexander Torgovitsky, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 177,808.00

Many empirical questions in economics require the answer to some form of the
following question: To what extent do past outcomes determine current and future
outcomes? For example, if employers make hiring decisions based in part on the
past employment outcomes of an applicant, then previous unemployment may cause
an applicant to remain unemployed, if employers view this as a negative signal
of the applicant's quality as a worker. Using data on employment outcomes to
measure the extent to which this phenomenon occurs is a notoriously difficult
problem. This proposal develops new statistical models for addressing this
problem, both as it applies to employment dynamics, and to other similar
problems in economics. The project advances the field by developing new methods
for data analysis. The application to employment outcomes also advances the
national prosperity by giving us better information about how unemployment
affects long run job prospects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental conceptual
difficulty with measuring state dependence is that the effect of past outcomes
will confound with temporally persistent unobservable heterogeneity across
agents. For example, observing in a panel that previously unemployed agents are
less likely to be employed could be due to a negative causal effect of past
unemployment, but it could also result if unemployed agents are less likely to
be employed due to other unobservable factors such as preferences or
productivity. To date, the vast majority of statistical methods designed to
measure state dependence use variants of highly-parameterized dynamic binary
choice models. These models depend on many strong assumptions, including
arbitrary functional form restrictions on the shape of heterogeneity. They are
quite likely to be severely misspecified in many applications. The goal of this
proposal is to develop and apply transparent nonparametric approaches for
identifying state dependence from unobserved heterogeneity. Owing to the
difficulty of point identifying state dependence, the proposed methods use
partial identification techniques. In particular, the PI develops a new dynamic
potential outcomes model, studies its properties, and applies it to questions of
state dependence in employment outcomes.