* 1756402
* Collaborative Research: Are Low-Temperature Hydrothermal Vents an Important but Overlooked Source of Stabilized Dissolved Iron to the Ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2024
* USD 700,310.00

Hydrothermal vents are hot springs on the seafloor. They are often thousands of
meters below the surface of the ocean along the large volcanic mountain ranges
called the mid-ocean ridges. Relatively little is known about these hydrothermal
vents because they exist so far from the ocean surface. Instead of lava, these
vents emit warm to hot fluids (from several ºC up to 350 ºC) into the ocean, and
contain high concentrations of a wide range of dissolved chemicals. One of these
chemicals, iron, has been studied extensively by ocean scientists because of its
importance as an essential nutrient for the microscopic photosynthetic algae
called phytoplankton that grow in surface ocean waters. Scientists once thought
that most of the dissolved iron coming out of hydrothermal vent fluids would
quickly precipitate (form a solid and sink) near the vents, as a result of
chemical reactions between the hot vent fluid and cold seawater, and therefore
only small amounts of dissolved iron could be transported from the deep sea mid-
ocean ridges to surface waters where phytoplankton grow. However, on a recent
scientific expedition over one of the most active mid-ocean ridges called the
southern East Pacific Rise (SEPR), scientists discovered that much of the
dissolved iron discharged from the SEPR hydrothermal vents was in fact
transported thousands of kilometers across the deep ocean. In addition, computer
simulations suggest that a substantial amount of this hydrothermal iron is
transported as far as the surface waters of the Southern Ocean around
Antarctica, where it could support the growth of
phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from the University of
Washington, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Old Dominion University
will return to the SEPR aboard a research ship and make additional measurements
to better understand how hydrothermal vents add dissolved iron to the deep
ocean. They will use specialized sampling equipment, including unmanned
miniature submarines called autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), to map the
distribution of hydrothermal vents in this region, and collect water samples
from both high temperature (250-350 ºC) and low temperature (&lt; 150 ºC) vents.
These samples will be analyzed for chemicals that are enriched in the
hydrothermal vent fluids, such as iron, manganese and helium-3, which will
provide information on the chemical changes that occur as the hydrothermal vent
fluids mix with surrounding seawater and are carried away from the SEPR. The
scientists will use their observations and chemical analyses to address the
following major questions: 1) are there more hydrothermal vents along mid ocean
ridges than previously thought? and (2) are low temperature hydrothermal vents
especially favorable for stabilizing dissolved iron, and ultimately transporting
it to the surface ocean where it supports phytoplankton growth?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the education and training
of a graduate student and two senior undergraduate students, and outcomes will
be incorporated into high school STEM curricula. The research activities will be
communicated via public lectures and media releases, and project results will be
disseminated to the scientific community by conference presentations,
publications in peer-reviewed scientific journals, and freely available on-line
archived data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along thousands of
kilometers of the seafloor volcanic chains known as the mid-ocean ridges,
hydrothermal vents discharge hot, acidic, metal-rich fluids into the deep ocean.
These submarine hot springs are a major gateway for the exchange of heat and
chemicals between the solid earth and the deep ocean, and have received
intensive scientific study during the last 40 years. This research has
overwhelmingly focused on high temperature (~200-350°C) hydrothermal vents.
Lower temperature (&lt;150°C) hydrothermal venting has received relatively
little attention, although results from recent observational and modeling
studies point to the greater abundance of low temperature discharge along the
mid-ocean ridges, and its potential importance for the input of elements and
chemical compounds into the deep ocean. Among the elements that are enriched in
hydrothermal vent fluids, iron has received attention because of its role as an
essential nutrient for primary production in the surface ocean. It has long been
thought that most of the dissolved iron discharged by hydrothermal vents is lost
from solution close to mid-ocean ridge sources, and thus of limited importance
for ocean chemistry. But this view has been challenged by recent studies which
suggest that chemical stabilization of hydrothermal dissolved iron may
facilitate its long-range transport in the deep ocean. In particular, results
from the US GEOTRACES program have revealed the lateral transport of a plume of
hydrothermal dissolved iron over several thousand kilometers westward from its
source region on the southern East Pacific Rise (SEPR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, investigators from the University of Washington, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and Old Dominion University will carry out a field
research program on the SEPR to test the overarching hypothesis that diffuse
low-temperature hydrothermal venting is a major a source of chemically-
stabilized dissolved iron to the deep ocean, and hence plays an important but
previously overlooked role in the ocean iron cycle. The ship-based field program
will use an autonomous underwater vehicle equipped with in-situ optical and
chemical sensors to identify plumes of both diffuse (low-temperature) and
discrete (high-temperature) hydrothermal discharge along the SEPR. Emissions
from multiple sites of both low and high temperature hydrothermal venting will
be sampled for shipboard and post-cruise analyses of iron and other trace
metals, and the inert hydrothermal "tracer" helium-3. The resulting data will be
used to test two specific hypotheses: (1) the population of active hydrothermal
discharge sites along mid ocean ridges is greater than previously estimated, (2)
low temperature hydrothermal venting is conducive to the chemical stabilization
of dissolved iron, thus facilitating its export to the ocean interior and
ultimately to surface ocean where it supports primary production by
phytoplankton. The information obtained in this research will facilitate
inclusion of iron and other trace elements in numerical models of ocean biology
and biogeochemistry, which will improve the ability to predict how the ocean
will respond to and modulate future climatic and environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.