* 1756126
* Inferring trace element inputs to North Pacific surface waters from Alaskan and Asian dust
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2023
* James Murray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2023
* USD 346,753.00

An important part of understanding chemical cycling in the ocean is
understanding the processes that deliver elements and nutrients to or remove
them from the oceans. The atmosphere can be an important source of material from
rain and from dust. In some parts of the oceans, input of elements such as iron
from dust (and possibly rain) can play an important role in stimulating the
growth of phytoplankton, the base of the marine food chain. This study will
involve collection and analysis of a two-year time-series of filtered air
samples from two locations in the subarctic North Pacific, aimed at
understanding the inputs of metals to the ocean surface from Alaskan and Asian
dust and from fossil fuel combustion. The dust time series observations and
analyses proposed will provide insight that will aid the interpretation of
observations from the 2018 U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect
expedition. This project will support a graduate student for two years and will
be the basis of his or her Ph.D. research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will collect atmospheric dust samples from two land-based
locations well suited to capture the flux to surface waters of the subarctic
North Pacific. One is on the northern side of the Aleutian chain, and the second
is an island to the northeast (Middleton Island), at the shelf break, in the
northern Gulf of Alaska. Sampling will be carried out year round at Middleton
Island using an automated sampling system, while high-volume sampling will be
carried out for one month at each of the two locations during targeted known
seasonal events. These will help infer and characterize inputs from Asian dust,
known to occur primarily in the spring, and from Alaskan dust, known to occur
primarily in the autumn. Samples from large events will be made available to the
GEOTRACES research community for analyses. The HYSPLIT model will be used to
simulate dust transport and deposition, for comparison to observations. Previous
work documents substantial interannual variability in dust fluxes from Alaska
and from Asia, and volcanic ash input is even more variable. Given the
seasonality and interannual and spatial variability of the dust sources, and the
short residence time of Fe and other trace elements and isotopes in surface
waters, this history of deposition from dust and fossil fuel combustion, and its
geochemical characterization, will help to distinguish the various inputs more
comprehensively than is possible with a single research cruise.&amp;#8232;A
variety of size fractions will be collected and analyzed to infer the particle
size range that contains each of the metals. Analyses will be carried out on
over twenty elements, including Fe, Al, the REE, the isotopes of Pb, Sr and Nd
(the tracers that best distinguish the dust source end members), and metals
including V and Ag to infer contributions from fossil fuel combustion.
Activities in air of the natural radionuclides lead-210 and beryllium-7, and
their depositional fluxes, will be determined to convert elemental
concentrations in dust into flux estimates to surface waters. Experiments will
evaluate the control of different organic ligands on the solubility of iron and
other metals in surface seawater, the relative solubility of different size
fractions, and the relative solubility of dust- versus fossil fuel-derived
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.