* 1756264
* Collaborative Research: Bottom Boundary Layer Turbulence and Abyssal Recipes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Gunnar Voet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,213,060.00

The classic view of the deep overturning circulation of the ocean is one in
which densest waters formed at high latitudes sink and spread along the abyssal
basins. Small-scale mixing, such as is caused by breaking internal waves, drives
upwelling of these densest waters slowly back toward the surface over the
interior of the basins. However, turbulence measurements over the last 20 years
have shown that mixing becomes more vigorous toward the ocean bottom, which
should result in the sinking of the water masses formed by mixing. Recent work,
combining theory, numerical models and turbulence measurements have suggested
that the upwelling necessary to bring the water back toward the surface to close
the loop happens in thin boundary layers very close to the ocean bottom. This is
a region typically avoided in turbulence measurements to prevent the instruments
from hitting the bottom. This US-UK joint project will seek the first direct
evidence that turbulent mixing drives sinking in the stratified interior and
upwelling along thin boundary layers. It has potentially wide impact because it
explores the importance of boundary layer upwelling in the overturning
circulation, a process that has received little attention to date. Should this
experiment succeed in finding evidence for large upwelling confined to deep
boundary layers, it will reinvigorate studies of boundary layer turbulence. The
field program will compare different approaches to measure turbulent buoyancy
fluxes in the ocean, and help settle the ongoing debate on which ones are most
accurate. The result of this experiment will have important implications for
climate studies, because the ocean uptake of carbon and heat is regulated by the
pathways of deep water masses. Finally, the project has a strong educational
component through the training of two postdocs at WHOI and SIO, who will lead
the analysis of the observations, and one graduate student at MIT, who will run
numerical simulations to put the observations in the overall context of the
regional circulation and the global overturning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting
with Munk (1966), it is generally understood that small-scale mixing, such as is
caused by breaking internal waves, drives upwelling of the densest waters that
sink to the ocean bottom at high latitudes. However, turbulence measurements
over the last 20 years have shown that mixing becomes more vigorous toward the
ocean bottom, and thus converts light waters into denser ones and not vice
versa. Using a combination of theoretical ideas, numerical models, and
turbulence measurements, Ferrari et al. (2016), de Lavergne et al. (2016) and
McDougall and Ferrari (2017) have argued that abyssal waters are converted from
dense to light along weakly stratified bottom boundary layers, where small-scale
turbulent buoyancy fluxes decrease to zero to satisfy the no-density flux
condition at the ocean bottom. In this view, the lower branch of the meridional
overturning circulation is the residual of a large diapycnal sinking, driven by
convection at high latitudes and small-scale mixing in the stratified ocean
interior, balanced by an even larger diapycnal upwelling along the ocean
boundary layers. Callies and Ferrari (2017) illustrate that the confinement of
upwelling along boundary layers results in a different abyssal circulation from
the classical view pioneered by Stommel (1958) and Munk (1966), with important
implications for ocean carbon and heat uptake. Observational support for this
emerging view of the overturning circulation is lacking, because tracers are
advected rapidly in and out of the boundary layers and thus reflect some average
of the diapycnal sinking in the stratified interior and diapycnal upwelling
along the boundaries. Vertical profiles of turbulence in the deep ocean
generally stop above the boundary layer to avoid hitting the seafloor, and thus
miss the crucial decrease of turbulent buoyancy flux through the bottom boundary
layer. This US-UK collaborative project will use the Rockall Trough in the
Northeast Atlantic as a natural laboratory to study diapycnal upwelling along
sloping boundaries. This basin is characterized by rough topography and strong
topographic mixing, and is an important conduit of abyssal waters in the North
Atlantic. Tracers will be released along the Trough's eastern boundary to see
whether their movement is consistent with these new ideas and with inferences in
prior work that deep waters enter the Rockall Trough from the south and upwell
in the basin. The temporal evolution of the tracers will be compared with
diapycnal velocities estimated from buoyancy flux measurements from vertical
profilers in the stratified interior and moored sensors across the boundary
layer. Diapycnal velocities are expected to be strong and upward in the boundary
layer, and downward in the stratified interior. Successful completion of the
field program will return the first direct observation of the role played by
deep boundary layers in the oceanic overturning
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.