* 1756241
* Digging Deeper with the JR100: Extending high resolution paleoclimate records from the Chilean Margin to the Eemian
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yair Rosenthal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 528,989.00

The southeast Pacific is home to the largest temperate ice masses in the
Southern Hemisphere, the Northern and Southern Patagonia Icefields, which
contribute a disproportionate amount to modern sea level rise relative to other
mountain glaciers. The climate impacts of future ice loss from the Patagonia
icefield remain uncertain, but are expected to lead to significant variations in
this region of the southern hemisphere with likely impacts to ocean circulation,
sea level rise, and the global climate. This award funds a month-long research
expedition from Tahiti to Punta Arenas, Chile to collect a depth transect of
sediment cores from the southeast Pacific. The cores will enable investigation
of oceanographic change in Chilean coastal waters and climate variability on the
South American continent over the last 140,000 years. Twenty-six scientists from
institutions across the country will participate, including many young
investigators, with an emphasis on underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to collect six, ~100
meters long sediment cores from the Chilean Margin (36-46Â°S, 829-3858 m) to
investigate links between oceanographic changes at the northern margin of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current and climate variability on the South American
continent over one glacial-interglacial cycle and two glacial terminations. The
new cores will enable reconstruction of surface and intermediate water
variability at centennial-to-millennial resolution, which will extend available
records from previous coring expeditions, thus providing a record of the MIS
5e-5d glacial inception and permitting comparison of Southern Hemisphere records
of the last and previous interglacial (Holocene vs. Eemian) as well as glacial
terminations I and II. The expedition will include high-resolution pore water
analysis to reconstruct the LGM seawater density profile in the Southeast
Pacific. Cores will be scanned at sea to maximize shipboard data analysis. Post-
cruise x-ray fluorescence (XRF) scanning will be used to verify the initial
shipboard splices. The project also involves post-cruise generation of high-
resolution sea surface and intermediate water temperature records from two of
the six sites using &amp;#61540;18O and Mg/Ca measurements in planktonic and
benthic foraminifera. Ba/Ca and Nd/Ca data will be used to trace changes in
river inputs to the coastal region as means of reconstructing changes in the
Patagonian glaciers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.