* 1756056
* I-Corps: Automating reforestation using machine learning and unmanned aerial vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Nancy Jackson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
enhanced capabilities for improved management of forest resources via aerial
reforestation. Sustainable forest management practices are important to decrease
soil erosion, increase biodiversity, sequester carbon and meet future demand for
timber and biomass supply to the pulp, paper, wood, and energy sectors.
Reforestation (natural or assisted) of cleared or degraded land is an important
management objective to achieve these goals. Management costs of private forest
lands have increased over time particularly for small-scale private landowners.
Unmanned aerial vehicles, equipped with customized hardware and software, have
the ability to replace or supplement conventional assisted-reforestation
practices (hand planting or mechanical) and provide a cost-effective
alternative. This project's approach to reforestation can increase accessibility
to physically remote or topographically constrained locations that are difficult
to access with large heavy machinery and vehicles.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercial viability of a data driven
management system for assisted reforestation efforts. The system is designed to
plant seeds using unmanned aerial vehicles outfitted with customized hardware.
The system hardware is capable of projecting customize seed pellets into a range
of soil conditions and at penetration depths necessary for successful
germination. Coupled to the system is a machine learning algorithm that provides
data metrics on forest land holdings using remotely sensed images. The machine
learning algorithm can be trained, based on data type and quantity, for more
accurate and reliable analysis. These data enable private landowners to assess
overall conditions of their holdings, facilitate development of reforestation
plans, and determine flight patterns. In addition, the algortihm is capable of
communicating and guiding the unmanned aerial vehicle's autonomous guidance
system to direct field planting.