* 1756405
* CSBR: Natural History: Conservation and Curation of the Milton Sanderson Dominican Amber Collection at the Illinois Natural History Survey
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Sam Heads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 488,112.00

Dominican amber is famous for the beautifully preserved fossils it contains -
ancient animals, plants, fungi, and even bacteria, dating back to the Miocene
epoch approximately 16-18 million years ago. To date, over 1,000 species have
been discovered in this remarkable amber. Scientific study of Dominican amber
began with an NSF-funded expedition by Illinois Natural History Survey (INHS)
entomologist Milton Sanderson, who visited the island in 1959 to study beetles.
Having learned of rich amber deposits he set out to find them with the help of
local guides and collected a large sample that he brought back to the INHS. The
following year he published a short paper reporting his discovery, thereby
kickstarting scientific study of this ancient ecosystem. Sanderson's collection
is therefore, tremendously important both scientifically and historically, yet
remains unstudied, still unsorted and unprocessed in the original five-gallon
buckets in which it was collected. Years of substandard storage has taken its
toll on the amber, which has undergone significant oxidation and is now
incredibly fragile. This project will allow the collection to finally be
screened for inclusions, conserved using state-of-the-art resin embedding
techniques, curated, and digitized. This will unlock a wealth of important data
concerning ancient biodiversity, ecology, and climate that is currently hidden
and inaccessible within the collection. In addition to making this data
available to the scientific community and the public for the first time, it will
also provide valuable experience to graduate and undergraduate students
beginning their careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Illinois Natural
History Survey (INHS) at the University of Illinois is home to the Milton
Sanderson Dominican Amber Collection (MSDAC). In addition to its historical
importance as the first substantial collection of Dominican amber, the MSDAC is
hugely significant scientifically. It comprises a large (ca. 70 kg) bulk sample
of amber that remains almost entirely unprocessed; i.e., it still resides in the
five-gallon buckets in which it was collected and has yet to be screened for
fossils. Aside from its size, the unscreened nature of the collection means that
it has not been subject to collector bias and no inclusions have been discarded,
as typically happens in collections made commercially and sold to museums or
private collectors. As a result, the MSDAC presents a unique opportunity to
study an unbiased collection that promises to deliver a more complete picture of
the paleobiodiversity and paleoecology of the Early Miocene Dominican amber
forest. Unfortunately, decades of substandard storage have resulted in
substantial oxidation damage putting the collection at significant risk. This
project will focus on the stabilization, conservation, curation and digitization
of the MSDAC. A state-of-the-art vacuum resin embedding technique, in which
specimens are embedded in a high-quality synthetic resin, will be used to
stabilize the oxidized amber. Trimming and polishing of stabilized specimens
will allow identification of inclusions and facilitate photomicrography of
specimens for inclusion in an online database. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in every step of the process, thereby helping to train
the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.