* 1756620
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Contexts of Mental Health Care
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Rebecca Lester, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 9,475.00

Does the experience of mental illness vary across cultures? While the simple
answer to this question is yes, how this happens turns out to be quite complex.
On the one hand, there is evidence that mental health problems and patterns
often emerge in similar ways across the world. Therefore, the psychiatric
sciences argue for the use of diagnostic categories that are broadly applicable.
On the other hand, anthropological research has found that mental illness
manifests differently in different places, reflecting the social and cultural
environment in which it is embedded. As researchers, policy-makers, and service
users debate how social systems should best provide care for those who
experience mental health crises, it is important to understand how such
experiences are connected to social and cultural surroundings in order to assure
that care is appropriate and effective. This is particularly important to
contain costs. The market-based health care policies, medication-centered
treatment plans, and dependence on hospital emergency rooms that are
characteristic of mental health care in much of the Western world are costly and
not always effective. As these approaches spread to other parts of the globe, it
is urgent to know what works, what does not, and why.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed in the research
supported by this award. Washington University St. Louis anthropology doctoral
candidate, Lauren Cubellis, with the guidance of Dr. Rebecca Lester, will
investigate the idea that the experience of mental illness, specifically
schizophrenia, is a complex interplay of multiple factors: heritable risk,
traumatic history, social and economic context, and individual social
relationships and resources. The researcher began her invesigation in New York
City and with this award will extend it Berlin, Germany, which will allow her to
understand the effects of cultural context on mental health and treatment
outcomes. Berlin is a particularly apt site because German reunification has
created a cultural context that markedly increases stress for some residents but
not for others, offering a scientifically useful lens for comparison. The
research will be conducted in a clinic that offers an option for care designed
to reduce the numbers of people admitted to the psychiatric emergency room each
year, and to improve the quality of life for people living with the symptoms of
severe mental illness. Data will be collected with a mixed-methods approach,
including participant observation, personal and professional history narratives,
interviews, and archival research. These data will allow her to determine why
this treatment model has been adopted in Berlin, how it relates to the history
of Berlin as a fundamental center of psychiatric thought and knowledge
production, and its potential spread as a plausible treatment option throughout
Germany, Northern Europe, and the United States. Findings from the research will
illuminate the role of history and socio-cultural context in the development and
treatment of an apparently universal mental health syndrome. At the same time,
it will provide information on a particular treatment model that may reduce
costs and improve quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.