* 1756244
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Estuarine Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Fredrika Moser, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,086,465.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program in marine and estuarine
science at the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES)
will be supported for five years. The program will be run at two UMCES
laboratories, the Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL) in Solomons, MD and the
Horn Point Laboratory (HPL) in Cambridge, MD. A total of fifteen undergraduates
will participate in the program each summer for twelve weeks during which
students will conduct an independent research project under the guidance of a
faculty mentor. Following orientation, REU students work with their mentor to
write a research proposal, conduct field and laboratory studies, analyze data,
write a research paper, and present a talk at a final symposium. The program
introduces REU students to applying the scientific method; learning field, lab,
and data analysis methods; developing an understanding of coastal and estuarine
processes; achieving an in-depth understanding of a research problem; and
learning to interpret, organize, and present in written and oral form the
results of a research project. Students may work individually with their mentors
or as part of a broader, interdisciplinary research team. The program includes a
partnership with Gallaudet University in Washington, DC and several small
institutions in Puerto Rico. Most of the funding provided supports participant
costs for seventy-five undergraduates, including student stipends, housing and
transportation to and from their home to participate in the program. This REU
program contributes to the national goals of training the next generation of
scientists and developing the nation's scientifically literate workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent student research topics include nutrient
biogeochemistry, estuarine modeling, sedimentology, trace element chemistry,
fisheries bioenergetics modeling, predator/prey and other ecological studies,
microbial ecology, genetics, environmental contamination, and toxicity studies.
In addition, professional development will include sessions on science
communication, research ethics, the graduate school application process and non-
academic careers in science. Students will be encouraged to continue their
research after the program, either by being a co-author on a scientific
publication, pursuing a senior thesis, or attending a scientific conference. The
primary intent of the program is to meet NSF's goal of developing a diverse,
internationally competitive scientific workforce by encouraging seventy-five
undergraduate students to pursue a career in marine
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.