* 1756118
* Submesoscale instabilities near the sea-floor and their effects on the ocean circulation and mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Leif Thomas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 324,569.00

Mixing processes in the ocean bottom boundary layer (BBL) are thought to exert a
strong control on the general circulation. For example, the enhancement of
turbulent mixing associated with breaking internal waves over topography has
been suggested to play a central role in closing the deep branch of the
meridional overturning circulation. Likewise, turbulent mixing in the BBL can
result when large-scale currents flowing along sloping topography are
decelerated by bottom friction. Importantly, these processes generate
temperature and salinity fields in the BBL that are well mixed in the vertical
but not in the horizontal, similar to fronts near the sea surface. This
similarity suggests that many types of submesoscale (horizontal scales of 0.1 -
10 kilometers) instabilities, which to-date have been studied almost exclusively
in the context of upper-ocean fronts, may also be active in the BBL. In the
surface ocean, submesoscale processes are known to play an important role in
restratifying the surface mixed layer, thereby counteracting turbulent mixing,
and in the dispersal and transport of tracers such as pollutants, dissolved
gases, and nutrients. Understanding the conditions under which submesoscale
processes may be active in the BBL, as well as their effect on the circulation
and mixing, therefore has potentially far-reaching implications for
understanding the physics and biogeochemical properties of both deep and coastal
oceans. This project will support a promising early career scientist who
conceived and wrote the bulk of this proposal and new scientific results will be
incorporated into outreach lectures and laboratory demonstrations for local
high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a combination
of theory and idealized numerical modeling to study the dynamics of submesoscale
instabilities in the BBL generated during the frictional spin-down of a current
on a slope. Preliminary calculations suggest that BBLs over sloping topography
can support a submesoscale baroclinic instability mode, a BBL counterpart to
surface mixed-layer instabilities. These instabilities are fast-growing, and
relatively insensitive to the topographic slope, suggesting they may be a common
feature of the ocean BBL. Initial numerical simulations also suggest that these
baroclinic instabilities can lead to vertical buoyancy fluxes which, under some
conditions, may dominate other more widely-studied sources of vertical buoyancy
fluxes, such as the breaking of internal waves at topography. The proposed
research will expand upon these initial results, using linear stability analysis
and idealized numerical modeling, to provide a complete exploration of the
parameter dependence of BBL submesoscale instabilities, with a focus on
turbulent fluxes of buoyancy and potential vorticity. Boundary layer dynamics
for flow over idealized variations in topography, including channel flows, will
also be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.