* 1756467
* CSBR: Natural History: Improvement of the Mississippi Entomological Museum for organization of collection and digitization of specimen data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* JoVonn Hill, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 292,055.00

The Mississippi Entomological Museum at Mississippi State University holds more
than 1.6 million research specimens from all 50 states of the U.S. and 48 other
countries. This research resource is especially important in documenting the
insect diversity of the southern Coastal Plain, including many imperiled
habitats. The collection also holds specimens of disease vectors as well as
agricultural and forestry pests that have been documented in Mississippi for the
past 120 years, and these specimens are important for evaluating their past,
current, and future distributions. The museum's identification center provides
early detection of invasive species that threaten the biosecurity of food,
fiber, and forests in 13 states. The acquisition of specimens from these
activities has resulted in unique holdings among biological collections in the
U.S., and these include major collections of ants and grasshoppers. More than
100 species new to science have been described based on specimens held in the
collection with many more still to be described. During the past five years, the
museum has hosted 112 visiting researchers from 42 institutions in 25 states and
five other countries. Concurrently, the museum has an active education and
outreach program with curricula designed for elementary students and table
events involving displays and informative hand-outs provided at public events.
The annual growth of collection holdings during the past five years has
approached 30% because of fieldwork, donations, trap samples from other states,
and acquisition of other institutional collections. At present the museum is
over full capacity, with cabinets holding specimens limiting access in hallways
and offices, and no space is available for future additions of
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three objectives. The first is
to expand storage space for research specimens by acquisition of a compactor
system that will include moveable carriages on rails that hold cabinets. This
compactor system will provide an estimated 30% increase in capacity. The second
objective is to resolve the current hazards of storage of flammable
preservatives in a multi-use building that includes classrooms for students.
Almost 400,000 curated specimens and a large number of bulk samples are
currently stored in ethanol and held in various rooms and hallways (some
adjacent to classrooms) of the Clay Lyle Entomology Building. This concentration
of specimens in alcohol has presented a safety hazard because the volatility of
the preservative. The acquisition of a walk-in refrigerated unit, located
outside the building, would alleviate the current hazards of storing specimens
in ethanol in the building. The third objective will be the digitization of
specimen label data for ants and grasshoppers. Both ants and grasshoppers have
ecological and economic significance to the public, especially for invasive
species of ants. The museum has the third largest collections of both groups of
insects in eastern U.S., but specimen data are currently unavailable to others.
The digitization effort will make these data available to researchers and the
public through data sharing with iDigBio (iDigBio.org) and other global
resources such as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.