* 1756714
* Collaborative Research: Physics of Dune Erosion during Extreme Wave and Storm-Surge Events
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Tian-Jian (Tom) Hsu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 606,457.00

Sand dunes are often the primary and sometimes only 'line of defense' for
coastal infrastructure, and are increasingly constructed and actively managed to
protect against extreme events. Coastal managers require knowledge of how dunes
will respond under these events so assets can be pre-positioned. Both natural
and constructed dunes dissipate energy by modifying breaking waves and runup to
limit overwash, thereby minimizing coastal flooding during extreme waves and
storm-surge events. However, because extreme physical forces only interact with
the dune for a relatively short, yet critical time when the water level rises,
there is limited understanding on how dune sediments and vegetation can modify
hydrodynamic forces and alter beach-dune profile evolution. This research
focuses on dune response to a range of water level and forcing conditions that
mimic the passage of an extreme storm event. A near prototype-scale laboratory
experiment will be conducted over a mobile bed in the large wave flume at Oregon
State University. Physical model studies will occur over a bare dune, a rapidly
constructed (loosely compacted) dune following wave-induced erosion, and a dune
with live vegetation. Data related to processes ranging from short-term
(turbulence) to longer time scales (individual events) will be collected and
analyzed to develop a fundamental understanding of the fluid-sediment-vegetation
dynamics affecting dune stability, as well as damage mitigation strategies for
extreme events. The collected data will be used to validate numerical models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multiphase flow model sedwaveFoam (created in the open-
source OpenFOAM framework), capable of simulating the full profiles of sediment
transport under realistic waves, will be extended for dune erosion with or
without vegetation. Detailed simulations will further inform the creation of
improved parameterizations of turbulence- and wave-scale processes in the event-
scale morphodynamic model XBeach. A fragility framework, consistent with risk-
based decision support tools, will be created to predict the probability of
damage states (e.g., dune volume loss) for a given level and duration of
hydrodynamic forcing. The collected data and extensive XBeach simulations will
provide required input parameters for the fragility analysis. The data and
modeling for different dune archetypes will be used to: (i) identify the
fundamental processes (including waves, turbulence, and sediment transport) that
drive dune evolution during extreme events; (ii) define the conditions by which
dune vulnerability increases as function of berm erosion; (iii) investigate the
interaction between the different processes and identify the threshold forcing
conditions and time scales beyond which vegetation no longer enhances dune
resilience; and (iv) examine the extent a fragility modeling framework can be
used to improve risk-based decision for dune erosion during extreme surge and
wave events. Natural resource managers and practicing engineers with on-the-
ground experience, from Federal and State (Delaware, Texas) levels will
contribute to this project through a stakeholder workshop planned for year 3.
The fragility framework will be developed in collaboration with managers from
Delaware and Texas, allowing prediction of dune damage based on commonly used
measures of storm intensity. The project will support PhD and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.