* 1756958
* The Influence of Climate Variability and Change on Stratospheric Intrusions of Ozone over North America
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* John Albers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2023
* USD 312,334.00

Ground-level ozone is harmful to human health, and ozone-producing activities
must sometimes be curtailed to avoid dangerous ozone concentrations. Efforts to
maintain safe ozone levels by limiting production are complicated by the
presence of ozone from sources other than local human activity, as higher levels
of this "background" ozone necessitate more stringent production caps. The
background concentration poses a challenge for air quality management as
background levels vary from place to place and also change over time. Thus the
need to manage and mitigate ground-level ozone motivates research on the
behavior of the background and the fundamental processes that govern its
variability in time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant portion of the
background ozone comes from the stratosphere, where ozone is produced naturally
by ultraviolet sunlight and can be transported over great distances. The
stratosphere extends upward from roughly the flight level of long-distance air
travel and is thus well separated from ground-level ozone production and
impacts. But ozone-rich air can descend into the troposphere during
stratospheric intrusions, which occur as a result of Rossby wave breaking. In
this process the large-scale flow becomes strongly sheared and stratospheric air
forms filaments which extend and fold into the troposphere and mix with ambient
air. The stratospheric contribution implies that the ozone background can be
influenced by several forms of atmospheric and climate variability that are
known to affect the stratosphere, including El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
events, the Northern Annular Mode (NAM), and the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
(QBO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research performed here seeks to understand the
processes which control the location and amount of stratospheric ozone entering
the troposphere over North America. Two factors are considered, the first of
which is the amount of ozone present in the lowest layer of the stratosphere
where it can be mixed into the troposphere by intrusions. The amount of ozone in
this reservoir is controlled by processes including the equator-to-pole
overturning circulation of the stratosphere which can potentially be influenced
by ENSO, NAM, and QBO variability. The second factor is north-south shifts of
the North Pacific jet stream and accompanying storm track, which modulate the
frequency and location of Rossby wave breaking events that produce intrusions
over western North America. Such jet shifts are known to occur as a consequence
of ENSO and NAM variability. The research is conducted through a combination of
observational analysis, working from satellite data and reanalysis products, and
computer simulations using the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM,
developed as part of the Community Earth System Model).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
noted above, the work has broader impacts due to the need to inform mitigation
actions to address the health impacts of ground-level ozone pollution. In
addition to pollution concerns the work has relevance to several forms of
surface weather that are affected by stratospheric intrusions. In particular,
deep intrusions can modulate thunderstorm activity and increase surface winds
leading to enhanced wildfire occurrence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.