* 1756662
* New Technologies and Health Care Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Daisy Deomampo, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 89,345.00

The average age of parents in the United States has increased significantly and
steadily in recent years, in part because of advances in medical technologies
that assist older people in having children. However, we still have a limited
understanding of the diverse reasons that people access these technologies,
which are likely to relate to cultural, religious, and socioeconomic factors.
This research will address this gap by examining gamete transfer and donation in
an understudied U.S. population. This project explores what impact the
availability and effectiveness these technologies have in influencing
reproductive decision-making. The findings from this project will be
disseminated to organizations and individuals who inform public health practices
and policies related to healthcare decision-making. The project also provides
training for undergraduate students in methods of rigorous, scientific data
collection and analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Daisy Deomampo of Fordham
University will investigate the following research questions: How do
sociocultural beliefs influence experiences of infertility and the use of
assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs)? How do views and practices in
reproductive medicine and science shape popular ideas about gamete donation? How
do legal cases shed light on sociocultural understandings of the value of
gametes? The research will focus on a cohort of Asian American gamete donors and
recipients, selected because they are overlooked in research on gamete donation,
yet have a high rate of ART utilization, and an older mean age of mothers at
first birth compared to other ethnic groups. In order to comprehend how diverse
groups in Asian America experience social and cultural issues related gamete
donation, this ethnographic study is located in three metropolitan areas with
significant diversity in Asian populations: New York, NY, Los Angeles, CA, and
Honolulu, HI. Data collection will include in-depth interviews and participant
observation with doctors, donor coordinators, and gamete providers and
recipients. This project will also include textual analysis of court cases,
media coverage, online forums, and policy documents. These data will be used to
facilitate analysis of two important themes: the social construction of identity
in medical practice, and the role of identity in shaping ideas about
reproduction and genetic inheritance. By exploring the social meanings attached
to identity and DNA in the context of gamete donation, this project will offer
much-needed ethnographic perspective on the bioethical and policy implications
of reproductive technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.