* 1756332
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Caregiving and Care Receiving
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Torin Jones, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 0.00

This research project, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific research, will investigate how a particular
class of young people interact with government-sponsored care and its effects on
long-term self-sufficiency. Unaccompanied minors are an internationally
protected class of humans, with rights guaranteed by the 1990 United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its ratification into law in 196
nations. However, in practice, there is disagreement about how the care and
protection of minors, particularly unaccompanied minor immigrants, actually
should happen and what it means. This ambiguity can produce major policy
challenges for receiving countries. While the notions of "integration" and
"care" are rarely challenged, the practices produced by these ideas may be
ambiguous and even ineffective. The researcher asks: How can governments carry
out their responsibilities to both their own citizens and to arriving minors?
How can the minors become self-sufficient while also conforming to what is asked
of them as care recipients? This research is important because it will
contribute to understanding the reality of responding to the growing numbers of
older unaccompanied minors throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be carried out by Stanford University anthropology doctoral
student, Torin Jones, under the supervision of Dr. Sylvia Yanagisako. The
researcher has chosen to situate the project primarily in youth migrant centers
in the Mediterranean city of Catania, a longstanding port of migrant
disembarkation in Eastern Sicily. This is an appropriate site because Catania is
generally regarded as a success story due to its elaborated migrant welcome
services. In addition, the region has had multiple approaches to border
securitizations. Therefore, understanding the situation in Catania may provide a
model for other cities, including migrant receiving sites in the United States.
The researcher will collect information through interviews, participant
observation, and life history elecitation with bureaucrats, migrant center
staff, and migrants themselves. He will also collect and analyze appropriate
documents. These materials will allow the researcher to learn how a particular
set of policies and programs is received by and affects youth migrants. Findings
from the research will contribute to better theory of migrant governance and
recipient response. It will also aid policy makers concerned both with the
futures of local communities as well the futures of unaccompanied foreign
minors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.