* 1756513
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparative Study of Skilling Institutions in U.S. Alternative Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Glenn Stone, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 21,324.00

Agriculture is increasingly identified as a key contributor to a variety of the
most pressing challenges of the 21st century including environmental change,
rural outmigration, soil degradation, biodiversity loss, traditional knowledge
loss, and epidemics of obesity and malnutrition. Against the well-documented
decline of the traditional American farm, the emergent alternative agriculture
sector offers a potentially promising solution. But alternative farmers, the
short-commodity-chain producers that have proliferated in the past two decades
in the United States, frequently find that a lack of knowledge and farm
management skill is an enormous obstacle to running a sustainable operation.
This project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, will study how differing skilling institutions for
alternative agriculture are used by farmers to develop, exchange, and apply
knowledge necessary for alternative agriculture. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations invested in discovering more effective means for improving
American agricultural development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bradley Jones, under the
supervision of Dr. Glenn Stone of Washington University, will explore how
farmers invested in smaller-scale alternative agriculture navigate skilling
institutions (the institutions through which agricultural management information
is disseminated) to create and sustain viable farming operations. The
investigator will comparatively study the emerging landscape of knowledge
production and exchange in Central Appalachia and the Hudson Valley of New York.
Both regions have seen recent dramatic increases in the number of alternative
farmers but have important demographic, historical, economic, and environmental
differences that offer unique challenges and opportunities. The study asks: How
do alternative farmers construct and engage with institutions to acquire
agricultural skill? How do institutions mediate flows of information and
knowledge transmission? What actors are involved and how do they operate in
relation to one another and broader structures of power? Answering these
questions has important implications for both our substantive understanding of
alternative farmers and their skilling strategies, as well as our broader
theoretical understandings of the way institutions are formed and used by
individuals to fulfill socially determined needs and to reorient the social
relations of production and expertise. Data will be collected from farmers,
agricultural experts, and program staff at a variety of sites including
alternative farms, beginning farmer training programs, and non-profit food and
agriculture advocacy organizations, as well as at an array of training events,
farm conferences, and seminars. This study of knowledge development and
dissemination responds to a practical need to better understand how alternative
farmers are navigating a major challenge in their long-term economic and
ecological sustainability. In both study regions, summaries of the results will
be provided to various stakeholders, including farmers, advocacy organizations,
agricultural extension, and policy makers so strategies can be developed for
mitigating obstacles to farmer success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.