* 1756928
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Development, Livelihood Strategies, and Carceral Privatization in the U.S. South
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Erin Koch, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 20,183.00

Research has shown that communities, largely rural ones, adopt prisons and jails
for a variety of reasons. Most often, prison building is seen as a way to create
jobs and economic growth lost to declines in local industry. States choose to
privatize carceral facilities hoping that shifting administration to corporate
actors will result in cost savings and lower budgets. However, little research
examines the effects of prison and jail privatization on the communities where
these facilities are located. Does for-profit incarceration benefit communities
experiencing a lack of resources due to loss of industry? This project, which
trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, conducts a case study in a rural city in northeastern Louisiana to
investigate how the historical growth of private jails has affected social and
economic community life over time. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
engaged in policy dialogues related to the carceral system in marginalized
communities, as well as discussions concerning criminal justice administration
and privatization more broadly.

The research will be carried out by University of Kentucky doctoral student Lee
Bullock, under the supervision of Dr. Erin Koch to examine the lived experience
of pervasive privatized carceral institutions in people's daily lives, their
communities, and their influence on prosperity and productivity over time. The
project explores whether and to what extent the impacts of this industry vary
among different groups within this community. The research takes places in
Tallulah, Louisiana, where prison building has been pursued as a major employer
following the decline of agriculture and mechanized production. To gain multi-
generational perspectives on these issues, the researcher employs the following
methods: interviews and multi-generational life history collection; participant
observation of everyday activities and public events; guided tours of the
community and surrounding areas; and, secondary analysis of census and community
data. This ethnographic research will make contributions to studies of
incarceration and privatization while producing regional scholarship that is
generalizable and applicable to other areas where these conditions persist. The
findings from this research will produce data to better understand the
relationships between privatized incarceration, pressing socioeconomic issues,
and community well-being in the United States.