* 1756092
* Understanding Race Bias in the Decision to Shoot with an Integrated Model of Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Taosheng Liu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 620,000.00

The shooting of unarmed citizens by police officers is a topic at the forefront
of public awareness. The disproportionate rate at which unarmed Black citizens
are shot is believed to reflect widespread racial bias on behalf of officers,
which erodes public trust and reduces policing effectiveness. Calls to reduce
bias with department-wide implicit bias training are common. There is evidence,
however, that officers vary widely both in the rate of decision-making errors
and in the degree of race bias in these decisions. Moreover, why race impacts
decisions -- in terms of how it affects the underlying decision process --
varies across officers. Finally, the effectiveness of implicit bias training has
been questioned recently, raising concerns that department-wide implicit bias
training may not reduce unarmed shootings. These problems all reflect a larger
theoretical problem: that the underlying cognitive and attentional components
involved in an officer?s decision to shoot are not well understood. This project
advances the basic science of decision making and does so in the context of a
decision with great societal import. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to develop an Attention-integrated Model-based Shooting
Simulator (AiMSS) to gain a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying
the decision to shoot. The AiMSS combines computational models of decision
making, visual psychophysics and eye-tracking methods, and an immersive decision
simulator to map the processes police officers use to decide to shoot. The
knowledge gained from AiMSS informs the development of training methods to
minimize the impact of race on this decision and will serve as a generative tool
to apply to other split-second decisions (e.g., medical decision making,
security monitoring decisions). At the conceptual level, this research advances
current computational modeling approaches by incorporating them with visual and
social processing methods. This integration provides a more comprehensive
understanding of this important decision that will ultimately aid in developing
individualized interventions. Phase I will deploys a dynamic, immersive shooting
simulator and mobile eye-tracking technology to collect behavioral and eye-gaze
data during the decision to shoot. Using this rich data, the investigators
develop computational models of decision making by integrating gaze behavior,
pre-existing beliefs, and affective evaluations into an evidence accumulation
process modulated by attention. An important strength of this approach is that
both experts (sworn officers) and untrained participants will be tested. Phase
II then uses results and methods from Phase I to compare different training
interventions that seek to reduce the effect of race on the decision to shoot.
The investigators develop the AiMSS to select individuals, identify the decision
component responsible for biased responding, and deliver an intervention
targeted to that specific component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.