* 1756466
* Fast Temporal Dynamics of Human Brain Activity During Emotional Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Josef Parvizi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 79,998.00

Emotions color our interpretations of the world and the people in it. For
instance, when someone smiles at us or when we learn new information about
someone, how does our perception of that person change? Given the everyday
relevance of reacting to people, we need a clear understanding of how our brains
generate emotional reactions towards others and how these emotions change our
perceptions of others. In the past, knowledge of emotional processing in the
human brain has largely been derived from behavioral, neuroimaging, and other
methods. Though these tools have taught us much, we still do not have precise
information about how quickly specific neuronal populations in the brain are
activated and coordinated in response to emotion. Indeed, we do not yet fully
understand how the human brain responds to emotional versus neutral stimuli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers, Drs. Parvizi and Gross, will use
behavioral, psychophysiological, intracranial EEG (iEEG), and direct cortical
stimulation (DCS) in conscious human subjects to test the effects of emotion on
brain activity, especially in areas of the brain that selectively respond to
emotion and to faces. Along with brain activity, they will also collect cardiac
and pupillary activity, and then use DCS of the amygdala to reversibly alter
this emotion-generative process. This research is expected to advance our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying emotion generation, and the effects
of these affective processes on the human visual perceptual system. Knowledge
gained will set the stage for future research to investigate how clinical
disorders and circuit-level abnormalities influence emotional processing in the
human brain. This collaborative research will also offer unique training
opportunities for students and fellows to learn multimodal approaches involving
psychophysiology, iEEG, and DCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.