* 1756252
* I-Corps: Multi-physics Software for Arbitrarily-shaped Objects
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Jose Andrade, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
applications of a technology, the Level Set Discrete Element Method (LS-DEM), to
solve real-world problems. Specifically, the project will look at the commercial
viability of the technology in geotechnical engineering, civil engineering, food
storage, additive manufacturing processes, pharmaceutical production lines, and
mining and excavation industries among many others. LS-DEM has capabilities that
exceed current techniques within engineering practice, enabling more accurate
analysis of engineering designs, enhancing optimization of existing engineering
processes, and reducing engineering costs both in terms of time and money.
Additionally, the potential exists for large improvements in the safety of both
existing and new infrastructure from the increased understanding of physical
processes that this technology can provide. Overall, the proposed technology has
the potential to be a transformative technology that positively impacts many
commercial industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project investigates
potential commercial applications and markets for the Level Set Discrete Element
Method (LS-DEM) technology. The intellectual merit of this method is to allow
the rapid simulation and modeling of discrete objects with any shape, overcoming
a major challenge within the field. Modeling of discrete objects is important in
many commercial applications and shape is pivotal for correctly understanding
systems. For example, spherical objects behave very differently than rectangular
objects, yet current discrete methods are mostly limited to spherical
approximations in large granular systems. This results in less accurate and less
informative results that LS-DEM overcomes by effectively and exactly replicating
any component's shape. LS-DEM has proven through past research to be highly
accurate and predictive engineering tool. This work will investigate various
commercial applications, where a better understanding of discrete object
interactions can impact our engineering and scientific understanding of the
system or systems in question.