* 1756217
* CSBR:  Living Stocks:   The Escherichia Coli Genetic Stock Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* John Wertz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,280.00

This award will contribute to the operation of the E. coli Genetic Stock Center
(CGSC) at Yale University. Escherichia coli is an important model organism and
is arguably the most completely understood cellular organism from a genetics and
biochemistry standpoint. This high degree of understanding has made E. coli not
just an important subject of research, but also the laboratory workhorse for
studying a broad variety of organisms as well as an invaluable tool for
biotechnology. The mission of the CGSC is to act as a central repository for
genetically modified strains of E. coli created by the research community, so
that they may be readily available to other researchers and educators. To that
end, the CGSC maintains a collection of about 28,000 cultures of genetically
defined derivatives of E. coli K-12. There are over 8,000 different mutations
represented in this strain collection with verified mutations in over 90% of the
4,111 identified genes in the sequenced E. coli K-12 genome. These cultures are
distributed to researchers and educators throughout the US and in over 65
countries worldwide. In addition to the distribution of cultures, the CGSC is
also an information resource, and provides information about strains, mutations,
genes, gene products and genetic maps, in a fully searchable database on the
web. Importantly CGSC also acts as a source of expert information and advice for
those researchers who have questions about using the E. coli strains in the
collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CGSC will continue to maintain and expand
its publicly available database on strain genotypes, phenotypes, histories and
pedigrees, which is unique to the Stock Center. The information systems will be
enhanced to increase compatibility with other E. coli web resources, including
the EcoliWiki project, EcoGene and EcoCyc. The CGSC is collaborating with other
US culture collections and the World Data Centre for Microorganisms (WDCM) so
that the collection can be indexed by global strain databases and to create a
national microbial strain database. Over the period of this award, capabilities
for our new strain construction services will be expanded for those users who
require a genetically modified strain, but lack the capability of constructing
it themselves, particularly to those outside of the traditional bacterial
genetics community. This is a service unique to the CGSC and has shown great
growth potential. Access to the strain collection database, including genotypes,
gene function and map location, as well as an extensive bibliography are
available online (cgsc.biology.yale.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.