* 1756382
* CSBR:   Natural History: Repair, digitization, and integration of the Southern Adventist University herbarium into the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Joey Shaw, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 30,504.00

This award will support the integration of specimens from the Southern Adventist
University (SAU) into the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) Herbarium
collection. The UTC herbarium is a moderately-sized, but scientifically and
educationally active collection of dried and archived plant specimens from
Tennessee, northwest Georgia, and northeast Alabama. The SAU collection of
approximately 9,500 specimens represents thousands of species from across the US
and Canada. Through historical missionary work of SAU professors, specimens were
also collected from international locations including Philippines, Kenya,
Lebanon, and Abu Ghraib, Iraq. Workers at the UTC will repair damaged specimens
and secure the SAU collection and integrate it into a thriving collection at
UTC. The digital data set will be made available to researchers, educators,
conservationists, and hobbyists through online public portals like iDigBio
(iDigBio.org). The Herbarium at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
(UCHT) is recognized across Tennessee and in the Southern Appalachians as a
leading resource documenting Tennessee's state flora, for digitizing Tennessee's
herbarium collections as part of the Southeast Regional Network of Expertise and
Collections (SERNEC), for making botanical data accessible through online
portals, including the Tennessee/Kentucky Plant Atlas, and as a facility to
train and educate young field botanists and conservationists. In 2014, a
languishing herbarium collection of ca. 9,500 specimens from Southern Adventist
University (SAU) in Cleveland, Tennessee was transferred to UCHT. After
transfer, triage work revealed extensive damage from insects, failing glue, and
improper storage. However, it also revealed the national and international
breadth of the collection. Beyond North America, specimens were observed from
Kenya, Lebanon, Philippines, and Iraq, potentially representing unique
biological collections not present in other US collections. This effort will
support the post-transfer curation, repair, preservation, integration into UCHT,
and digitization of the SAU collection. Students at UTC will be trained on
specimen repair, digitization, efforts to make collections data available
online, and collections curation. Data from this collection will be shared
through SERNEC, Symbiota, iDigBio, and GBIF.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.