* 1756351
* CSBR:  Natural History: Critical Access and Storage For a Unique Collection of Mistletoes at University of California, Berkeley
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 193,611.00

The University and Jepson Herbaria (UC/JEPS) at the University of California,
Berkeley with approximately 2,250,000 specimens is the largest collection west
of the Missouri Botanical Garden and the largest at a public university in the
USA. It is a widely used and growing collection representing all plant groups
across all continents. This project will enable the consolidation and proper
housing of three important collections that were developed over the research
career of four specialists on mistletoes (parasitic plants that live on host
branches). This consolidation of approximately 20,000 specimens, including 1,200
haustoria (connections between host and parasite), will result in the largest
and most comprehensive collection of mistletoes in the world and will provide a
unique resource that is not available elsewhere. Securing these collections is
urgent because they are currently stored in non-archival conditions and are not
easily available for study. Mistletoes are considered keystone forest species
that are central to studies on ecology, biodiversity, and species interactions
in forested environments. Undergraduate students from the research
apprenticeship program at the University of California, Berkeley will be trained
in museum curation and work-study students will be trained in databasing and
digitization of natural history collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accommodate these collections, compactors with 44 new cabinets will be installed
and archival boxes purchased to house haustoria. Specimens will be imaged and
label information will be captured for incorporation into the UC/JEPS herbarium
portal (http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/specimens/) and will be shared with GBIF
(https://www.gbif.org/) and iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), making these
collections accessible to the public and researchers across several platforms.
More information about the UC/JEPS Herbaria and this project is available at:
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.