* 1756997
* Price Rigidity and The Granular Origin of Aggregate Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Raphael Schoenle, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 475,698.00

This award funds research in macroeconomics that will study the effect of price
rigidity on the origins of aggregate fluctuations in the entire U.S. economy.
This addresses one piece of a larger question about whether and how shocks at
the level of a firm, industry, or economic sector affect aggregate economic
outcomes. The PIs hypothesize that price rigidity, and in particular the kind of
rigidity that varies between different economic sectors, is responsible for a
substantial fraction of the volatility generated by aggregate shocks. The
results of this research will help us understand how price rigidity interacts
with factors such as firm size and connections between firms. The project has
potential to improve our understanding of how to model business cycle
fluctuations, as well as how to build macroeconomic policies to promote economic
stability and growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project begins from the premise
that prices can be rigid. Since prices are the key transmission mechanism of
shocks, the degree of price rigidity has important implications for the
transmission of sector-level productivity shocks. Price rigidity attenuates
upstream and downstream responses (second-order general equilibrium effects
aside). Heterogeneity in price rigidity matters as well. For example, small
sectors with very flexible prices may transmit as much of a micro shock as large
sectors with very rigid prices. Similar intuition applies to interconnectedness.
What this means is that price rigidity changes the effective distributions of
size and interconnectedness.Preliminary theoretical analysis indicates that
this, in turn, changes the aggregate implications of idiosyncratic shocks. In
particular,sales are no longer a sufficient statistic for the contribution of
sector-specific shocks to aggregate volatility. Independently, price rigidity
can also affect the identity of sectors driving aggregate fluctuations. Under
price rigidity, a sector may no longer show any response while absent price
rigidity, it was a very important sector for aggregate fluctuations. The first
step in the research plan is to construct and calibrate a finely disaggregated
general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy that includes input-output
relationships as well as information on industry size and degree of price
rigidity. The second step will then employ this framework to derive predictions
how infrequent price changes aggregate the impact of sector-specific shocks.
Finally, the authors will calibrate and simulate the model economy in order to
study the quantitative importance of price rigidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.