* 1756947
* Collaborative Research: Chemical and microbiological studies of water-soluble alkanes in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2023
* USD 488,478.00

This research project addresses the fate of hydrocarbons that enter the ocean,
using geological oil seeps as a natural scientific laboratory.  The key issues
of intellectual merit that will be addressed focus on the development and
application of methodology to determine how the chemical properties of
hydrocarbon molecules dictate whether they will be trapped in the ocean's
interior or find their way to the atmosphere.  The research will further follow
the fate of these molecules in the ocean's interior, determining how the ocean's
bacterial population responds, and the extent to which responding bacteria will
degrade these molecules. The broader impacts of this research will include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in scientific research and at-
sea oceanographic training, as well as the dissemination of findings to policy
makers striving to understand the fate and effects of hydrocarbons in the
ocean. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrocarbons enter the ocean through a
combination of natural seepage, anthropogenic discharge and biological
production, with profound impacts on ocean biogeochemistry, ecology, and the
atmosphere. This research project addresses the chemical and biological
processes affecting water-soluble alkanes in the ocean, using natural seeps to
study their fluxes, partitioning between ocean and atmosphere, and the bacterial
response to their input.  The intellectual merit of this research pertains to
the behavior of highly volatile hydrocarbons, a class that is abundant in
petroleum reservoirs and many crude and refined products, but is poorly
understood in the ocean.  Volatile hydrocarbons display distinct behaviors
compared with traditional oil in that they will partition to seawater or the
atmosphere depending on their molecular structure and the context by which they
enter the ocean, a combination of characteristics unsuitable for traditional
fate and transport models that govern our understanding of liquid oil. This
research project addresses this gap in knowledge through a plan to study
volatile, water-soluble hydrocarbons in the context of natural seepage, focusing
on key questions about their transport and fate, and the ocean?s microbial
response. Two key questions include:  1) What factors control the partitioning
of water-soluble alkanes between water and the atmosphere at natural seeps, and
how does this affect their availability to microbes?  2)  What genomic and
metabolic factors enable the microbial response to the input of water-soluble
alkanes and how does the microbial response vary with regional oceanographic and
geologic factors such as proximity to and flux from natural seepage?  The
hypotheses that result from these questions will be tested through a series of
oceanographic and laboratory-based experiments designed around natural oil seeps
in the Pacific and in the Gulf of Mexico. The results of these studies promise
to inform our understanding of the transport, fate, and effects of water-soluble
alkanes in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.