* 1756245
* JUAMI (Joint Undertaking for Africa Materials Institute)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sossina Haile, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 254,038.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: The Joint Undertaking for African Materials Institute
(JUAMI) is an Advanced Studies Institute that serves to connect materials
researchers in Africa with those in the United States and other parts of the
developed world, primarily from Europe. The December 9-21, 2018 school in
Kampala, Uganda on "Materials for Sustainable Energy" will enable participants
to explore shared scientific challenges and to help co-generate new knowledge
and innovative solutions with colleagues who bring different national, cultural
and institutional perspectives. World-renowned experts drawn from the United
States, Africa and Europe will teach courses and provide opportunities for
hands-on learning. The Institute promises to strengthen the capacity of the
African Materials Science community by providing short-term graduate level
training of African students and researchers by some of the world's top
scientists during a two-week school. It benefits U.S. participants because it
immerses them in a rich, transcontinental network of collaborators from Africa
and Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: Motivated by the need to
develop and sustain positive international scientific relationships between the
United States and African scientific communities, JUAMI employs a unique format
to address four primary concerns: the creation of new knowledge and innovative
solutions through cross-cultural collaborations, the need for U.S. graduate
students and faculty to be engaged in international research collaborations and
networks, the value to the United States of remaining a desired collaboration
partner for African counterparts, and the need for graduate level training in
materials science in Africa. This two-week school, which follows on earlier such
schools, focuses on "Materials for Sustainable Energy", a topic at the frontier
of materials research, with lectures offered by world-renowned experts recruited
both internationally and locally. The curriculum includes directed hands-on
activities, lectures, and the preparation/presentation of group proposals that
give rise to ongoing cross-cultural collaborative research projects. Experts
from the Searle Center for Advancing Learning and Teaching at Northwestern
University provide ongoing assessment to quantify educational outcomes and
improve pedagogy and program structure. The 2018 school takes advantage of
JUAMI's existing clearing house, a virtual gathering place, to connect
researchers and resources across international boundaries. The institute's
unique format, essentially a hybrid between a state-of-the-art conference
offering advanced seminars and a school with hands-on learning opportunities, is
key to achieving mutual benefit for the United States and
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.