* 1756028
* CRII: CHS: Humanizing Algorithms: Empirical and Design Investigations of Sensitive Algorithmic Encounters
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Jed Brubaker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2021
* USD 183,654.00

This project will study algorithmic interactions and develop strategies for the
human-centered design of systems that incorporate algorithms and their
underlying data. Software developers of platforms of all kinds are creating
features that make use of algorithmically curated content that leverage data
about people's relationships, behavior, and identities. However, algorithms
usually make decisions based on system metrics that are readily calculable, such
as the number of likes, plays, and clicks. Even more sophisticated algorithms
are limited by the social information explicitly given or inferred from provided
data. As a result, algorithms can fail to capture the social context and human
meaning that is important to the acceptability and success of the interactions
these algorithms are meant to support. The research will investigate both
algorithmic and human understandings of social data, especially when they
diverge. By attending to divergence, the research can examine human expectations
of algorithms, how misunderstandings might be reframed, and how subsequent
action is informed by those divergences.

Specifically, this project will identify (1) how people navigate sensitive
algorithmic encounters; (2) how these encounters impact people; (3) what social
concepts algorithms are failing to understand; and (4) what design strategies
are needed to address sensitive content in algorithmic curation. To focus this
work, the specific context of inquiry will be algorithmic encounters with
content related to loss of life, given its prevalence and sensitivity at both
communal and individual levels. The broader impacts of the work include: (1)
developing guidelines around the curation of and interactions with social data
related to loss of life, which can also be applied to other groups and
experiences where algorithms should be sensitive; (2) demonstrating how designs
that incorporate social data can adopt human-centered approaches to sensitize
encounters with algorithmically curated content; (3) contributing to the
development of design practices that encompass the design of interactions,
systems, algorithms, and data; and (4) engaging students in multiple fields,
including Information Science, Computer Science, Media Studies, and
Communication through research and curricular activities focused on human-
centered approaches to studying and designing social algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.