* 1756219
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Maintenance of the Bacillus Genetic Stock Center, a Key Resource for Scientific Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Tina Henkin, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 499,400.00

An award is made to The Ohio State University (OSU) to support the Bacillus
Genetic Stock Center (BGSC). Bacillus plays a vital role in microbiology
research. This widespread and diverse group of bacteria synthesizes a large
array of antibiotics, fine chemicals, vitamins, and industrial enzymes. Bacillus
bacteria serve as production platforms for biofuels and ecofriendly pesticides.
Some species are useful as probiotics or in vaccine production; others play
important roles in sterility assurance, food safety, and bioterrorism
prevention. Bacillus research provides insights into bacterial physiology,
development, and behavior. The BGSC maintains a centralized collection of useful
Bacillus strains. Each year, BGSC strains are used for hundreds of innovative
projects nationwide, resulting in peer-reviewed publications and US patents,
undergraduate teaching lab experiences, and high school science fair projects.
This award will strengthen the nation's scientific infrastructure by ensuring
that this resource remains available to America's scientific research and
education communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BGSC will accession, maintain,
document, and distribute Gram-positive, endospore-forming bacteria, not only
from Bacillus but from many closely related genera. The backbone of the
collection is devoted to B. subtilis, a model organism and biotechnology
workhorse. Included are two complete knockout libraries covering every non-
essential gene in the organism and a third "knock-down" library covering the
essential genes. A fourth library consists of B. subtilis strains that produce
membrane proteins marked with fluorescent tags for easy microscopic observation.
A wide variety of genetic tools for modulating gene expression and for
constructing new strains are also stocked. The collection is rounded out with
sizable holdings of the biopesticides B. thuringiensis and Lysinibacillus
sphaericus, the thermophile Geobacillus, the food spoilage organism B. cereus,
the plant growth-promoting Paenibacillus, and other important species. A small
collection of bacteriophages, viruses that infect Bacillus cells, is also
maintained. Cultures will be collected and stored cryogenically at a secure site
at the OSU. Strain data will be made publicly available on the BGSC website
(http://bgsc.org) and integrated into Bacillus gene and genome databases in the
USA and Europe. Standardized cultures are provided at a reasonable cost to
qualified scientists and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.