* 1756592
* Collaborative Research: Spatial analysis of genetic differences in salinity tolerance resulting from rapid natural selection in estuarine oysters
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Elizabeth North, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 333,221.00

Many marine animals have a bipartite life cycle consisting of a stationary
bottom-dwelling adult stage and a mobile larval stage. The flow of water
transports these larval offspring, and their genes, to different habitat
patches. It is thought that animals from nearby patches will be more genetically
similar than animals in patches that are further in proximity, but these
patterns of genetic similarity may not be maintained if the nearby patches have
different habitat characteristics. This idea is fundamental to our understanding
of adaptation and evolution, but it has not been adequately tested with respect
to the effects of rapid selection. This study applies new technologies to test
if the genetic signatures of marine animals change even when patches with
different environmental characteristics are closer together than the dispersal
distance of larvae. This research focuses on eastern oysters (Crassostrea
virginica) in Delaware Bay, and their ability to withstand variability in the
amount of salt in the water. This study will provide new insights on factors
that control oyster survival and growth in estuaries with different salinity
profiles. The three investigators are sharing study results with resource
managers and stakeholders to improve shellfish restoration and oyster stock
management in Delaware Bay, Chesapeake Bay, and New York. A postdoctoral scholar
at Cornell and graduate student at the University of Maryland are being trained
and mentored during the project. The investigators are also working with teacher
training programs in New York and New Jersey to develop and disseminate new
curriculum materials on oyster ecology for middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate whether hyposalinity
tolerance of oysters is a function of viability selection during larval
dispersal and after settlement. Gene flow across salinity zones within an
estuary is expected to be high enough that adaptive differentiation will not
result from Darwinian multigenerational processes. Instead, recurrent viability
selection in each generation is expected to generate spatial variation in this
trait at small spatial scales. This type of recurrent within-generation
adaptation has been referred to as phenotype-environment mismatches and has been
hypothesized to generate balanced polymorphisms, but it has never been studied
beyond single gene cases. The project team is testing for spatially discrete
patterns of selection by first collecting oysters from different salinity zones,
measuring variation in their tolerance to low salinity and then testing for
associations between this trait and genomic variation using whole genome
sequencing. Experimental hyposalinity challenges enable within-generation,
before/after genomic comparisons to identify DNA variants that change as a
result of strong viability selection. Candidate genes and selectively neutral
control loci will be assayed in larval, juvenile, and adult samples from the
same salinity zones to test for an association between variation at candidate
loci and lifetime hyposalinity exposure. Two years of environmental data will be
collected and added to an existing long-term data set to map salinity variation.
The observed spatial distribution of hyposalinity tolerance and genomic
variation associated with it provide a test that could definitively reject the
prevalent assumption that all larvae have similar capabilities. If larvae differ
by parental source for traits that differentially affect their viability in the
plankton, then phenotype-environment mismatches can have profound consequences
for population connectivity. This project improves understanding about
mechanisms that shape realized larval dispersal and recruitment variation in
oyster populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.