* 1756650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: International Constraints and Informal Trade Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Thomas Wilson, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,200.00

The term informal (or grey) economy refers to businesses, economic activities,
and workers that are not government regulated and are not captured in measures
of national GDP or GNP. Even so, the informal economy is known to comprise a
significant part of world economic activity: the International Labor
Organization estimates that globally, it employs over half of the world's labor
force. The research supported by this award takes a multidimensional approach to
the question of how informality plays out in an increasingly globalized economic
environment. The focus is on the nexus of three inter-related dynamics:
vernacular economic practices, state surveillance, and the effects of global
forces. The research is important because informal economic activities are
increasingly felt beyond the local level and can produce significant unintended
effects on the outcomes of international economic regulatory policies and
practices.

The research will be conducted by State University of New York, Binghamton,
anthropology doctoral student, Ehsan Lor Afshar, with the oversight of Dr.
Thomas M. Wilson. The researcher will engage in research in a region divided by
the international borders that have been central to major informal cross-border
trade networks. Examining how these networks interact with global regulation,
such as the international framework for Anti Money Laundering and Counter
Financing Terrorism and regional economic sanctions, will provide a revealing
case study of the potentials for such programs and policies to be efficacious,
reconfigured, or transformed at the local level. The researcher will collect
data through a mix of anthropological methods: (1) participant observation in a
major wholesale market's everyday life, with a focus on three divergent types of
merchandise (foodstuffs, cloth goods, and electronics); (2) surveys of a
merchant sample; (3) semi-structured interviews with merchant association
leaders, other NGOs, government officials, and a sub-sample of merchants; (4)
focus groups of merchants and community leaders; and (5) archival research. The
research will advance social scientific understanding of how global financial
regulations and sanctions interact with local unregulated or semi-regulated
economic practices. Research findings will be helpful for state officials and
global organizations by clarifying the picture of the effects of transnational
policies on the ground.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.