* 1756327
* CSBR:  Natural History:  Building a specimen-based Biologia Centrali-Americana for weevils:  Improved access to the Charles W. and Lois B. O'Brien Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Sangmi Lee, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 497,809.00

This project will enhance physical and on-line data access to the Charles W. and
Lois B. O'Brien insect collection, with an estimated 1,000,000 specimens of
weevils and 250,000 planthoppers. This collection has particular strengths in
New World tropical groups, where 60-90% of the known genera and species of these
megadiverse plant-feeding insects are represented. The project will raise
Arizona State University's profile as a center for understanding the systematics
and evolution of two highly diverse and economically impactful insect groups.
The collection transfer and mobilization will involve multi-generational
specialists and train diverse populations of students and citizen scientists.
Media-based outreach will include a series of podcast episodes about specialized
life histories of weevils and planthoppers, and sharing of high-quality specimen
photographs through the #YourDailyWeevil Twitter hashtag.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To house the O'Brien collection at Arizona State
University, the project will acquire and install 30 entomological double
cabinets and matching Cornell-sized drawers and unit trays. All specimens will
be reorganized into the new infrastructure according to a single, well-
referenced classification. The collection's impact is reflected in more than 300
publications, nearly 400 primary types that anchor species names, rare specimen
material pertaining to multiple thousands of species new to science, and a
legacy of expert mentorship. Existing identifications will be updated, and the
legibility and consistency of identification labels for unit trays and pinned
specimen sets will be improved, thereby resolving current challenges to access.
Focusing on the biologically distinctive weevil sub-families Dryophthoridae,
Conoderinae, and Entiminae from Central America, all unique taxon/collecting
event instances will be digitized; representing an estimated 1,200-1,500 species
and 8,000-12,000 specimens. Digitization will include georeferencing and the
production of high-resolution species images. The occurrence data and images
will be published as a Symbiota Collections of Arthropods Network (SCAN)
checklist, shared with iDigBio, and submitted upon completion to a biodiversity
data journal. The checklist will be promoted as a first specimen-based update of
the seminal Biologia Centrali-Americana for weevils, published more than 100
years ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.