* 1756824
* Priming Gender-based Status Beliefs: Self-Relevance, Stereotypes, and Schemas
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Joseph Dippong, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

We know that in collective task situations, men tend to be more resistant to
influence from an opposite sex partner than women are. Also, when members of
mixed-sex decision-making groups are non-consciously "primed" with images that
challenge cultural gender stereotypes, people are less likely to act as if such
stereotypes are accurate, and the magnitude of gender inequality can be reduced.
Conversely, when group members are primed with images that support cultural
gender stereotypes, the magnitude of gender inequality increases. What we do not
know is why this occurs. This study will test three possible explanations: i)
men and women may require targeted primes that convey self-relevant status
information; ii) whereas men tend to process only gender-related information
relevant to masculine gender expectations, women may respond to information
relevant to both masculine and feminine gender expectations; and iii) the
behaviors of individuals in higher-status positions may reflect a self-serving
bias whereby they ignore situational cues that threaten their privileged
position. Understanding the mechanisms driving differences between men and women
in terms of processing and responding to gender stereotypes is an essential step
in developing interventions to reduce inequality. Furthermore, insights from
this study are of potential importance for developing interventions aimed at
mitigating the negative effects of other forms of status beliefs (e.g., racial
inequality). The proposed study involves an eight-condition laboratory
experiment examining how priming effects enhance or impede the cognitive
categorization of interaction partners and affect judgments about relative
status and competence. Prior to interacting, participants will complete a
cognitive priming task, which involves viewing a series of photographs that
convey visual signals that either support or challenge dominant cultural
stereotypes regarding male competence and agency. Following the priming task,
participants will complete a seemingly unrelated collective decision-making task
either with a same-sex partner or an opposite sex partner. This task will allow
assessment of how the cognitive primes affect group outcomes: specifically
openness to influence. Hypotheses suggest that priming group members with
stereotype-consistent images will increase inequality of influence between men
and women, and that priming with stereotype-inconsistent images will reduce
inequality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.