* 1756645
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Evaluating what Factors Contribute to Effectiveness in Heritage Commercialization
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Monica Udvardy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 23,124.00

Heritage commercialization has frequently been promoted as a critical strategy
for development in indigenous communities. The view that culture is a critical
resource for poverty alleviation among indigenous communities has become so
widespread that some organizations, such as the U.S. Agency for International
Development, the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, compel
nation-states to participate in these initiatives. Despite the prevalence of
such development schemes, the communities targeted continue to face high indices
of poverty and vulnerability. This research sets out to understand why such
inequalities remain entrenched, and how that entrenchment varies among
communities. This project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, will test whether current investments
in such heritage-based development initiatives contribute to or impede economic
welfare objectives in three different contexts. In addition to providing funding
for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would
enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations interested in development and poverty alleviation efforts.

Ana Hasemann, under the supervision of Dr. Monica Udvardy of the University of
Kentucky, will explore whether participation in heritage commercialization and
development efforts contributes to economic welfare. This research will be
conducted in three Lenca communities located in Southwest Honduras, which are
chosen because of their extensive participation in development initiatives. The
researcher has engaged in preliminary fieldwork in the region, has gained
familiarity with national legislation and development bureaucracy, and has
acquired significant contacts with local informants since 2008. The researcher
will conduct prolonged visits in each community, during which she will collect
information through interviews, surveys, and personal narratives, in order to
empirically explore and identify how indigenous women and their communities
respond to and negotiate their participation in development interventions.
Findings from this research will ascertain the importance of public policy on
heritage and culture as driving forces in local development, which is sometimes
the only means of survival for poor communities. They will also provide insight
into how the political and economic agendas of contemporary national governments
and transnational organizations influence the degree of attention paid to
ethnic/minority peoples, their livelihoods, and their development.