* 1756525
* NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Linking geophysics and volcanic gas measurements to contrain the transcrustal magmatic system at the Altiplano-Puna Deformation Anomaly
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* David Schmidt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2021
* USD 44,378.00

The path that magma takes through the crust is not well understood -- where is
magma stored and under what conditions will it erupt? While this question is of
fundamental scientific interest, it is also directly related to understanding
the hazard posed by volcanic systems that are showing signs of activity and
unrest. This project seeks to understand the cause of unrest and the
architecture of the magma storage system within the central Andes, home to the
world's largest geophysically imaged zone of silicic partial melt, the
Altiplano-Puna Magma (or Mush) Body (APMB). This project involves scientists in
the USA, United Kingdom, and Bolivia to collect new field measurements (gravity,
ground deformation, seismic, gas flux and composition) at Uturuncu volcano,
Bolivia and develop numerical models of the volcano motivated by the new data.
In particular, the new data will add to the limited understand of the background
activity at restless volcanoes that is necessary to better assess the hazard of
future volcanic unrest -- what is normal activity and what should cause concern?

There is a new emerging paradigm of a transcrustal magmatic system (TCMS) where
magma storage and differentiation occurs at several locations throughout the
entire crustal column. This conceptual revolution is being driven by
petrological, geochronological, and geochemical studies of magma storage
conditions that show (1) many large eruptions tap multiple melt sources, (2)
large melt bodies are probably transient features, (3) crystals carried by the
transporting melt have been stored at a range of pressures and temperatures. A
key location to assess and refine models of currently active TCMS is at the
APMB, where a large ground deformation pattern 150 km in diameter lasting
several decades has been observed centered on Uturuncu volcano, Bolivia. By
collecting and analyzing new interdisciplinary field measurements (gravity,
ground deformation, seismic, gas flux and composition) and developing 3D
numerical models, this proposal will answer several outstanding questions about
the nature of TCMS at the APMB: 1. What is the cause of deformation in the
midcrust at the APMB: a magmatic diapir, cyclic up and down movements from magma
mush reorganization involving magma and/or volatiles, or something else? 2. What
is the nature of a shallow-seated conductivity anomaly -- to what extent is it
partial melt, a hydrothermal brine reservoir, or a mature ore body? 3. What is
the flux of volatiles through the TCMS? 4. How important is crustal anisotropy
in the interpretation of the subsurface magma plumbing architecture?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.