* 1756851
* Collaborative Research: Probing the Metabolic and Electrical Interactions of Cable Bacteria in Anoxic Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Samantha Joye, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 369,682.00

Marine sediments represent the world's largest repository of stored organic
carbon, and understanding how microorganisms break down this carbon is an
imperative for understanding global carbon cycling. Yet long-standing questions
remain regarding how networks of microorganisms work together to accomplish the
complete breakdown of organic carbon in marine sediments. Sediment microbes
interact in a myriad of ways that couple their metabolism to the break down of
organic carbon, including by sharing products of metabolism. Accumulating
evidence further suggests that some microorganisms can interact by transferring
electrons directly to other unrelated microorganisms. This ability occurs across
diverse microorganisms and appears to be widespread in the biosphere,
particularly in anaerobic environments such as marine sediments. This project
addresses emerging questions about the identity and metabolic linkages between
microorganisms that work together in natural anaerobic marine and estuarine
sediments to break down organic carbon. The investigators approach these
questions by focussing on the influence of a keystone bacterium on its
surrounding microbial community. "Cable bacteria" are a recently discovered
group of long filamentous bacteria that act as electrical conductors in aquatic
sediments providing a conduit for electrons to commute from deeper sulfidic
sediments up to the surface oxygen layer by the process of centimeter-scale
electron transport. Since their discovery about 6 years ago, these bacteria have
been observed in a wide range of depositional sedimentary environments, often at
extremely high cell densities. Where these bacteria are abundant, such as in
coastal marine muds, they drive intense localized changes in pH and strongly
influence the mineral cycling. This research explorew the direct and indirect
influence of cable bacteria on the metabolic activity of associated
microorganisms. This project also advance the education and training of two
early-career investigators, two PhD students, and undergraduate students. The
skills and expertise gained from these PhD research projects will enable the
students to be competitive in academic pursuits and in bioinformatics and
technology applications relevant to private industry. The scientific discoveries
emerging from this work is being incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
level courses in marine microbial ecology. The research team will reach out to
the broader community by hosting public lectures promoting a better
understanding of environmental microbial ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work is to investigate the role of cable bacteria in structuring
sediment microbial communities. Due to their growth strategy and morphology,
cable bacteria are particularly amenable to experimental manipulation, providing
an outstanding opportunity to better understand community interactions among
microorganisms in a natural and complex anaerobic environment. The investigators
will explore the interactions and relationships between cable bacteria and their
associated microbial community by manipulating the growth and activity of cable
bacteria and quantifying the resultant microbial community response.
Specifically, this project aims to (1) identify microorganisms whose growth is
enhanced by cable bacteria, (2) identify metabolic processes linked with cable
bacteria activity using metatranscriptomics, (3) test specific metabolic links
between sediment microorganisms and cable bacteria activity using a DNA-stable
isotope probing (SIP) approach, and (4) visually confirm the identity and
quantify key microorganisms associated with cable bacteria using microscopy. As
more is learned about the identity and the mechanisms by which microorganisms
are metabolically linked in anoxic sediments, we will be better able to
understand and make predictions about how microorganisms function in their
environment and how they can be utilized in bioengineered
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.