* 1756215
* Collaborative Research:  New Algorithms for Computing Equilibria of Stochastic Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Dilip Abreu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 341,423.00

This research focuses on models of dynamic strategic behavior, in which two
parties (individuals, nations, corporations, agencies) interact repeatedly over
a long horizon and make decisions that have a persistent impact on the
environment. The PIs are developing algorithms to simulate behavior in which
each party has consistent beliefs about how others will behave and is maximizing
their own welfare given those beliefs. These computational methods can be
applied to a wide range of models that are used in various fields of economics,
as well as in other disciplines such as international relations and evolutionary
biology.

More specifically, the PIs study the pure strategy subgame perfect equilibria of
infinitely repeated games with geometric discounting and a stochastic state
variable. The state variable determines the set of actions that can be taken by
the agents in each period of the game and the resultant payoffs. Conditional on
the actions taken by the players, the state evolves as a Markov chain. The
objective of the research is to develop algorithms for computing the discounted
payoffs that players can obtain in subgame perfect equilibria starting in each
state. The PIs will also develop and distribute software packages that implement
the algorithms.