* 1756578
* Collaborative Research: Mixing of river water into the coastal ocean and the role and structure of the outer edge of the discharge
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Michael Whitney, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 397,471.00

As river waters enter the coastal ocean they mix with the saltier sea water.
This process starts at the seaward boundary of the river discharge (plume) and
it affects circulation and flow near the river mouth and throughout the adjacent
coastal region. Although the area where this river-ocean interface occurs
represents a small region of the ocean, it is very important to ocean mixing and
is often poorly resolved in circulation models used to predict environmental
conditions in coastal regions. As part of this investigation the researchers
will carry out field measurements and utilize numerical models to define
variability in the structure of the seaward boundary of the freshwater
discharge, and the mixing that occurs there. These processes will be examined
for different river discharge and tidal conditions. In addition, this study will
assess how much of an ebbing riverine outflow is cycled through the seaward
boundary and evaluate the overall importance of this region to mixing the total
river discharge to a near-ocean salinity. The outcomes from this work will
reveal the details of the physical processes taking place at the riverine-ocean
interface and improve the predictive capabilities of large-scale models. In
addition, the advances gained from this study will ultimately allow better
prediction of the fate and transport of pollutants, nutrients and water masses
in the ocean. During the period of this project three graduate student will
supported contributing to building scientific capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
frontal region of a river plume is the seaward boundary that separates a buoyant
coastal discharge from ambient ocean water. Oceanic fronts of all scales act as
significant energy sinks over several orders of magnitude through mechanisms
that are poorly understood. Although significant efforts have advanced knowledge
of plume dynamics over the last several decades, fundamental gaps still exist in
our understanding of frontal evolution, and the role of the front in
establishing the dynamics in the interior of the plume and in the overall plume
mixing budget. The objective of this proposal is to understand the evolution and
significance of frontal processes across a range of scales, from small scale
propagating discharge fronts to intermediate scale shelf fronts bounding an ebb
pulse, and to identify the mechanisms controlling the evolution of a front from
engineering scales to geostrophic scales. Our hypothesis is that the relative
importance of frontal mixing to overall mixing in the plume is controlled by the
ratio of a frontal length scale representing water mass interaction with the
front, to the overall plume length scale, and diminishes as the plume front
evolves, due to diminishing connectivity between the plume front and the source
through the ebb tide. We hypothesize that mechanisms of diminishing connectivity
include both weakening of barotropic gradients through the plume as well as
Coriolis effects as the plume becomes geostrophic. This work will be pursued
using 21st century current, hydrography and microstructure measurements in the
plume front and core to assess mixing using various techniques, as well as
hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic realistic and idealized numerical models. The
field effort is focused on the mid-sized Merrimack and Connecticut rivers, which
are well studied and provide an ideal setting to observe frontal evolution in
regions with and without strong tidal currents. Results from the field study
will allow calibration and validation of models, which can then be used to
understand similar frontal processes across a wide swath of parameter
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.