* 1756859
* Collaborative Research: Molecular profiling of the ecophysiology of dormancy induction in calanid copepods of the Northern Gulf of Alaska LTER site
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Russell Hopcroft, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 441,122.00

The sub-arctic Pacific sustains major fisheries with nearly all commercially
important species depending either directly or indirectly on lipid-rich copepods
(Neocalanus flemingeri, Neocalanus plumchrus, Neocalanus cristatus and Calanus
marshallae). In turn, these species depend on a short-lived spring algal bloom
for growth and the accumulation of lipid stores in order to complete an annual
life cycle that includes a period of dormancy. The intellectual thrust of this
project measures how the timing and magnitude of algal blooms affect preparation
for dormancy using a combination of field and experimental observations. The
Northern Gulf of Alaska - with four calanid species that experience dormancy,
steep environmental gradients, well-described phytoplankton bloom dynamics, and
a concurrent NSF-LTER program - provides an unusual opportunity to identify the
factors that affect dormancy preparation. Education and outreach plans are
integrated with the research. Educational efforts focus on interdisciplinary
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral trainees. The
project will generate content for existing graduate and undergraduate courses.
U. of Alaska Fairbanks and U. Hawaii at Manoa are Alaska Native and Native
Hawaiian Serving Institutions, and students from these groups will be recruited
to participate in the project. Because fishing is a major industry in the Gulf
of Alaska, outreach will communicate the role copepods play in marine ecosystems
using the concept of a dynamic food web tied to production
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diapause (dormancy) and the accompanying
accumulation of lipids in copepods have been identified as key drivers in high
latitude ecosystems that support economically important fisheries, including
those of the Gulf of Alaska. While the disappearance of lipid-rich copepods has
been linked to severe declines in fish stocks, little is known about the
environmental conditions that are required for the successful completion of the
copepod's life cycle. A physiological profiling approach that measures relative
gene expression will be used to test two alternative hypotheses: the lipid
accumulation window hypothesis, which holds that individuals enter diapause only
after they have accumulated sufficient lipid stores, and the developmental
program hypothesis, which holds that once the diapause program is activated,
progression occurs independent of lipid accumulation. The specific objectives
are: 1) determine the effect of food levels during N. flemingeri copepodite
stages on progression towards diapause using multiple physiological and
developmental markers; 2) characterize the seasonal changes in the physiological
profile of N. flemingeri across environmental gradients and across years; 3)
compare physiological profiles across co-occurring calanid species (N.
flemingeri, Neocalanus plumchrus, Neocalanus cristatus and Calanus marshallae);
and 4) estimate the reproductive potential of the overwintering populations of
N. flemingeri. The broader scientific significance includes the acquisition of
new genomic data and molecular resources that will be made publicly available
through established data repositories, and the development of new tools for
routinely obtaining physiological profiles of
copepods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.