* 1756093
* Collaborative Research: Internal Lee-Wave Dissipation in Oceanic Flows with Mean Shear
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Eric Kunze, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 245,996.00

The mechanisms for dissipating the ocean's balanced flow remain uncertain but
are important for correctly simulating oceanic circulation. Dissipation through
internal lee-wave generation followed by turbulence production has been proposed
to account for 20-75% of the needed loss. However, microstructure measurements
do not agree with the predicted dissipation. This research will explain this
discrepancy and better constrain the role of lee-waves in dissipating vs.
redistributing energy. This study will carry out numerical simulations
describing the generation, propagation, dissipation, and reabsorption of
internal lee-waves in areas where earth rotation-induced flows of finite extent
are dominant. Results from this project will be presented at conferences and
published in peer-reviewed journals to make them available to the wider
scientific community. The results of this study will provide an improved
parameterization for the dissipation and redistribution of balanced flows and
induced mixing by lee-wave generation and increase the accuracy of Ocean
circulation modeling. The project will support education and mentoring of a
graduate student in numerical modeling and internal-wave physics, and an
undergraduate student in research. The research will also be utilized in
outreach activities for the general public and K-12 science teachers, as well as
undergraduate and international student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large
amounts of power, equivalent of 1 TW, is thought to be input into the ocean
circulation by wind-work. The maintenance of steady state conditions (i.e.,
constant energy levels) in the world's oceans requires that addition of energy
by the wind is balanced through energy dissipation processes. Internal lee-wave
generation has been assumed to be one of the largest predicted energy sinks
dissipating 0.2 to 0.75 TW through turbulence generation. However, measurements
in Antarctic Circumpolar Current jets find that turbulent dissipation rates fall
short of predictions by as much as an order of magnitude. Recent numerical
simulations of spontaneous near-inertial wave generation in the Kuroshio Front
find that much of the generated wave energy is reabsorbed back into the mean
flow. If reabsorption also occurs for lee waves, they would be as much a
mechanism for redistributing balanced energy as dissipating it. These numerical
simulations will determine what fractions of lee-wave energy are lost to
turbulence vs. being reabsorbed into the mean flow and hence address whether
lee-wave generation represents a major sink for the large-scale circulation.
Missing key elements have been sheared flow and wave action (E/w) conservation
where E is the wave energy density, w = kU the Lagrangian frequency of the lee
wave, k the topographic wavenumber and U the flow speed. In a bottom-intensified
rotating shear flow, the fraction kU1/(kUo) is available for dissipation and
(kUo- kU1)/(kUo) for reabsorption, where Uo is the bottom flow speed and U1 &gt;
f/k the flow where the waves break. The numerical simulations will test
realistic ocean flow and topography configurations to determine whether
reabsorption is a significant fraction of lee-wave generation in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.