* 1756006
* Efficient Utilization of Flexible  Transmission for Renewable Energy Integration
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Mostafa Ardakani, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 167,240.00

Energy systems are transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy
resources, such as solar and wind. Despite their obvious environmental
advantages, large-scale integration of renewable energy faces a number of
technical difficulties. These challenges are linked to the fact that the
availability of renewable energy, i.e., wind and sunlight, depends on nature
rather than the controllable process of burning a fuel. This project develops
innovative software tools that enable the deployment of flexible transmission,
which is a cost-effective solution to address these challenges. As a result of
these developments, system operators will be able to benefit from a new resource
that was not available to them before. Particularly, this project aims to employ
flexible transmission in order to alleviate the uncertainty and intermittency of
renewable energy resources, and facilitate higher levels of renewable energy
production. With the help of efficient mathematical modeling and high-
performance computing, the models developed in this project are fast and
appropriate for real-time operation. As renewable energy is economical and
emission-free, this project will have a significant positive impact on the
national health, prosperity, and welfare. Additionally, this project will
integrate computational methods and algorithm development in power engineering
education to fill a much-needed gap in power engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to enable
frequent utilization of flexible transmission for one of the largest and most
complex cyber-physical system that exists today: the North American power grid.
Co-optimization of flexible transmission and generation dispatch is not possible
yet due to the computational burden of the underlying mathematical problem.
Specifically, transmission flexibility, in the form of controllable impedance,
introduces non-convexities to power system operation that are challenging to
handle within the limited available computational time. This project
substantially reduces such computational burden through a novel and fast
optimization technique, which exploits the mathematical structure of power
flows. Consequently, utilization of flexible transmission can become possible
which can help reduce the operation cost and improve the system reliability.
This project also aims to mitigate the intermittencies and uncertainties
associated with renewable generation by utilizing transmission flexibility. It
employs stochastic optimization as the mathematical framework to model renewable
energy uncertainties, and optimizes flexible transmission and controllable
generation as the decision variables. Algorithm decomposition and high-
performance computing are employed to reduce the solution time required for
stochastic optimization in order to ensure fast and efficient computation. This
is an essential component of the project as the computational time available for
real-time operation is less than five minutes. The education component of this
project enriches the power engineering curriculum, by developing educational
modules, on computational methods, algorithm design, and high-performance
computing for power engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.