* 1756932
* Constraining Upper-Ocean Carbon Export with Biogeochemical Profiling Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Andrea Fassbender, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 683,207.00

A goal in chemical oceanography is to advance our understanding of the global
carbon cycle, specifically to quantify the transfer of carbon from the surface
ocean to depth through the sinking of particles produced by marine organisms.
Yet, modern global estimates of this process (commonly called carbon export)
differ by over 100%. These estimates are often derived from regional
relationships between ocean measurements and satellite observations that are
then applied globally. Persistent differences between the satellite and field-
based estimates of carbon export have been found throughout the ocean,
suggesting that improvements are needed. This project will determine whether
profiling floats equipped with chemical sensors can be used to estimate the
export of carbon in the ocean. Floats will be deployed at Ocean Station Papa,
but the approach is scalable in nature and could be used to validate and improve
the satellite algorithms used for global carbon export determinations. The
project will support a female, early career scientist and a postdoc, as well as
facilitate international collaboration with Canadian scientists. Additionally,
the results may assist the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
EXPORTS campaign as well as other satellite carbon export development efforts.

Modern global estimates of the biological pump differ by over 100% (~5 to >12
Pg C yr-1) making it challenging to determine the role of marine biogeochemical
(BGC) cycling in modern climate and climate variability. Global carbon export
estimates are often derived from regional empirical relationships between field
and satellite observations that are then applied globally. Persistent
discrepancies between unique satellite algorithms and unique geochemical
approaches suggest that accurately quantifying the biological pump remains a
fundamental research goal. This project will assess the capability of using BGC
profiling floats to estimate the export of distinct biogenic carbon pools
(dissolved and particulate organic carbon, and particulate inorganic carbon). By
using BGC floats to close multiple upper ocean tracer budgets this project will
address two known issues common to other geochemical approaches: assumptions
about (1) dissolved organic carbon cycling and (2) the integration depth used
for annual carbon export assessments. The method will be tested at Ocean Station
Papa, but is scalable in nature and could be used to develop a carbon export
database suitable for the validation and training of satellite algorithms
required for global carbon export determinations. Results from the floats will
be compared to satellite carbon export algorithm estimates over the 5-year float
lifetimes. Ten years of existing BGC data from profiling floats and a mooring in
the region will also be used to provide further context about interannual
variability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.