* 1756781
* Collaborative Research: Tidal internal waves that propagate along the coast: Determining how they are generated and how far they travel
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 180,041.00

Tidal internal waves arise from the interaction of the surface tide with
topography, with their generation, propagation and dissipation forming a key
pathway for tidal energy in the ocean. Internal tides can constitute a dominant
energy source on continental shelves, where they can lead to processes such as
soliton generation, turbulent mixing and cross shelf exchange, with wide ranging
implications for transport, biological productivity and near-shore pollution.
This study will explore how internal tides are transformed near the shelf break
to propagate along the coast and how quickly they decay by radiating some of
their energy offshore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the deep ocean
internal tides usually manifest as low vertical mode waves, however, close to
the continental shelf break they may take the form of "leaky" (superinertial)
baroclinic coastal trapped waves and edge waves. These modal structures are
superinertial analogues to the well studied subinertial coastal trapped waves,
having a component that radiates along the shelf break. However, they are
distinguished from subinertial waves by exhibiting coincident radiation offshore
(i.e. "leaking"). The goal of this study is to better understand the nature of
internal tides close to the coastal margin, where the presence of leaky
baroclinic trapped internal tides may contribute to the along shore variability
and propagation of tidal energy. The study will consider the forcing of these
waves by both the local astronomical tide, and by remotely incident deep ocean
internal tides. The approach will include idealized, linear, two-dimensional
(cross-shore) analyses; idealized, three-dimensional, nonlinear numerical
simulations of the coastal response to local and remote forcing; and a suite of
realistic numerical simulations to investigate leaky trapped internal tide
energy along the U. S. West coast due to local and remote
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.