* 1756104
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES PMT: Quantification of Atmospheric Deposition and Trace Element Fractional Solubility
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2023
* William Landing, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2023
* USD 163,074.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. An
essential part of this effort is determining the sources of trace elements to
the oceans, one of which is from the atmosphere: dust falling from the air, and
rain, both deliver elements to the sea surface. This project would collect and
analyze samples of rainwater and of particles from the atmosphere, along a U.S.
GEOTRACES expedition from Alaska to Tahiti in the fall of 2018. The timing of
the expedition corresponds to the part of the year with the highest atmospheric
dust concentrations in the Gulf of Alaska and may also capture the tail end of
peak fire season in Asia. In contrast, the southern end of the proposed ship
track is known to have very low atmospheric dust. Aerosols will be influenced by
human activity in Asia as well. The anticipated differences in atmospheric
deposition along the ship track will allow the assessment of the role of this
process on trace element and isotope cycling. The project will support a
postdoctoral investigator. The relevance of ocean-atmosphere studies to the
public will be communicated at campus open house events and in online forums in
collaboration with the GEOTRACES management team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
alignment with the mission of GEOTRACES, the proposed research will address the
following biogeochemical and oceanographic questions: 1) What is the magnitude
of atmospheric aerosol deposition (wet and dry) to the surface of the Pacific
Ocean? 2) What is the chemical composition of these aerosols and how does
composition vary based on source (e.g. Alaskan glacial flour, Asian mineral
dust, emissions from biomass burning, anthropogenic emissions)? 3) What is the
fractional solubility of trace elements in Pacific aerosols and does solubility
vary based on aerosol source? 4) What is the potential bioavailability of
soluble aerosol Fe? 5) How is the soluble fraction of aerosol trace elements
distributed across operationally defined size classes? 6) How does atmospheric
deposition impact distributions of other GEOTRACES parameters? Atmospheric
aerosol and precipitation samples will be collected over the 70-day expedition
and the investigators will provide sub-samples to collaborators and other
interested scientists. These samples will be analyzed for a suite of key trace
elements from bulk and size-fractionated aerosol samples, aerosol leachates, and
rain samples. A sequential extraction scheme designed to solubilize aerosol Fe
as a function of its FeOx morphology and particle size will be used on selected
samples because an understanding of aerosol trace element fractional solubility
is fundamental to future work to assess the bioavailability of aerosol derived
trace elements. The proposed work will provide data that directly contribute to
the GEOTRACES objectives related to atmospheric deposition and will help to
address temporal variability as this cruise section follows the CLIVAR/Repeat
Hydrography P16N line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.