* 1756576
* Collaborative research:  Sediment geochemical control on ocean acidification and carbon budget in a river dominated shelf system
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Courtney Harris, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,955.00

In many coastal regions fertilizer washed down rivers leads to high production
of algae. Consumption of organic material produced by the algae in deeper waters
or in sediments consumes oxygen, leading to low-oxygen "dead zones" in many
places like the northern Gulf of Mexico. This process of nutrient input, algal
growth, and loss of oxygen is called eutrophication. Consumption of the organic
matter also releases dissolved carbon dioxide into the water, and contributes
directly and indirectly to ocean acidification. In order to understand and
predict this impact on acidification, it is important to understand how much of
the organic matter degradation occurs in the water column versus in the
sediments, how variable it is between seasons and years, and how it is affected
by processes such as storms that disturb the bottom sediments. In this project,
investigators from three institutions along with their graduate and
undergraduate students will conduct a combination of field observations and
computer modeling to address these questions in the northern Gulf of Mexico.
They will share their results with the public through local outreach activities,
and with secondary school students in Louisiana through partnerships and
curriculum development with local teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will use a combined observational and numerical modeling approach to
better understand the role of shelf sediment in driving bottom water dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC) and pH dynamics and acidification at seasonal scales.
Past and current studies have not addressed this mechanism. This current lack of
knowledge makes it difficult to construct a comprehensive carbon budget for this
region. The proposed research will (i) quantify the role of benthic fluxes in
DIC production leading to acidification in the bottom water; (ii) determine the
importance of the seasonally changing benthic DIC flux in acidifying the bottom
water; and (iii) explore the importance of episodic resuspension events in
modulating benthic fluxes of DIC. Seasonal sampling will be carried out in
Louisiana shelf using state of the art benthic lander platform to record in situ
sediment and bottom water oxygen consumption rates, organic matter
remineralization rates, sediment oxygen penetration depths, benthic fluxes of
DIC and accompanying pH drop. Bottom current velocities and turbidity will also
be recorded in conjunction with sediment porewater and water column sampling.
Complementing these detailed near-bed and seabed observations, we will utilize a
recently developed coupled hydrodynamics, sediment transport and biogeochemistry
model (HydroBioSed) to scale up observed estimates of benthic fluxes to an
annual scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.