* 1756475
* CSBR:  Natural History:  Infrastructure improvements to enhance the preservation and accessibility of the Collection of Genetic Resources at the LSU Museum of Natural Science
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Frederick Sheldon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 324,999.00

In a world whose landscape is constantly changing through natural and
anthropogenic forces, one of the most important functions of biological research
collections is to preserve a permanent record of where and when a species
occurred. Biological research collections allow scientists to understand both
how changes in the landscape affect species and to forecast how future changes
to the landscape could affect those species. As indicators of environmental
health, specimens preserved in biological research collections provide human
society with a vital tool that can be applied to a diversity of issues related
to human health, including studies of infectious diseases or the affect that
disasters had on the environment. For example, without biological research
collections, tracking the entire arc of an emerging infectious zoonotic disease
(one caused by the transfer of an infectious agent from animals to humans) would
be challenging if there were no animal specimens to determine the wild species
that served as a reservoir for the infectious agent. Along the Gulf Coast of the
United States, determining the biological effect of large oil spills on the
deep-water and coastal environments would be challenging without good
documentation of when and where species occurred before spills. Biological
research collections are available to fill these needs through careful
preservation of specimens that document when and where a species occurred. This
grant supports the Collection of Genetic Resources at the Louisiana State
University Museum of Natural Science, one of the oldest and largest collections
of frozen tissues (e.g. heart, liver, muscle tissues) and tissue extracts (e.g.
DNA) of wild vertebrates. Since its inception in 1979, the Collection has been
acknowledged in more than 1500 publications and theses. The grant will allow the
Collection to continue supplying the research community with the highest quality
genetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Collection of Genetic Resources at
the LSU Museum of Natural Science houses genetic material from more than 140,000
individual wild animals representing over 8,000 species, with a rate of growth
of ca. 10,000-15,000 samples per year from ca. 4,200 individuals. This
collection is used by scientists working in a diversity of fields, and provides,
on average, 2000 tissue subsamples to researchers around the globe each year.
The Collection supplies genetic materials to the international community for
research in genomics, molecular evolution, population genetics, ecology,
wildlife management, forensics, epidemiology, environmental toxicology, and
other areas. Whenever possible, tissues in the Collection are flash frozen in
the field in liquid nitrogen to ensure the preservation of fragile biomaterials,
such as RNA and proteins, required by the dramatically expanding field of
genomics. Optimally, those flash frozen tissues are transferred at LSU to liquid
nitrogen vapor freezers (-196 degrees C) for long-term archiving. However, the
Museum's six liquid nitrogen freezers are now full. This award provides funds to
purchase two additional liquid nitrogen vapor freezers for the bird and mammal
specimens, and a safer, more efficient liquid nitrogen delivery system and to
provide support for a graduate assistant to transfer specimens from ultracold to
the new liquid nitrogen freezers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.