* 1756423
* Issues in Civil Wars Dataset
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Eric Keels, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 239,684.00

Why do rebel groups rebel? Though past research has greatly expanded our
understanding of how issues of political exclusion, organizational finance, and
the tactics of insurgents shape the dynamics of civil war, very little
quantitative research has explored how insurgents justify their insurgency. As
opposed to assuming that wars are fought over monolithic issues such as ethnic
exclusion or inequality, this project will explore the multiple ways that armed
non-state actors justify their war against the state. This gap in our knowledge
on the nature of civil wars has profound implications for how the international
community may foster peace and reduce the systemic factors that lead to
intractable conflicts. The Issues in Civil Wars (ICW) Dataset is a comprehensive
database of rebel grievances from 1946-2015 that allows us to address these
concerns. This dataset allows researchers to identify what grievances rebels
claim to have, the goals of their insurgency, and how these issues change over
time. In addition to identifying the issues rebels claim, the ICW also includes
a measure for the relative salience of each issue, allowing us to examine how
the importance of key issues hinders conflict resolution in intractable civil
wars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last two decades, a considerable amount of
research has emerged that has allowed scholars of civil war to examine various
aspects of the conflict process. Datasets such as the Uppsala/ PRIO Armed
Conflict Dataset (ACD) as well as the Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) dataset have
enabled scholars to make substantial discoveries related the onset, duration,
and outcomes of civil wars. While data exists on the organizational
characteristics of rebel groups, the use of one-sided violence, and the
locations of armed conflict events, there is limited information as to why rebel
groups claim to engage in armed conflict in the first place. To address this
gap, we have initiated the process of examining the grievances claimed by rebel
groups in civil wars. The Issues in Civil Wars (ICW) Dataset is a comprehensive
database on rebel group grievances and goals from 1946-2015. The ICW is compiled
from detailed data drawn from primary and secondary sources. The specific issues
identified by rebels are drawn from organizational manifestos, propaganda
material, policy statements, as well as press releases offered by rebel groups.
The research team codes these primary sources as well as secondary sources such
as historical accounts of the conflict. In addition to collecting data on the
specific grievances and goals offered by rebel groups, the ICW includes detailed
data on the relative salience of each goal. Salience measures are drawn from
political, cultural, and economic factors that precede the emergence of the
rebel group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.