* 1756301
* The Effects of Moving to Opportunity on Youth Political Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Tali Mendelberg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 156,744.00

One of the most important findings in political science is that economically
disadvantaged people are much less likely to vote, and policy is much less
responsive to them. However, researchers do not know if disadvantage actually
causes lower political participation, or why it does. Moreover, little is known
about how to break the cycle of poverty and low participation. The proposed
research uses the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) program to test potential
interventions to break the cycle. MTO randomly assigned housing vouchers to low-
income families for use in the private housing market in low-poverty
neighborhoods. By moving these families to less distressed neighborhoods, the
vouchers were expected to improve their economic situation. Unfortunately, the
vouchers failed to do so for the adults. In failing to increase education and
income -factors thought to promote voting - it is not surprising that the MTO
program also failed to increase voting. However, the MTO program did improve the
economic situation of those who were children. As they grew up, the children
completed more education and earned higher incomes. This is consistent with
other findings on the powerful long-term impact of early-life experiences. If
education and income are indeed causes of voting, then the low-poverty vouchers
should have substantially improved the children's participation in the political
process as they came of age. Data from MTO will be merged with census tract and
public voter file data, to assess whether blunting children's disadvantage
allows them to become civic contributors later in life. This research design
allows the first examination of the long-term impacts of poverty on political
participation. It is also the first test of early exposure to interventions that
may increase the participation of economically disadvantaged Americans in the
democratic process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals with
low levels of education and income are much less likely to vote, and public
policy is much less responsive to them. However, while this association is among
the most robust and theorized findings in political science, it is based almost
entirely on observational data. In addition, the mechanisms for the association
remain unclear. Finally, when it comes to the long-term impact of poverty
experienced early in life, researchers know still less, because data tracking
individuals from childhood into adulthood has been scarce. Moreover, little is
known about what interventions might break the cycle of poverty and low
participation, and whether these are more effective early in life. The proposed
research uses the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment to test the causal
effects of poverty on political participation. MTO randomly assigned housing
vouchers to low-income families living in public housing for use in the private
housing market in low-poverty neighborhoods. It improved the economic situation
of those who were children, as they became adults. This is consistent with other
findings on the powerful long-term impact of early-life experiences. Building on
this framework, low-poverty housing vouchers are expected to substantially
improve children's participation in the political process as they come of age.
Ameliorating children's disadvantage may increase voting through several
pathways: improving their resources (income, education); increasing their access
to social networks where voting is more common; and ameliorating their
perception that collective problems are intractable. MTO administrative and
survey data will be merged with census tract and voter file data. This research
design allows the first examination of the long-term impacts of poverty on
political participation. It is also the first comparison of early- versus late-
childhood exposure to interventions that may later increase the participation of
economically disadvantaged Americans in the democratic process. The proposed
research advances political science by looking beyond contemporaneous
explanations and focusing on early-life experiences that can have a lasting
impact on behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.