* 1756431
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Support of the Duke Lemur Center for the Study of Primate Biology and History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 499,988.00

This award will partially support operations of the Duke Lemur Center (DLC). The
DLC is a unique living stock collection of the world's most endangered and
biologically diverse primates, the lemurs of Madagascar. The colony is the
product of more than 50 years of captive breeding, institutional exchange, and
initially, animals caught in the wild. Lemurs are unique to the biodiversity
hotspot of Madagascar, and due to their critically-endangered status, are not a
renewable resource. The DLC is an exceptional training ground for students
across all ages and academic levels. Over its 50-year history, thousands of
students ranging from K-12 through postgraduate levels have been engaged in and
inspired by their experiences at the DLC. Also, hundreds of thousands of
visitors from the general public have been exposed to the concepts of
biodiversity discovery and conservation, as well as the power of biological
research via their exposure to the DLC's staff, students, and collections. The
DLC serves as a living laboratory for advancing interdisciplinary research,
scholarship, and biological conservation, covering biological disciplines
ranging from behavioral ecology to brain sciences, evolutionary ecology,
microbial metagenomics, comparative genomics, biomechanics, One Health disease
dynamics, aging and demography, biodiversity conservation, paleontology, climate
change, comparative physiology, speciation genetics, sensory biology, and more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will help the DLC meet its short and long-term
goals, which include improving support for undergraduate research projects,
engaging in exchanges and loan agreements to maintain and enhance species and
genetic diversity, and harnessing new technologies to improve comparative
biological research involving lemurs. The research and colony-care programs that
will be supported by this project have oversight from a dedicated team of
professionals who collectively represent five PhDs, three Masters degrees, two
DVMs, and additively, more than two hundred years of direct experience with
lemur research, health, husbandry, conservation, and captive management. The DLC
is the only place in the world where lemurs are readily available to
investigators, and where biological samples, decades of medical records, fossil
representatives of extinct taxa, and rich life-history are available for
comparative studies. Access to colony inventories, demographics, metadata and
research opportunities is available on-line (lemur.duke.edu). The DLC serves
multiple educational communities, including the general public, K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students. For K-12 students,
activities include summer camps and a variety of classroom learning and
interactive activities with increasing engagement in long-distance learning
through on-line tools for educational outreach. The veterinary department also
supports educational activities via undergraduate work-study opportunities and
veterinary student training. Critically, the DLC is committed to conservation
activities via both ex situ captive management and extensive community-based
Madagascar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.