* 1756250
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Development:  Building a Pipeline for Validation, Curation and Archiving of Integrative/Hybrid Models
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andrej Sali, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 713,250.00

Recent advances in the field of structural biology have led to the elucidation
of the three-dimensional structures of very large macromolecular machines of
high biological impact using novel "integrative/hybrid" (I/H) methods. These
leading-edge I/H methods integrate information from different sources to
determine the structures of complex biomolecular assemblies, analogous to
assembling the pieces of a puzzle to build a three-dimensional object. Some of
the landmark structures determined using I/H methods include the nuclear pore
complex that enables the transport of proteins across the nuclear membrane and
the proteasomal lid sub-complex that regulates the degradation of damaged,
malfunctioning or toxic proteins in the cell. There is currently no repository
capable of archiving these I/H structures so that they are available for
downstream scientific and biomedical applications. The current project builds a
comprehensive software pipeline to support the validation, curation and
dissemination of I/H models so that they are freely available to the broader
community. The outcomes of this project will make key structures of biological
assemblies accessible to researchers, educators and students around the world.
This project will impact scientists who use structural biology data for their
research as well as students and educators who study the role of structure in
biology. This research will directly and significantly enhance the field of
biology and medicine and extend its impact on the broader community through
education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends a
previously developed prototype system (PDB-Dev) by building the complete data
pipeline for the curation, validation and delivery of I/H models. This will be
achieved through the creation of an automated deposition system to support a
broad range of I/H models; development of annotation and validation pipelines
for processing I/H models by leveraging existing protocols and tools;
development of new tools for visualizing multi-scale model representations and
model uncertainly; creation of a service architecture to manage data exchange
among federated resources capable of supporting evolutionary improvements of I/H
models and associated experimental data; and development of a delivery platform
to support data set discovery and to provide web services for searching,
reporting, and data download. Since I/H methods integrate information from
several experimental and computational techniques, this project also prototypes
a new centralized software environment that facilitates automated communication
and exchange of data among a federation of structural biology model and data
repositories contributing to I/H modeling. These developments will lead to a
robust system capable to archiving and disseminating I/H models to the public in
a standard form. The results of the project will be available on the PDB-Dev
website at https://pdb-dev.wwpdb.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.