* 1756313
* Architecture and plasticity of auditory lexical representations in the human brain
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Josef Rauschecker, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 651,953.00

Considering the diversity and richness of languages spoken around the globe,
speech perception is arguably one of the main achievements of the human brain.
While there is now broad support among cognitive neuroscientists for the concept
of a hierarchy of cortical areas subserving auditory and speech processing,
there is substantial disagreement about the roles different brain areas play in
speech recognition, how the speech system learns and represents spoken words,
and how learning words through one sense (e.g., through reading) can allow the
brain to recognize the same words through another sense (e.g., through hearing).
With support from the National Science Foundation, we will use advanced
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate these questions.
Specifically, the project is designed to resolve a major ongoing controversy
regarding how and where words are represented in the brain by, for the first
time, applying fMRI techniques to this field that have been used successfully to
answer related questions in the domain of written words. A second study will
probe how the brain learns new spoken words and adds them to the auditory
lexicon. In the final set of studies, the project will break new ground in our
understanding of how the auditory and visual systems are linked in reading, and
how this interaction is enabled by cross-sensory learning. Understanding the
neural bases of speech processing and cross-sensory learning of language are
areas of great interest not only for basic science but also other areas ranging
from education and language learning to engineering (by elucidating effective
learning algorithms for deep multisensory hierarchies, e.g., for automatic
speech recognition) as well as biomedical fields (by building a foundation to
study a range of disorders, including dyslexia and language comprehension
deficits). The research project will form an opportunity to train the next
generation of scientists, at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more scientific detail, the overarching goal of
the proposed project is to study the existence and plasticity of auditory lexica
in the human brain, and to understand coupling of written and auditory speech
representations that permit cross-modal transfer of lexical learning. The
project has three Aims: Aim 1 addresses the current controversy regarding the
existence and location of auditory word representations in the brain.
Translating techniques we previously developed to identify a "visual lexicon" in
the "Visual Word Form Area", we will use sensitive fMRI rapid adaptation (fMRI-
RA) and other advanced fMRI techniques to test the hypothesis of a (receptive)
auditory lexicon within an analogous "Auditory Word Form Area" in left anterior
superior temporal cortex. At the same time, we will test whether another lexicon
exists in motor-related speech areas of the auditory dorsal stream representing
articulatory word forms that are automatically activated by speech perception
via an "inverse model". Aim 2 is designed to probe the plasticity invoked by the
addition of novel words to the auditory lexicon. Aim 3 studies the interaction
of written language with the auditory system. Prior studies have shown that
reading activates phonological representations in proficient readers, and that
this phonological recoding is crucial for reading acquisition. We will test the
novel hypothesis that written words cause widespread activation of the auditory
system and that training on novel written words can drive word-selective
rewiring in the auditory lexical system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.