* 1756996
* CAREER: Effective Field Theories from String Compactification
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Jonathan Heckman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 240,170.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Jonathan Heckman at the
University of North Carolina (UNC)at Chapel Hill. This research will focus on
using string theory to understand the workings of Nature at the shortest
distance scales. Strings continue to have significant impact on theoretical
physics, with interdisciplinary connections ranging from the physics of
subatomic particles to pure mathematics. One of the most important open issues
is how to connect this framework to experimentally verified theories of
subatomic particles. This project aims to use the geometry of extra dimensions
predicted by string theory to construct and study theoretical models of
relevance both for theories of subatomic particles, and for more formal
mathematical applications.

The education and outreach efforts of this program will introduce students to
the power of geometric methods in theoretical physics. 1) At the postdoc and
graduate level, the PI will maintain a collaborative research environment. 2)
The PI will develop a course on geometric methods in high energy theory. 3) At
the undergraduate level, the PI will advise students on geometric and
computational aspects of string theory through the UNC REU program on
computational methods in physics held in his department. 4) The PI will work
closely with the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center to develop a set of
outreach modules aimed at conveying the broad range of energy scales which are
actively being investigated by high energy theorists and experimentalists.

The technical components of this program will focus on the development of new
tools in the study of string compactification at strong coupling, and the
resulting low energy effective field theories. Particular emphasis will be
placed on compactifications of F-theory. This will entail developing the
correspondence between the open string degrees of freedom in the worldvolume
theory of intersecting seven-branes, and closed string degrees of freedom
captured by elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau manifolds. Additional components
will entail the development of specific string-motivated scenarios for physics
beyond the Standard Models of particle physics and cosmology. Particle physics
applications will include the study of kinetic mixing with a strongly coupled
extra sector. Cosmology applications will include the development of
inflationary reheating scenarios coupled to concrete stringy particle physics
models. This project will also focus on using the geometry of F-theory
compactifications as a tool to classify and study superconformal field theories
(SCFTs) in diverse dimensions. This will include a classification of 6D SCFTs,
the construction of new 4D N = 1 SCFTs from D3-brane probes of singular Calabi-
Yau fourfold geometries, and the development of 2D SCFTs with N = (0,2)
supersymmetry from compactification on singular elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau
fivefolds.