* 1756191
* An energy-sensitive pathway of cold-induced metabolic remodeling in threespine stickleback
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kristin O'Brien, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 689,579.00

Adjustments in metabolism are necessary to meet changing energetic demands that
result from processes such as exercise, temperature fluctuations, and diseases
such as cancer. One of the most striking examples of alterations in metabolism
occurs in fish in response to temperature. Because fish are ectotherms, with
body temperatures equivalent to their environment, some species may experience
body temperature changes as great as 15-20oC diurnally or seasonally, requiring
adjustments in metabolism to maintain activity and swimming performance.
Although metabolic remodeling in response to temperature has been well
documented in several fish species, little is known about how it is regulated.
While some components of the regulatory pathway are similar between fish and
mammals, others differ, providing an opportunity to expand understanding of how
metabolism is regulated. This project will identify the signaling pathway
involved in temperature-induced changes in metabolism in the threespine
stickleback fish. Stickleback are ideal for these studies because they inhabit
thermally variable environments and their genome has been sequenced, making
molecular biological studies more tractable compared to other species. High-
school, undergraduate, and graduate students will participate in this research,
obtaining training in physiology, biochemistry, and molecular biology. Native
Alaskan high school students will be involved through independent studies as
part of the Rural Alaskan High School Honors Institute, a six-week college
preparatory program at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Results from this
research will provide a better understanding of how metabolism is regulated, a
process essential to the health of all organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates mechanisms of phenotypic plasticity, specifically the role
of sirtuins, NAD+-dependent deacetylases, in driving metabolic reorganization in
response to temperature in the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus.
The hypothesis will be tested that sirtuins activate c-MYC, a potent regulator
of cell growth and metabolism, and that differences in chromatin packing among
different tissues will affect c-MYC binding, resulting in tissue-specific
metabolic remodeling that is reflected in the degree of thermal compensation at
the organismal level in aerobic metabolic scope. Stickleback will be acclimated
to three temperatures (5, 12, or 20oC) for 10 weeks. Maximal activities of key
metabolic enzymes, mitochondrial respiration rates in permeabilized cells,
aerobic metabolic scope, and levels of adenylates, sirtuins, and c-MYC will be
quantified in liver and glycolytic and oxidative muscles. Levels of sirtuins
will then be manipulated in vivo in animals at 12oC and these parameters
quantified, along with the expression of select mitochondrial genes. Gene
targets of c-MYC will be identified using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled
with high throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq), and a c-MYC promoter and reporter
construct will be used to assess c-MYC DNA binding activity in vivo during
thermal acclimation. This project will determine how changes in metabolism at
the cellular level contribute to whole-organismal metabolic remodeling and
identify components of the signaling cascade driving tissue-specific metabolic
remodeling, creating an integrated understanding of metabolic remodeling that
spans molecular, cellular and organismal levels. Broader impacts include
graduate student training and research opportunities for Native Alaskan high-
school students participating in a six-week summer college preparatory
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.