* 1756469
* CSBR: Natural History: Restructuring the Shirley C. Tucker Herbarium into a central hub for Louisiana botany via the consolidation of multiple herbaria
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Kluse, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 494,764.00

Herbaria serve as crucial documentation of the natural world. Their dried,
pressed specimens are of multidimensional importance: they are documentation of
plant occurrence through space and time; markers of taxonomic and nomenclatural
identity; evidence of plant-animal interactions; and sources of DNA for
molecular studies. In recent years, there has been a resurgence in the
acknowledgement of the importance of natural history specimens to modern
biological research. Despite this resurgence and broad application of specimens
in research a number of herbaria in Louisiana have recently closed and the
collections orphaned. The Shirley C. Tucker Herbarium at Louisiana State
University (LSU) has been the recipient of a large portion of these orphaned
collections. This has resulted in a near doubling in the size of the collection,
from 207,500 specimens in 2015 to an estimated 400,000. This project will result
in the integration and consolidation of these specimens into the Tucker
Herbarium's infrastructure, as well as completion of prior digitization efforts.
This project will not only ensure that Louisiana's botanical heritage is
available to interested researchers, but also foster an understanding of the
importance of plants and natural history collections via outreach projects aimed
at the broader public, undergraduate students, and the academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The incorporation of multiple orphaned herbaria
at LSU presents an opportunity to restructure the Tucker Herbarium into a
regional hub for Louisiana botany. This project will integrate the recently
acquired herbarium specimens into LSU's compacted herbarium infrastructure, as
well as consolidate multiple digital data sources. Both of these steps are
crucial for the maintenance and maximum utility of the much larger collection
that will be housed at the Tucker Herbarium by 2020. Challenges related to the
integration of different filing schemes and database structures will be
addressed by project personnel and their solutions will be presented at national
conferences. Additionally, continued digitization efforts will result in a
nearly complete online database with image records of the Louisiana flora. All
associated data will be publicly accessible and linked to multiple consortium
and data aggregation efforts, including SERNEC, iDigBio, and GBIF. Integration
and digitization activities will be coupled with the development of a rotating
public exhibit to feature Tucker Herbarium research and activities, the
inauguration of an annual plant biology seminar at LSU, and the establishment of
a stronger presence, both online via social media campaigns and on campus via
participation in outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.