* 1756011
* CRII: SaTC: Multi-User Authentication and Access Control in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Blase Ur, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 191,000.00

Computing is transitioning from single-user devices, such as laptops and phones,
to the Internet of Things (IoT), in which numerous users interact with a
particular device, such as an Amazon Echo or Internet-connected door lock. The
desired level of access to particular capabilities, such as ordering items using
a shared voice assistant, likely differs across members of a household (e.g.,
children and parents). Widely deployed devices and the existing research
literature lack mechanisms for specifying who should be able to perform which
actions with which household Internet-connected devices. Complicating matters,
the users of a given device often have complex social relationships to each
other. Our goal is to develop techniques and interfaces that enable non-
technical users to specify who should be able to perform what actions using
which Internet-connected devices in the home, as well as to verify the identity
of the person trying to perform those actions. Misconfigured devices can open
the home to attackers, yet may also disenfranchise members of the household. Our
approach to authentication and authorization directly impacts security for
consumers of an array of household IoT devices. A core objective of this
proposal is also to train first-time student researchers in a tangible domain
that is ideal for a first research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a
technical level, the work comprises three phases. The first phase aims to
characterize the access-control policies users will want to express for multi-
user IoT devices, focusing on the unique characteristics and capabilities of the
IoT. To do so, we will conduct an online user study that elicits users' desired
access-control policies for the home IoT, that is, who should be allowed to use
particular capabilities, as well as in what circumstances. Having identified the
primitives necessary for users to express their desired access-control policies
for the home IoT, the second phase will systematize authentication mechanisms
and authorization interfaces appropriate for the constraints of these home IoT
environments, proposing mechanisms commensurate with the risks of unauthorized
use of different capabilities. In the third phase of the research, we will
implement our proposed mechanisms and evaluate them through an in-situ field
study, allowing us to gauge how effectively these interfaces and mechanisms
minimize both unauthorized access and incorrect access denials in the realistic
setting of users' homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.