* 1756412
* Air-Sea Momentum Flux in Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Shuyi Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 436,659.00

The intensity of a tropical cyclone is significantly influenced by two competing
physical processes at the air-sea interface. It strengthens by drawing thermal
energy from the underlying warm ocean but weakens due to the drag of rough ocean
surface. These processes change dramatically as the wind speed increases above
30 m/s. The air-sea momentum flux at hurricane winds is still poorly understood,
which severely affects the capability of forecasting the path and intensity of
tropical cyclones. Ocean surface waves undoubtedly play a central role, but sea
spray plays an increasingly important role. This project addresses this
challenging problem by analyzing field measurements (surface wave spectra,
underwater ambient sound, wind, etc.) in three tropical cyclones and stress
calculated using an ocean momentum budget. The analyses are guided by the state-
of-the-art UWIN-CM (the University of Miami Unified Wave INterface Coupled
Atmosphere-Wave-Ocean Model) simulations. Variations in wave stress and breaking
rate as a function of wind speed and directional wave properties will be
investigated by comparisons with the UWIN-CM simulations and by analyses of the
modeled wave dissipation function. Knowledge acquired in this project will
improve the understanding and forecasting of hurricanes and will directly
benefit the public. In addition, poor understanding of hurricanes is partly due
to the lack of reliable measuring techniques in the harsh hurricane condition.
This project will develop the underwater Lagrangian and acoustic techniques,
which are able to monitor the air-sea interface from the beneath. A user-
interface designed movie will be created to display how scientists observe
hurricanes using different techniques, such as satellites, aircrafts, and
underwater instruments. The movie will be played to visiting children, in
science talks, in local schools and on the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
combining the unique field measurements and state-of-the-art UWIN-CM
simulations, we will answer the following scientific questions: (1) How
important are equilibrium-range waves in controlling the air-sea momentum flux
in tropical cyclones? We hypothesize that for wind speeds higher than 30 m/s the
stress on the ocean surface is larger than the equilibrium-range wave breaking
stress. (2) How does the wave breaking rate vary with wind speed and the complex
surface wave field? At moderate wind speeds the wave breaking rate increases
with increasing speed. Does this continue at extreme high winds? (3) Can we
detect acoustic signatures of sea spray at high winds? Measurements of sea spray
in tropical cyclones are very rare. We will seek for the acoustic signatures of
spray droplets impacting the ocean surface. (4) What are the processes
controlling the air-sea momentum flux? We will use the coupled atmosphere-wave-
ocean model to guide the interpretation of the field measurements, assessing its
ability to predict and using internal diagnostics to assess the importance of
various processes. Knowledge gained by answering these questions will improve
the understanding and modeling of the air-sea momentum flux and improve the
capability of forecasting tropical cyclones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.