* 1756905
* Comparative Welfare Entitlements Project
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lyle Scruggs, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,683.00

Countries across the world vary in the extent to which they provide social
welfare supports to citizens, and these benefits change over time. Social
scientists and policymakers require data tracking these distributions and
changes to assist with policy formulation and analyses of policy change. An
existing data set, the Comparative Welfare Entitlements Dataset (CWED), is a
cross-national, time series data set of comparative welfare state
characteristics in 21 countries covering the years 1972-2010. This project
expands the CWED to provide coverage of key social welfare programs in 33
countries and across the 50 US states over the last five decades. The expanded
database will also provide new information about programs to support working
mothers and people with non-traditional labor force attachment. CWEP will assist
educators, policymakers, and journalists as a tool for visualizing the diverse
array of social protection arrangements across the US and around the world over
decades, providing a more historical perspective of the evolution of social
welfare policy. The combination of international and state policy data produced
in this project will help us to better understand the many factors that shape
social welfare policy across the world as well as how social welfare policies
affect social and economic outcomes for individuals and families in the global
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project expands and extends the
Comparative Welfare Entitlements Data set (CWED) through 2020 (renaming it
Comparative Welfare Entitlements Project). CWEP first expands coverage of the
existing CWED data to 33 countries over 48 years (1972-2020). Second, it
provides a new data set of US states' cash transfer programs, such as
unemployment insurance, cash social assistance (AFDC/TANF), state SSI, and (for
the several states that have such programs) short-term disability. Third, it
improves the web interface of CWED, allowing researchers and the general public
to visualize features of both CWED and SWB data. The project will use these data
to evaluate several theoretical questions, incorporating data from the post-
Great Recession era, including statistical analyses of: the impact of political
partisanship on policy; the impact of immigration and ethnic diversity on social
policy; the long-term effects of incremental policy change; and the
distributional implications of welfare reforms. Previous versions of the data
set have been used in over 200 peer reviewed research articles in the last
decade. The new data set will be of considerable use to researchers in
disciplines including political science, sociology, social policy, economics,
social work and public health, thus expanding social science
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.