* 1756892
* ATD: Online Multiscale Algorithms for Geometric Density Estimation in High-Dimensions and Persistent Homology of Data for Improved Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Mauro Maggioni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 379,940.00

The investigator and his colleagues develop novel ideas to tackle challenges in
threat detection. The starting point are insights from multiscale geometric and
topological analysis of high-dimensional data: low-intrinsic dimensionality,
manifold structures and/or other types of geometric properties of the data are
exploited by their novel approaches for tasks such as density estimation,
anomaly detection, dimensionality reduction and classification. This approach
has the advantage of being adaptive to the low intrinsic dimensionality of the
data, thereby leading to algorithms to perform these tasks efficiently, both in
terms of sample size require to learn, and in terms of computational costs,
leading to a new generation of results and algorithms. Their research focuses on
the detection of chemical attacks, which are one of the most pernicious threats,
and in particular on hyperspectral imaging for chemical detection, specifically
using atmospheric longwave infrared spectroscopy built into the longwave HSI
systems. He and his collaborators apply these techniques to HSI data, in the
form of images and streaming HSI movies containing chemical plumes, taking
advantage of the speed of the proposed techniques.

The input data (images, spectra, etc...) for many threat detection problems is
typically large, high-dimensional, corrupted by noise, and often subject to
distortions due to environmental conditions. Many threat detection tasks fall
into one of the following broad categories: regression, classification, anomaly
or outlier detection, and changepoint detection. These tasks face the
fundamental curse of dimensionality: to achieve a target level of accuracy, the
number of observations required is exponential in the number of dimensions of
the data. Such dimension may be the number of pixels in a sub-image of interest
or the number of spectral bands in a HyperSpectral Image (HSI) or a
spectrometer, and may be very large. This makes the analysis of high-dimensional
data hopeless unless we can discover a low-dimensional representation of the
data, or at least of those features of the data that are sufficient to perform
the task at hand: the PI and his colleagues develop novel techniques for
discovering such representations and exploiting them to model the data, and
detecting anomalies in evolving data. These constructions and algorithms enhance
our capability in threat detection, and are key to advance information
technology in the field of analysis of large data sets arising in threat
detection.