* 1756337
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics of dissolved organic phosphorus production, composition and bioavailability along a natural marine phosphate gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Sonya Dyhrman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 398,468.00

Phytoplankton, also known as primary producers, are microscopic floating plants
at the base of the marine food web. As photosynthetic organisms, phytoplankton
directly take up dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) to synthesize their tissues
using energy from the sun. In addition to carbon (C), essential nutrients such
as phosphorus (P) and nitrogen (N) are required by these primary producers.
While dissolved inorganic phosphorus (DIP) is the preferred form of P because it
is a small enough molecule that phytoplankton can directly absorb it, in the
sunlit surface waters of the ocean the concentration of DIP can be drawn down to
limiting levels. In this situation, the larger dissolved organic phosphorus
(DOP) molecules can become available through enzyme hydrolysis reactions, which
convert DOP to DIP. There was mounting evidence that DOP can play a crucial role
in supporting primary production in the ocean, yet very little is known about
the nature of the DOP pool. There are many analytical impediments to gaining
information about the chemical structure and composition of DOP, and without
knowledge of its composition there is no basis for evaluating the potential
bioavailability of DOP to primary producers. The proposed work will employ a
unique combination of methods to gain novel insight into the composition and
bioavailability of DOP. Field and laboratory (culture) nutrient addition
incubation experiments will target the drivers of DOP variability, information
crucial to resolving models of primary production in the ocean. Results of this
work will be transformative for understanding DOP composition, DOP variability
in space and time, and microbial control on the nature of the marine DOP pool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support a postdoctoral scholar, two
undergraduate students and two undergraduate students. Recruitment of
undergraduate students will focus on entraining Native Americans and Pacific
Islanders, through SACNAS (Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and
Native Americans in Science) and related venues. Results will be published in
peer-reviewed journals and presented at national and international meetings. We
also propose to conduct outreach to middle schools, including bringing The
Artistic Oceanographer Program, an interactive inquiry-based program targeting
middle school age science and art standards by integrating concepts in ocean
science literacy with art, to local middle schools in New York and
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
provide foundational information on the way DOP molecular characteristics
translate into P-bioavailability to marine microorganisms, and in turn how
microorganisms growing under different dissolved inorganic nitrogen: dissolved
inorganic phosphorus (DIN:DIP) impact the composition and bioavailability of
DOP. A newly developed sequential ultrafiltration (SUF) method will be applied
to samples collected along a natural P-gradient in the western North Atlantic.
The SUF method quantitatively segregates and concentrates DOP into 4 molecular
weight size classes, which can be subjected to bioavailability assays using
phosphohydrolytic enzymes, and to liquid chromotography-mass spectrometry to
provide detailed compositional information. Using these combined methods we will
probe in situ DOP, the evolution of in situ DOP during shipboard incubations
under different DIN:DIP, and the composition and bioavailability of DOP produced
by organisms isolated from key stations along the natural phosphate gradient.
Contrast of in situ patterns to those developed in controlled culture
experiments using field isolates will be achieved by identifying cellular shifts
in organic phosphorus biosynthesis pathways, and tracing how such shifts impact
DOP composition. The combined methodological approach will provide unparalleled
insight into DOP composition and bioavailability, addressing this major
knowledge gap. Results of this work will be transformative for understanding DOP
composition, DOP variability in space and time, and microbial control on the
nature of the marine DOP pool. Such information is a prerequisite to building
ecosystem models that capture the influence of P biogeochemistry on primary
production and carbon cycling in aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.