* 1756035
* Neural Investigations of Face Perception and Attention Using Population Receptive Field Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Kalanit Grill-Spector, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 612,406.00

Every day, our many social interactions with others depend on our ability to
recognize people from their faces. However, about 2% of the general population
have deficits in face perception. What makes some people good at recognizing
faces and others bad at it? Scientists have identified brain regions involved in
perceiving faces. Additionally, behavioral research has shown that face
perception is "holistic". That is, perception of the whole face, all at once, is
better than that of individual facial features. However, it is unknown what
neural computations underlie this holistic perception of faces. Because holistic
face processing requires spatial integration across face parts, the goal of the
research is to examine whether such processing relies on spatial integration by
neurons in face-selective brain. Additionally, the research will determine if
individual differences in neuronal spatial integration predict individual
differences in face recognition ability. This project is expected to impact
society in several ways. Understanding the neural mechanisms of face recognition
could improve measurement, enhance diagnosis, and ultimately improve the
wellbeing of individuals with deficits in face recognition. The project will
also develop research infrastructure by making publicly available the new
methods and computational tools for measurement and modeling of brain responses.
The project intends to advance the participation and education of women in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program addresses important gaps in
knowledge by leveraging cutting-edge neuroimaging and computational approaches,
including population receptive field (pRF) modeling and hierarchical convolution
neural networks, together with behavioral measurements of face perception. In
particular, the pRF approach offers a unique opportunity to operationalize and
measure spatial processing and attentional effects on face perception in a
computational framework. Thus, the research (i) will advance understanding of
the neural mechanisms of face perception by quantifying spatial aspects of face
processing and attention, (ii) will uncover how spatial integration of different
face stimuli, under differing attentional demands explains individual
differences in face perception abilities, and (iii) will generate an up-to-date
and neurally accurate computational model of human face perception.