* 1756254
* Environmental Lipidomics of Suspended and Sinking Particles in the Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2021
* USD 760,208.00

Plankton in the ocean play an important role in regulating Earth?s climate due
to their role in cycling carbon dioxide. For example, some plankton use
photosynthesis to convert carbon dioxide into the organic molecules that compose
their cells. About a quarter of these organic molecules are lipids, which serve
important roles as structural components of membranes, as energy reserves in oil
bodies, and as signaling molecules. In some planktonic cells there are over one
thousand different types of lipid molecules, each playing a distinct and
essential role in the metabolism of the cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planktonic
lipids are also important for humans. They are measured by geoscientists in
order to address a wide variety of problems, from understanding when life
evolved on Earth, to estimating the temperature of the ocean in geological past,
to assessing the health of plankton and their ability to conduct photosynthesis.
Planktonic lipids are also the main components of petroleum, a critical energy
source for transportation and industry. Finally, ocean plankton are the sole
sources of many "essential" lipids that humans require in their diet but cannot
efficiently synthesize themselves. Notable examples are eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which in humans play key roles in
cardiovascular health, hormone production, and inflammation management. On
average, the global population of humans is chronically deficient in EPA and
DHA. Seafood is essentially the only source of these essential fatty acids to
the human diet, and yet we do not know if production of these lipids by marine
organisms will be able to keep up with future global
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of planktonic lipids,
geoscientists have only a basic understanding of lipid distributions in the
ocean and cannot predict how lipids will change in response to future global
warming. Results from lab experiments with cultures of phytoplankton suggest the
potential for significant future alterations in the types and amounts of lipids
produced in the oceans. The research being conducted as part of this project
seeks to address this problem by producing the first global-scale assessment of
lipids in the ocean. The overarching strategy will be to apply lipidomics, a
state-of-the-art method for simultaneously analyzing all of the lipids in a
plankton cell, to a library of thousands of samples from a broad range of ocean
environments. These environments nearly span the global range in factors thought
to affect plankton lipid metabolism. This project will shed new light on the
identity, sources, and fates of the vast diversity of planktonic lipids, and
enable scientists to predict and respond to changes in the future output of
lipids from the ocean. The project will also inform our understanding of
petroleum formation, and provide geoscientist with better tools for
understanding Earth's history. The scientist would continue his efforts to train
the next generation of scientists (postdoc), as well as his quest to educate the
community and K-12 students via his science outreach
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.