* 1756908
* I-Corps: Carbon nanotube coaxial noise control
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Andrew Barnard, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 10/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make quiet
products and systems that have pipe and duct sound transmission. Systems like
automobile exhausts and intakes, building heating and ventilation systems, and
fluid flow piping all transmit sound from power generating equipment to human
receivers. In order to reduce the amount of noise to which people are exposed,
passive and active noise control systems are incorporated in pipe and duct
systems. These systems are currently large, heavy and inefficient. The
application of a compact and lightweight coaxial active noise control system has
potential implications on many industries where size of noise control elements
constrain design. More importantly, the reduction of noise in the environment
has potential health and wellness benefits for all members of society through
environmental stress reduction. Reducing noise emitted from mechanical pipe and
duct systems is an important step in reducing overall environmental noise
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the market need for
coaxial thermophones (or heat-driven solid state speaker), particularly those
manufactured using carbon nanotube (CNT) thin films. The idea of a thermophone
was developed as early as 1898. However, practical applications of the
thermophone have not been realized. This is mainly due to lack of low heat
capacity material to manufacture the thermophone. CNT thin-films enable an
efficient thermophone due to their low heat capacity per unit area as well as
their relatively low production cost. Current active noise control technologies
rely on outdated moving coil transducer design, which limits their widespread
implementation due to size, weight, cost, and performance restrictions. A
coaxial thermophone transducer design reduces size and weight significantly
while increasing potential noise control performance. This I-Corps national
program will lead to better understanding of customer segments, value
propositions, customer pain points, value chains, delivery methods,
partnerships, and a minimum viable product.