* 1756531
* RUI: Effects of large inedible particles on larval feeding, planktonic larval duration, and juvenile quality in marine invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Bruno Pernet, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,639.00

Many ecologically and economically important marine invertebrates (e.g.,
oysters, crabs, and sea urchins) have life cycles that include feeding larval
stages that live drifting in the water as part of the plankton. These larvae
spend days or weeks feeding on tiny algal particles to fuel their development
until they can metamorphose into juveniles. In nature, however, the plankton
includes not only edible particles, but also many particles that are too large
to be eaten but which may interfere with feeding on edible particles. These
include, for example, large algal particles, eggs and embryos of other
invertebrates, re-suspended sediment, and anthropogenic nano- and micro-
plastics. When larvae encounter large inedible particles, they may respond by
altering their swimming behavior to avoid them, or by capturing and then
rejecting them. Such interactions reduce the rate at which larvae can capture
edible particles, which forces them to either spend more time feeding before
metamorphosis (increasing their overall risk of dying due to planktonic
predators), or to metamorphose with less energy, producing juveniles in
relatively poor condition. This project examines how large inedible particles
affect feeding, time to metamorphosis, and juvenile condition in the larvae of
diverse marine invertebrates. The project has the potential to dramatically
change our understanding of how larvae feed and survive in natural communities,
and thus our understanding of the population dynamics of these important
organisms. The project will support research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at California State University Long Beach, a
primarily undergraduate institution, as well as summer research internships for
students at two local community colleges. Project data will be integrated into
laboratory modules in undergraduate courses. Finally, data on the reproductive
biology of diverse California marine invertebrates will be added to a public
website that is widely used by members of the public, students, and biologists
interested in the development, life histories, ecology, and evolution of these
common animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The factors that control planktonic
duration and juvenile condition in marine invertebrates with feeding larvae have
long been recognized as critical to understanding their ecology and evolution.
Larval feeding environment is clearly one of those factors, but previous work
has focused almost exclusively on one feature of that environment, the abundance
of food. This project will evaluate the importance of another potentially
critical dimension of the larval feeding environment ? the presence of large
inedible particles, which are frequently abundant in natural plankonic
communities. It takes a comparative approach to address two key questions about
the effects of large inedible particles on larvae (including those of
echinoderms, annelids, and molluscs) that feed using several different particle
capture mechanisms. First, do large inedible particles present in natural
plankton reduce larval feeding rates? And second, does the presence of large
inedible particles extend larval planktonic duration or result in the production
of lower quality juveniles? Feeding rates of larvae will be measured in short-
term experiments in which larvae are exposed to both food and to natural or
artificial large inedible particles over a range of concentrations. Effects of
large inedible particles on planktonic duration and juvenile quality will be
measured by culturing larvae through their entire life cycles in the presence of
large inedible particles at various concentrations. Because feeding performance
is an important determinant of planktonic duration, larval survival, and
juvenile condition, the project will add greatly to our understanding of how
conditions in the plankton affect the population dynamics of the many marine
invertebrates with feeding larvae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.