* 1756312
* Collaborative Research: The Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study: Sustained Biogeochemical, Ecosystem and Ocean Change Observations and Linkages in the North Atlantic (Years 31-35)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Deborah Steinberg, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 298,738.00

Long-term observations over several decades are a powerful tool for
investigating ocean physics, biology, and chemistry, and the response of the
oceans to environmental change. The Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Study, known as
BATS, has been running continuously since 1988. The research goals of the BATS
program are: (1) to improve our understanding of the time-varying components of
the ocean carbon cycle and the cycles of related nutrient elements such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, and silicon; and, (2) to identify the relevant physical,
chemical and ecosystem properties responsible for this variability. In addition,
the BATS program has strong and diverse broader impacts, contributing to the
field of ocean sciences by providing high quality ocean observations and data
for seagoing scientists and modelers, and a framework through which researchers
can conceive and test hypotheses. This award will support the operations of the
BATS program for five more years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary BATS research
themes are as follows: (1) Quantify the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling and
climate variability on air-sea exchange of CO2, and carbon export to the ocean
interior; (2) Document trends and the controls on the interannual to decadal
scale variability in carbon and nutrient cycles to their coupling in the surface
and deep ocean via the Redfield Ratio paradigm; (3) Quantify the response of
planktonic community structure and function, and impact on biogeochemical cycles
to variability in surface fluxes and dynamical processes; (4) Facilitate
development, calibration and validation of next generation oceanographic
sensors, tools and technologies; and, (5) Generate a dataset that can be
utilized by empiricists, modelers and students. This research integrates ocean
physics, chemistry and biology into a framework for understanding oceanic
processes and ocean change in the North Atlantic subtropical gyre. The existing
29 years of BATS data provide robust constraints on seasonal and interannual
variability, the response of the Sargasso Sea ecosystem to natural climate
variability, and signal detection of potential ocean changes. This project would
extend the BATS program through years 31-35 to address a series of ten
interlinked questions through integrated research approaches and a multitude of
collaborative efforts. In addition to the themes above, and embedded into the
ten questions and approaches, the BATS team will focus on, for example, coupling
of particle production and biogeochemistry; revisiting the complexities of the
biological carbon pump; oxygen decline; and changes in the hydrography, physics,
ocean carbon cycle and biogeochemistry of the Sargasso Sea. The highest quality
data observation and collection will be maintained and used to address these
questions. Importantly, a wide range of collaborations at the BATS site,
spanning the physical and biogeochemical disciplines, will aid these broad
goals. Strong links to community stakeholders, and close collaboration
(including methods intercomparisons and personnel exchanges) with the Hawaii
Ocean Time-series are proposed. This work will extend the research findings of
the project into educational and training opportunities within and beyond the
oceanographic community, including training and mentorship of both undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.