* 1756000
* CRII:  CSR:  MPI-ACC_GIS:  Accelerating Geo-Spatial Computations on HPC Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Satish Puri, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 03/31/2021
* USD 174,998.00

Spatial computations are at the heart of topological and geometric analysis used
in many science and engineering applications. Spatial data is used in mapping
applications for navigation. Government agencies in public health, urban
planning, transportation, scientific communities and private sector depend on
spatial data mining and analysis to gain insights and produce actionable plans.
However, with the increase in the size and complexity of spatial data,
traditional desktop-based analysis is inadequate for the task, and there is a
need to accelerate compute-intensive spatial applications on modern computers
and supercomputers to get results in real-time. This requires new software
design and implementation, as well as efficient algorithms for spatial query,
join and overlay that can scale with the data and the available hardware
resources. The first objective of this project is to develop practical parallel
algorithms based on plane sweep for computational geometry problems. The second
objective is to inject spatial data awareness into the existing Message Passing
Interface (MPI)-based Geographic Information System (GIS), and incorporate new
features to leverage high performace computing resources by using specialized
software packages. A new load balancing technique will be developed that works
during the file partitioning phase by non-contiguous file reading supported by
the MPI library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MPI-Vector-IO library will enable
efficient parallel input/output on large polygonal datasets stored on parallel
filesystems, thus improving the state-of-the-art. The MPI-ACC-GIS software will
enable existing sequential tools to be used in a high performance computing
environment with thousands of cores. Parallelization of plane sweep algorithm
based on concurrent data structures on shared memory machines will impact many
computational geometry algorithms that rely on plane sweep for efficient
implementation. Development of MPI-ACC-GIS software will be useful to geo-
spatial data scientists. In addition, the project has a broader impact in
training undergraduate and graduate students to perform research in high
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPI-ACC-GIS software implementing
new algorithms and methodologies along with test data, results and benchmarks
will be made publicly available on a website hosted at the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.