* 1756447
* 2018 CSES
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 844,784.00

The 2018 CCES is a collaboration of over 50 different university research teams
throughout the United States. Collectively this group designs and fields a large
sample survey of at least 50,000 American adults. The survey measures
demographics, opinions, and attitudes. The very large sample size allows
researchers to have sufficient data to study states as well as the entire
nation. The CCES, which started in 2006, makes available at very low cost a
survey platform that is open to all. Since its inception, the project has
involved more than 100 different research teams and hundreds of faculty and
student researchers, and it has conducted interviews with over 250,000 American
adults. The data from this project are used widely by researchers, journalists,
and members of the public to understand public opinion. Few, if any, data
infrastructure ventures in the discipline can boast participation from as many
institutions and scholars as CCES has facilitated. The survey helps to create
and sustain a network of researchers interested in survey design and public
opinion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 CSES is developed by a consortium of
research teams. Each research team that wishes to be involved in the project
purchases a 1,000-person sample survey from the same firm. Each individual team
determines half of the questions on its survey. The other half of the content
(Common Content) is created by a design committee, drawn from the participating
teams. Common Content consists of questions that every team would like to
measure or questions that are of broad interest and require a very large sample.
The project, thus, fields as many surveys as there are teams and also produces a
single large sample survey that consists of the Common Content. The Common
Content is designed by a committee in consultation with all teams involved in
the survey. The survey will be fielded over the Internet, with samples
constructed to be nationally representative. Each team will receive the data
from its own 1,000-person survey and a dataset consisting of the 50,000+
observations from the Common Content survey. Survey data are validated using
comparisons of state level election results to the survey results from the
subsamples for each state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.