* 1756524
* Gross nitrogen fixation in the oligotrophic North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Samuel Wilson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2021
* USD 247,076.00

Just as plants convert carbon dioxide into biomass for growth, some
microorganisms can convert nitrogen gas from the atmosphere into biomass. This
process is called nitrogen fixation and it is important ecologically because it
allows microorganisms to live in habitats where they would otherwise be unable
to grow. Nitrogen fixation occurs both on land and in the oceans. One of the key
questions facing oceanographers today is resolving how much nitrogen fixation is
occurring in the surface ocean and how it varies temporally, on timescales of
days to seasons, and spatially, across different biomes. This work will develop
high throughput analysis of nitrogen fixation at sea so that measurements can be
made in real-time onboard oceanographic research vessels. This will help improve
targeted sampling of the water-column and facilitate the comparison of nitrogen
fixation with rates of photosynthesis which are currently conducted on
timescales of minutes to hours. The work will be done at the Center for
Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education (C-MORE) where Native Hawaiians
and Pacific Islanders majoring in an ocean or earth science-related field are
given opportunities for scientific training and laboratory experience. To engage
the high-school students in the work and inform them about opportunities in
scientific careers, we will hold one to two outreach events per year targeting
sixth to eighth grade girls at local public charter schools.

This research will use a highly-sensitive reduced gas analyzer to quantify the
production of hydrogen gas which is a metabolic by-product of the nitrogen
fixation process. To improve the detection limit, seawater samples will be
sparged with the inert gas argon to inhibit the reduction of nitrogen gas by the
nitrogenase enzyme. Under this scenario, nitrogenase transfers all the electrons
used to reduce nitrogen gas into the production of hydrogen. This technique of
amplifying the production of hydrogen via nitrogen fixation is familiar to the
biohydrogen research community and will be developed for sea-going oceanographic
purposes. This proposal will test the method on laboratory cultures of
diazotrophs to verify the ratio of hydrogen gas production to traditional
methods of nitrogen fixation analysis such as stable isotope incorporation into
biomass.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.