* 1756115
* Collaborative Research: Surface wave impacts on upper ocean response to tropical cyclones
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Eric D'Asaro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 210,260.00

The current development of global weather/climate numerical models is moving in
the direction of higher spatial resolutions, such that they are now capable to
resolve extreme weather events, including tropical cyclones (TCs). In fact, TC
prediction models and global weather prediction models are expected to merge in
a near future. Turbulent mixing in the ocean surface layer under TCs effectively
couples the ocean and atmosphere through air-sea exchanges of heat and momentum.
This air-sea coupling is modulated by ocean surface waves (sea states) that are
particularly complex and varied under TC conditions. Surface waves affect both
one-dimensional (vertical mixing/diffusion), and three-dimensional (upwelling
and horizontal advection) processes in the upper ocean. The focus of this study
is to advance ocean turbulent mixing schemes that explicitly include the impact
of surface waves. Although similar efforts are underway in modeling centers
worldwide, few of such efforts include extreme (TC) conditions. Results from
this study will inform on the leading order impacts from surface waves on upper
ocean processes in high wind conditions, on the benefits of coupling wave and
ocean models, and on optimal approaches to implementing wave-dependent
parameterizations. The proposed effort is timely and will immediately benefit
both the regional and global weather and climate modeling communities. The
results of the research will be integrated into the Hurricanes: Science and
Society website that is currently used by tens of thousands of educators and
students as well as the general public. In addition to their technical training,
the graduate students will receive training from education and outreach
professionals on how to translate complex scientific concepts into non-expert
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative study will be carried out by
combining state-of-the-art modeling and observational data obtained in previous
field programs. Specifically, upper ocean responses to several historical
Tropical Cyclones will be simulated using a coupled ocean-wave model that
includes sea-state dependent Langmuir turbulence parameterizations and other
significant surface wave impacts (the Stokes advection, the Coriolis Stokes
force, the Stokes shear force, and the air-sea momentum flux budget). First, the
model results will be used to constrain the wind stress and the drag
coefficient. Next, the model results, with and without the wave effects, will be
compared with observational data, including mixed layer temperature, current,
and turbulence data. This investigation will clarify whether the Langmuir
turbulence and other surface wave effects make leading order impacts on upper
ocean responses to Tropical Cyclones, and whether their accurate prediction
requires a fully coupled ocean-wave model with sea-state dependent
parameterizations. This study will be conducted in close collaboration with
NOAA/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory scientists and will contribute to the
NOAA research and coupled atmosphere-ocean model development involving the role
of upper ocean mixing on climate and weather
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.