* 1756316
* Collaborative research: The genomic underpinnings of local adaptation despite gene flow along a coastal environmental cline
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nina Therkildsen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,044,907.00

Oceans are large, open habitats, and it was previously believed that their lack
of obvious barriers to dispersal would result in extensive mixing, preventing
organisms from adapting genetically to particular habitats. It has recently
become clear, however, that many marine species are subdivided into multiple
populations that have evolved to thrive best under contrasting local
environmental conditions. Nevertheless, we still know very little about the
genomic mechanisms that enable divergent adaptations in the face of ongoing
intermixing. This project focuses on the Atlantic silverside (Menidia menidia),
a small estuarine fish that exhibits a remarkable degree of local adaptation in
growth rates and a suite of other traits tightly associated with a climatic
gradient across latitudes. Decades of prior lab and field studies have made
Atlantic silverside one of the marine species for which we have the best
understanding of evolutionary tradeoffs among traits and drivers of selection
causing adaptive divergence. Yet, the underlying genomic basis is so far
completely unknown. The investigators will integrate whole genome sequencing
data from wild fish sampled across the distribution range with breeding
experiments in the laboratory to decipher these genomic underpinnings. This will
provide one of the most comprehensive assessments of the genomic basis for local
adaptation in the oceans to date, thereby generating insights that are urgently
needed for better predictions about how species can respond to rapid
environmental change. The project will provide interdisciplinary training for a
postdoc as well as two graduate and several undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities. The findings will also be leveraged to develop
engaging teaching and outreach materials (e.g. a video documentary and popular
science articles) to promote a better understanding of ecology, evolution, and
local adaptation among science students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to characterize the genomic
basis and architecture underlying local adaptation in M. menidia and examine how
the adaptive divergence is shaped by varying levels of gene flow and maintained
over ecological time scales. The project is organized into four interconnected
components. Part 1 examines fine-scale spatial patterns of genomic
differentiation along the adaptive cline to a) characterize the connectivity
landscape, b) identify genomic regions under divergent selection, and c) deduce
potential drivers and targets of selection by examining how allele frequencies
vary in relation to environmental factors and biogeographic features. Part 2
maps key locally adapted traits to the genome to dissect their underlying
genomic basis. Part 3 integrates patterns of variation in the wild (part 1) and
the mapping of traits under controlled conditions (part 2) to a) examine how
genomic architectures underlying local adaptation vary across gene flow regimes
and b) elucidating the potential role of chromosomal rearrangements and other
tight linkage among adaptive alleles in facilitating adaptation. Finally, part 4
examines dispersal - selection dynamics over seasonal time scales to a) infer
how selection against migrants and their offspring maintains local adaptation
despite homogenizing connectivity and b) validate candidate loci for local
adaptation. Varying levels of gene flow across the species range create a
natural experiment for testing general predictions about the genomic mechanisms
that enable adaptive divergence in the face of gene flow. The findings will
therefore have broad implications and will significantly advance our
understanding of the role genomic architecture plays in modifying the gene flow
- selection balance within coastal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.