* 1756271
* Phosphonate Utilization by Eukaryotic Phytoplankton:  Who, How, and Where?
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 472,014.00

Phosphorus (P) is an essential nutrient for all living cells. It is a central
component of genetic material and cellular membranes and is integral to energy
production and regulating enzyme activity. In the marine environment, P occurs
as inorganic (Pi) and dissolved organic (DOP) forms; the availability and
concentration of these different forms of P is an important control on marine
phytoplankton growth. Marine phytoplankton are single-celled photosynthetic
organisms and can be both prokaryotic bacteria and eukaryotic plants. While Pi
is the preferred form of P for marine phytoplankton, in large regions of the
oceans it is at such low levels that it restricts phytoplankton growth. In these
regions, DOP is the most important P source. The composition of the DOP pool can
generally be divided into two major groups: P esters and phosphonates. All
marine phytoplankton are capable of using P esters to support growth; in
contrast, phosphonates have only been shown to be an important source of P in
the nutrition of bacteria to date. This project will determine the ability of
marine eukaryotic phytoplankton to use phosphonates as a source of P for growth.
Genomic analyses will determine the metabolic response of eukaryotic
phytoplankton species to growth on phosphonates as well as the relevance of
phosphonate use by natural populations. It is critical to understand the
metabolic capabilities of phytoplankton which control marine nutrient cycling.
In addition, the project is of great value in understanding the potential
impacts of a changing ocean on phytoplankton growth. The project supports
reseach opportunities for undergraduates from a local community college as well
as hands-on enrichment programs for an afterschool program that serves a diverse
student population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprising up to 10% of the marine DOP
pool, phosphonates have been shown to be a dynamic P pool both being assimilated
and produced by marine photosynthetic bacteria. The ability of eukaryotic
phytoplankton to supplement their growth with phosphonates remains vastly
unexplored. Several eukaryotic phytoplankton species have been shown to use
glyphosate, a chemically synthesized herbicidal phosphonate, as a P source; it
remains unknown if open ocean eukaryotic phytoplankton can utilize phosphonates
found naturally in the marine environment. Preliminary experiments suggest at
least some eukaryotic phytoplankton are able to directly utilize extracellular
phosphonates. This project characterizes the pervasiveness of phosphonate
utilization within eukaryotic phytoplankton lineages and identifies the cellular
underpinnings that support the acquisition of and growth on naturally occuring
phosphonates. The project uses whole-cell transcriptomics and functional gene
complementation assays, in addition to phylogenetic analyses, to understand the
bioavailability of phosphonates and relevance of phosphonate utilization by
natural eukaryotic phytoplankton populations. It is critical to understand the
metabolic capabilities of phytoplankton which control marine biogeochemical
cycles. This is especially important given the prediction that future oceans may
become more stratified which could increase the importance of DOP, including
phosphonates, in supporting phytoplankton growth.