* 1756415
* U.S. GEOTRACES PMT: Measurement of the organic complexation and chemical lability of dissolved copper using multiple techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2022
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2022
* USD 288,505.00

Copper (Cu) is an element in the ocean that is essential for life. Like many
elements taken up by marine life, its concentrations in seawater are very low;
however, Cu has a distribution in the water column that is different from other
biologically essential elements. This difference may be attributed to the
presence of a residual fraction in seawater that is virtually inert. This
project seeks to understand what this material is, why it is so unreactive, and
how it can eventually be &lt;br/&gt;'cracked" and re-enter the biological cycle.
A scientist from the University of Southern California (USC) will characterize
the Cu chemistry during the US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT)
cruise. This cruise is a north-south transect from Alaska to Tahiti that spans a
wide range of water depths, temperatures, biology, and chemistry. The Cu
measurements will be made alongside many other trace elements that have
different chemistries. By comparing their behavior, coupled with the knowledge
of each element?s chemical properties, the scientist will further our knowledge
of what controls the behavior of Cu in the ocean. Training of graduate students
and outstanding undergraduates in the speciation techniques is planned. The
graduate students will also mentor high school students from inner city schools
through the USC Young Investigators Program. The cruise and its findings will be
incorporated into outreach activities and courses taught at USC, including a
general education class for non-science majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scientist
from USC hypothesizes that non-labile complexes will predominate in high-
scavenging regimes and that labile forms will accumulate in older deep waters
above a non-labile background pool. To quantify the distribution and chemical
properties, two different speciation techniques will be used based on
competitive ligand exchange. The first, adsorptive cathodic stripping
voltammetry, was used on previous GEOTRACES sections. The second is based on a
ligand exchange, liquid/liquid partition methodology developed by the
researcher. Partitioning leads to physical separation of fractions that are
reactive or not with the competitive ligand allowing the exchangeability of
strongly complexed copper by using Cu-65 as a tracer. The tracer enables much
slower reactions to be studied experimentally. Samples will be analyzed using
isotope dilution by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. Samples will
also be prepared for natural Cu isotope analysis of non-labile Cu by a colleague
at USC (Seth John) to test the hypothesis that non-labile or semi-labile
complexes contribute to the heavy isotope signature of dissolved Cu in seawater.
The PMT enables high volume sample collection from deep waters at the terminus
of the oceanic conveyor belt, along with data for particulate metals and isotope
tracers of scavenging. Moreover, the relationship between labile and non-labile
Cu can be studied over several distinct biomes, including high-nutrient, low
chlorophyll regions and oligotrophic subtropical gyres along the
PMT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.