* 1756340
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Managing Ecological and Cultural Value on Rural Lands
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Daniel Fisher, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,405.00

Rural land management has always been an important topic in the United States as
the Federal Government and other landowners have sought to balance economic
value of rural lands and resources with the preservation of our natural and
cultural heritage. These issues have only grown more significant and complex
because of conflicting understandings about the environmental and heritage value
of rural lands as well as increased participation of non-profits and the public
in land management practices. This project, which trains a student in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, asks how land
managers balance these myriad priorities to improve processes of public
involvement in land management planning. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
invested in discovering more effective means of navigating land management,
improving policies and practices, and promoting environmental, cultural, and
economic sustainability.

Doctoral student Julia Sizek, supervised by Dr. Daniel Fisher at the University
of California-Berkeley, will explore what factors influence shifts in land
management policies and practices on rural lands. Research conducted in
Southeastern California's Mojave Desert, an area gaining increasing visibility
as both a place of ecological value and a site of Native American, homesteading,
and military history. This region is currently in the process of land management
planning for two new national monuments (Mojave Trails National Monument and
Castle Mountains National Monuments, established 2016), but also contains a
contentious National Park Service unit: the Mojave National Preserve,
established in 1994. By studying how members of environmental and Native
American organizations participate in land management planning and understand
the value of the desert, this research will reveal the cultural and ecological
value of desert lands as understood today, and how this affects land management
priorities. This research will also follow land managers on privately and
publicly-held conservation lands, seeing how land management practices (e.g. use
regulations, fence-building, trail-building, reseeding, signage) are changing in
the desert as understandings of desert ecology and the extent of historical and
cultural research are becoming more accurate. Data about understandings of the
desert and scientific advances will be collected through interviews with
relevant experts, analysis of environmental events aimed at public participation
in planning processes, and site visits to areas of ecological restoration and
desert protection. The project will advance theoretical debates about land and
governance under conditions of environmental uncertainty, and the effects of
heterogeneity in land conservation practices. Research results will be relevant
to landscape-scale environmental planning processes happening in the Mojave
Desert and elsewhere, and will also show how perceptions of the environmental
value of the desert are shifting and with what effects for land management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.