* 1756760
* Formation and Elimination of Segmetation and Transform Faults on the Reykjanes Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Fernando Martinez, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 679,862.00

Seafloor spreading centers?the volcanic ridges where Earth?s tectonic plates
separate and form oceanic crust?are subdivided into ?segments? that represent
basic units of volcanic crustal formation. Segments are typically tens to
hundreds of kilometers long and form crust along their length but with decreased
thickness toward the segment ends. Often the segments are offset from each other
along shear zones called transform faults. The scars produced by transform
faults, referred to as fracture zones, trace out the motion of the plates and
are among the longest and most prominent features of ocean basins. The segmented
nature of volcanic crustal production on seafloor spreading centers creates the
large-scale structure of the seafloor and controls the way in which material
from the shallow mantle flows, melts and is emplaced to form the layered oceanic
crust that forms two-thirds of the surface of the Earth. Yet segmentation is a
dynamic aspect of seafloor spreading and can evolve abruptly or progressively.
Segments can form, grow, shorten or be eliminated by merging together with other
segments. What controls this evolution has long been a subject of debate and
controversy. Some models propose that large-scale variations in flow and
temperature of the underlying mantle are important. Other models propose a
predominant control by the motion of the tectonic plates themselves. This
project will conduct a marine geophysical survey to examine what controls the
formation, evolution and elimination of segmentation on the Reykjanes Ridge, a
1000-km-long seafloor spreading center in the North Atlantic Ocean south of
Iceland. In order to study what may be controlling this evolution this project
will map how the segments first formed following the abrupt change in plate
motion and how they progressively re-merged to eliminate segmentation along the
gradient in mantle melting away from Iceland. The project will support the
training and education of a graduate student in the research and bring
undergraduates and interns out on the research vessel for at sea experience and
training. A movie will be made of the ridge segmentation evolution to help
explain the processes involved in plate tectonics.

The Reykjanes Ridge is probably the best example of the systematic formation and
elimination of segmentation and transform faults on Earth today. The project
will survey two conjugate flank areas of the Reykjanes Ridge where segmentation
and transform faults formed and were subsequently eliminated. The survey will
span the area from near the Iceland shelf in the north to the Bight Fracture
Zone in the south, encompassing the prominent gradient in mantle melting away
from Iceland. The survey will use multibeam swaths and sub-bottom sonar profiles
to map the tectonic and volcanic structure of the seafloor, towed magnetometer
measurements to accurately map the magnetic lineations that date the crustal
formation process, and ship gravimeter measurements to estimate crustal
thickness changes. These data will be used to examine how variations in mantle
melting and plate motion changes affect the formation, evolution and elimination
of segmentation on mid-ocean ridges that frame the large-scale tectonic and
crustal structure of entire ocean basins.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.