* 1756403
* Neural tuning of the reading system
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Phillip Holcomb, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 648,869.00

Reading is a skill that is critical for our social, educational, and political
lives, and yet we know relatively little about how our brain becomes "tuned" to
written words. Many theories propose that reading builds upon speech perception
and that the quality of phonological representations -- that is, those related
to how words sound -- plays a central role in how the brain responds to printed
words. Skilled readers who are congenitally and profoundly deaf pose a challenge
to these models because they do not have rich phonological representations of
speech. This project investigates word reading processes in deaf and hearing
adults who have similar reading abilities. Its main aim is to understand whether
brain areas involved in reading are impacted by differences in phonological
knowledge and auditory experience. Electroencephalography (EEG) and innovative
statistical analyses will be used to determine how the timing of the brain's
response to words is influenced by deafness and reading skill. Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) will also be used to characterize how brain
regions previously linked to word-reading respond for deaf and hearing readers.
In addition, this project aims to promote the participation of deaf people in
research by providing an environment that is accessible to them (e.g., "deaf
friendly" labs) and training that facilitates academic advancement. The
principal investigators (Drs. Karen Emmorey and Phillip Holcomb) are committed
to improving opportunities for deaf students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contains six studies that use neural tuning paradigms to identify the stimulus-
based and experience-based factors that shape the brain's response to
orthographic stimuli. Two event-related potential (ERP) studies investigate the
"fine tuning" of different neural responses (e.g., N/P170, N270) across several
levels of representation (e.g., words, pseudowords, consonant strings, pseudo-
letter strings). Using linear mixed effects (LME) analyses these experiments
examine how individual variation in specific linguistic skills modulate these
ERP components. Two fMRI studies parallel these ERP studies but capitalize on
the strengths of fMRI paradigms to reveal functional and spatial organization
within the reading circuit. A third ERP study tests the distinction proposed by
the Bimodal Interactive Activation Model (BIAM) between the N400w and N400c ERP
responses (exploiting differences between deaf and hearing participants with
respect to implicit picture naming). The final study examines whether
differences in visual peripheral attention between deaf and hearing individuals
impact neural tuning to letters (using a visual crowding paradigm). By
addressing basic science questions about the flexibility of the reading circuit,
this project will provide foundational evidence for developing reading
interventions and improving reading acquisition for both deaf and hearing
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.