* 1756907
* Photolysis and Photoproduction of Acrylate in Seawater and their Impact on the Marine Organosulfur Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2023
* USD 463,449.00

This project would investigate the marine chemistry of the compound acrylate.
Acrylate is a mostly overlooked by-product of a very well-studied process
through which a compound known as DMSP (dimethylsulfoniopropionate), a compound
produced by phytoplankton, is converted to the gas dimethylsulfide (known as
DMS). This process is an important part of understanding the marine cycling of
sulfur, and DMS plays a role in cloud formation and climate. Thus, these aspects
of the conversion of DMSP to DMS have received considerable attention. On the
other hand, very little is known about acrylate concentrations, fluxes, or
impacts in the oceans, even though it is produced during the conversion of DMSP
to DMS. Acrylate concentrations and fluxes should at times be substantial,
especially in shallow-water coral reefs or during blooms of DMSP-rich
phytoplankton that are common throughout the world's oceans and often harmful or
toxic. It is likely that acrylate is a reactive form of marine organic matter
that significantly impacts the carbon cycle and ecology of the upper ocean. This
project will foster research and educational opportunities for undergraduates
and one graduate student through several avenues including field work with
international collaborators, attendance at national and local meetings,
mentoring, preparing for and delivering college-level lectures, and
presentations made to the general public at forums such as Syracuse's Milton J.
Rubenstein Museum of Science. Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, media communications, web-based data bases, and presentations at
scientific meetings, public forums and in the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A three-year project is proposed to study the effect of sunlight on
the formation and loss of acrylate in seawater, to model these processes in the
water column, and to determine if photoproduction and photolysis are important
pathways in the marine acrylate cycle in a shallow-water coral reef. Four
objectives are planned to carry out this research: (1) synthesize radiocarbon-
labeled DMSP as a source of radiocarbon-labeled acrylate for photolysis and
uptake studies; (2) conduct laboratory experiments using a solar simulator to
study the photolysis and photoproduction of acrylate in water and seawater under
varying conditions (e.g., pH, temperature, oxygen concentration); (3) determine
temperature and wavelength-dependent quantum yields for acrylate photolysis and
acrylate photoproduction in seawater using a monochromatic irradiation system;
and (4) conduct a field study at the Richard Gump Research Station to determine
rates of photolysis, photoproduction and microbial consumption of acrylate in a
shallow-water coral reef.