* 1756998
* REU Site:  Advancing Undergraduate Research Among Minorities in Plant Biology Enrolled in an Urban Community College
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Alexander Gosslau, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 227,267.00

This REU Site award to Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) located in
New York, NY, will support the training of eight students for eight weeks during
each of the summers of 2019-2021. Student research focuses on bioactivity of
natural products at different biological levels of organization (e.g., the
potential antioxidant capacity of natural plant products used in different
cultural groups, the effects of natural extracts on microorganisms in fresh
water and marine environments with changing salinity, in regulating genes
involved in differentiation of cells, and in potential protective effects on
growth of mammalian cells). Students will receive training in all aspects of the
scientific method including biostatistics, and workshops in professional
development including scientific communication (oral presentations, scientific
writing), lab safety, ethics/responsible conduct of research and STEM careers.
Field trips to internationally recognized botanical gardens, an agricultural
experiment station and an herb farm will introduce students to sources of many
natural extracts, with emphasis on research in plant sciences and networking
opportunities. The program culminates with each student preparing a research
paper and giving an oral presentation on their individual research.&lt;br/&gt;
It is anticipated that a total of 24 students primarily from underrepresented
groups from community colleges with limited research opportunities will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how to conduct research, develop
professional skills, and may present their work at scientific conferences. With
community colleges accounting for more than half of all undergraduate
enrollments, the BMCC REU program may serve as a national model for other two-
year institutions involved in STEM research which seek to encourage and
facilitate transfer of STEM majors to four-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt; A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.bmcc.cuny.edu/gra/page.jsp?pid=1080&amp;n=REU, or by contacting the
PI Adolfina Koroch (akoroch@bmcc.cuny.edu) or the Co-PI Alexander Gosslau
(agosslau@bmcc.cuny.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.