* 1756352
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Safeguarding the world's largest dendrochronological collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Baisan, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 485,160.00

CSBR: Natural History Collections: Safeguarding the world's largest
dendrochronological collection&lt;br/&gt;The Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research
(LTRR) at the University of Arizona holds the world's largest and most diverse
collection of wood specimens used for dendrochronological (tree-ring dating)
research. The estimated two million tree-ring specimens collected over the past
century are used to understand past climate and ecosystem dynamics, refine
predictions regarding future environments, inform policy for hazard mitigation
and resource management, and to study and date a broad range of human and
environmental interactions. Many of these unique, irreplaceable specimens are
currently at-risk, stored beneath the university football stadium bleachers.
They require cataloging, labelling, and re-boxing prior to transfer into a new
state-of-the-art repository. Techniques and tools will be developed to assist in
this cataloging and to maximize accessibility to the international scientific
community and the public. Best practices developed through this process will be
made available to other tree-ring laboratories around the world. In addition,
the project will enhance the existing LTRR public outreach program by developing
new resources such as STEM and sensory resource kits in collaboration with local
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will safeguard the approximately
60,000 specimens that constitute the "modern studies" portion of the tree-ring
collection, making them physically available, secure and electronically
accessible via web resources. The specimens will be cataloged using the open
source Tellervo software, which conforms to the Tree Ring Data Standard (TRiDaS)
developed by the international research community. Tellervo will be further
developed to include new curation interfaces to improve the efficiency of the
cataloging workflow. To enable data to be provided to established biodiversity
portals like iDigBio (iDigBio.org) and the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility (GBIF.org), fields will be mapped from TRiDaS to the DarwinCore
standard and delivered using GBIF's Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT). A
dedicated web portal will also be developed for Tellervo enabling users to query
the rich information associated with dendrochronological data beyond the core
specimen collection information. Such information combined with full
accessibility will enhance next generation studies in tree-ring science. The new
curation, DarwinCore data export, and web portal tools developed during this
project will be made available to numerous laboratories already using Tellervo,
facilitating international adoption of a standardized procedure for collection,
data and specimen storage for tree-ring research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.