* 1756031
* CRII: CHS: Enabling Safe and Adaptive Robot-aided Gait Training through Biomechanical Characterization and Learning from Demonstration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Wenlong Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 191,000.00

The unprecedented growth in the elderly population is generating a high demand
for gait rehabilitation due to age-related neurological diseases. To address
this urgent need various assistive robots have been developed to improve gait
training outcomes, and impedance control (controlling the force of resistance to
external motions that are produced by the environment) has been widely employed
in these robots to ensure safe human-robot interaction. However, it is difficult
to personalize the virtual impedance for such robots due to the complex nature
of human neurological and musculoskeletal dynamics. On the other hand, a
physical therapist can provide adaptive assistance to a patient at the correct
moment in a gait cycle based on real-time sensory feedback and clinical
experience. Inspired by this observation, one could imagine designing an
assistive robot control system by learning from therapists' demonstrations, but
such a purely data-driven approach could lead to significantly degraded
performance with new gait patterns, which creates safety risks for users. This
research will develop a hybrid assistive robot control approach, which
integrates model-based impedance control with machine learning from therapists'
behaviors so that the resultant robot assistance is safe yet adaptive. Project
outcomes will include a novel algorithm framework for physical human-robot
collaboration that exhibits both performance guarantees due to the model-based
control and intelligent adaptation resulting from robot learning. The new
technology will have a wide range of applications in many other safety-critical
human-robot collaboration scenarios, including collaborative manufacturing,
(semi) autonomous driving, and service robots. The broader impacts of the work
will be further enhanced by tight integration of the research with educational
activities including new modules in existing robotics classes, research
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, and
internships for local high-school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific
contribution of the work will include: 1) integration of heterogeneous wearable
sensor data to build the robot learning model from therapists' demonstrations,
and human knee impedance characterization to build the robot impedance control
model; 2) a robot planning approach based on a fusion of learning from
demonstration and impedance control, with the weights determined by the degree
of confidence in the robot learning model; and 3) automatic requests for new
demonstration data and incorporation of subject feedback to refine both the
robot learning and impedance control models. Performance of the approach will be
assessed in biomechanical simulations, in lab tests with healthy subjects, and
in a pilot study with stroke and Parkinson's disease patients. It is envisioned
that project outcomes will make assistive robots highly intelligent so that a
therapist could work with multiple patients simultaneously and even remotely,
which could significantly reduce both the therapists' labor intensity and cost
of rehabilitation training for patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.