* 1756099
* A Social Network Analysis of Poverty and Health Care Utilization
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Janet Shim, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 344,144.00

The objective of this study is to characterize the networks and their effects on
health-related decisions and behaviors of medically complex individuals who are
high utilizers of health services and who have multiple medical, cognitive, or
social challenges. Sociological research has documented the importance of social
networks for individual health. Social ties may be even more critical for the
health of the most vulnerable. Developing a better understanding of the nature
and influence of social networks among the underserved will provide insight into
social and health disparities, and how the healthcare and social service systems
can better partner with network members to improve the health of disadvantaged
individuals. The overall goal of this project is to advance scientific knowledge
that will strengthen the formal and informal safety net and improve the well-
being of individuals in society.

This project will use egocentric social network analysis and qualitative
interviews with patients and providers to examine how disadvantaged individuals'
networks are shaped by their social and health conditions, and what kinds of
formal and informal social interactions facilitate productive engagement with
institutions that promote wellbeing. Specifically, network data will be
collected from 100 participants and interviews will be conducted with 50
participants to (1) identify the social network characteristics and complex,
interacting social and medical vulnerabilities of individuals in the healthcare
safety net; (2) examine longitudinal relationships among social network
dynamics, health behaviors, services utilization, and chronic disease management
to identify social mechanisms that foster or undermine patients' engagement with
healthcare institutions; and (3) assess the strengths, functions, and structural
positions of formal and informal caregivers to understand the co-evolving roles
of institutions and lay persons in patients' networks. Potential contributions
of this study include: (a) transforming our conceptual understanding of the
formal and informal safety net among the marginalized and the resources provided
by social ties, (b) enhancing our research methods for ascertaining and studying
personal social networks in these populations, and (c) amplifying our ability to
supplement social networks and leverage them to achieve individual and societal
benefits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.