* 1756795
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Production of "South-South" Capitalist Labor Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* James Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Foreign commercial and investment activities in developing countries are no
longer exclusively owned and managed by traditional core countries of the Global
North, such as the United States and Britain. Increasingly, countries of the
Global South are leading the way. For example, China and India have been at the
forefront of commercial activities in sub-Saharan Africa. These investments have
generated needed jobs for poor countries but they also have produced
controversies about labor practices. One question that has arisen is whether
national and international labor codes are being ignored to give businesses
unfair advantages while also victimizing workers. However, surprisingly little
is known about how the situation plays out on the ground, at the work sites
where workers and foreign supervisors actually engage. The research supported by
this award will help to fill this knowledge gap. This research is in the United
States' national interest because the U.S. government and investors need to know
that they are playing on a level playing field. It also is essential to better
understand the contexts that determine the effectiveness of U.S. foreign aid
investments.

This fourteen month empirical ethnographic study will be carried out by
University of California, Davis, anthropology doctoral student, Justin L.
Haruyama, under the supervision of Dr. James H. Smith. The research will be
conducted in two Chinese-operated coal mines in southern Zambia: one operated by
a Chinese state-owned enterprise and the other privately owned by five Chinese
brothers. Both of these mines hire managers primarily from China while
recruiting their ordinary workforces exclusively from Zambia and neighboring
African countries. The research will examine how actors from different racial,
linguistic, and cultural backgrounds at the mines understand and affect each
other. This will illuminate the broader social consequences and capitalist
transformations at work in everyday encounters around the extraction of coal.
The researcher will also pay close attention to historical experience, as
preliminary research has shown that the sometimes-traumatic encounters with
colonialism, socialism, and neoliberalism experienced by participants from both
Zambia and China continue to have profound reverberations in their actions and
discourses at the mines today. Data will be collected through a mixed-methods
approach, including archival research, participant observation, census and
structured survey interviews, and the collection of life histories. Results from
this research will improve understanding of how contemporary international
capitalist investments are affecting the lives of ordinary people, and how they
are reshaping business environments and capitalist culture in many African
countries.