* 1756014
* CRII: AF: Polynomial Time Approximation Schemes Subexponential in the Parameter
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Lin Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 12/31/2019
* USD 148,447.00

Algorithms are important to our everyday life as they have greatly improved the
efficiency of task performance in various areas. People are enjoying the
benefits brought by algorithms used in their smartphones, laptops and household
robots without even realizing it. Various products that are claimed to be clever
and better serve people's needs owe their smartness to the smart algorithms
implemented in them. Therefore, the improvement on algorithms for fundamental
problems will have a significant impact to people's life as well as the whole
society. This project aims at further improving the algorithms for various
fundamental problems including scheduling, resource allocation and routing
problems. It is interesting and meanwhile surprising that the algorithms for
many such problems, which seem to admit the best possible running time, can be
further improved. The project will also make significant contributions to
education via new teaching materials for graduate and undergraduate students
with diverse backgrounds. Research assistants will participate in all areas of
this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fine-grained complexity is a research field
that aims to provide a refined classification in complexity theory with a focus
on a quantitative study of the exact time required to solve problems. Most
researches in this area are concerned with exact algorithms. This project aims
at extending the research of fine-grained complexity in the direction of
approximation algorithms. In particular, we propose a quantitive study on the
dependency of the parameter that measures the accuracy in approximation schemes,
with a particular focus on the subexponential dependency of this parameter. The
project seeks to challenge several classical problems in scheduling, resource
allocation and routing which admit approximation schemes that seem to have a
best running time and remain untouched for decades. It will break the barrier of
convention by establishing approximation schemes that run in time that is
subexponential in the accuracy parameter. It will explore such a subexponential
phenomenon in approximation schemes and compare it with the subexponential
phenomenon in the field of parameterized complexity, which has been widely
observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.