* 1756547
* U.S. Participation in the Development of LIS, a Transnational Database: Luxembourg Income Study Database &amp; Luxembourg Wealth Study Database, 2019 to 2023
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Janet Gornick, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,875,000.00

This project provides continuing support for LIS, Cross-National Data Center
(formerly Luxembourg Income Study). The LIS is a unique, cross-national, data
infrastructure that is essential for understanding the social and economic
wellbeing of persons and families in the globalized world. Created to foster
primary research by providing access to household microdata, LIS enables both
theoretical and empirical social research that informs analyses of a broad array
of social and economic policies and institutions. LIS maintains two social
science data archives for the purposes of enabling and fostering cross-national
research on socio-economic outcomes in high- and middle-income countries. The
current project will add new data sets from currently included countries as well
as datasets from additional countries. Thousands of researchers worldwide use
the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) and Luxembourg Wealth Study (LWS) databases to
analyze outcomes including poverty, income inequality, employment status, wage
patterns, gender inequality, family formation, immigration, wealth and debt
accumulation. A large share of LIS-based studies focus on the ways in which, and
the extent to which, economic and social policies shape these outcomes. These
studies provide policy input regarding income and wealth distributions in the
United States and across the globe. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project harmonizes (renders comparable) micro-datasets from multiple countries
that include data on income, wealth, employment and demography. It provides a
secure method that: (1) allows investigators access to data with privacy
restrictions; 2) maintains a remote-execution system to enable research
conducted from off-site locations; and 3) promotes the use of microdata in
comparative research on social and economic wellbeing on a global level. The
project conducts research onsite, and sponsors and hosts scholars using the LIS
data. By providing an infrastructure with datasets from geographically and
economically diverse countries, the project will continue to broaden the basis
for interdisciplinary researchers pursuing intellectual inquiry using household
microdata. The LIS datasets include income, employment, and demographic
variables at the person- and household-level. The LIS Database currently
includes microdata from 50 countries and contains over 300 datasets spanning the
years 1968 to 2016; the newer LWS Database contains 20 wealth datasets from 15
countries and covers the period 1994 to 2015. LIS and LWS datasets together
cover approximately 86% of the world GDP and 64% of world population. The
project prepares and maintains standardized national indicators on household
inequality and poverty that are publicly available on the LIS website,
www.lisdatacenter.org. Extensive documentation is available on the underlying
surveys, the harmonization process, and the country-specific institutions that
shape income and wealth levels and distributions through METIS, the new metadata
system. The project provides online instructional materials, user support, and
annual training workshops as well as periodic conferences. LIS is a physical and
virtual venue for researchers to exchange ideas, results, and methods; these
exchanges take place through the Working Paper Series, the Visiting Scholar
Program, LIS-based conferences, workshops, and public programs, as well as pre-
and post-doctoral scholarships; excellence is promoted through an annual
research award. LIS serves thousands of researchers worldwide from various
disciplines including economics, sociology, political science, policy studies,
and public health. Users come from academia, government agencies, non-
governmental agencies, supranational organizations and news agencies; one-third
of registered users are from the United States. LIS is supported by substantial
funding from the Luxembourg government. The current project will continue to
broaden its impact beyond academia by expanding collaborations, communicating
through various media, and developing data
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.