* 1756834
* Collaborative Research: Permanent forearc strain partitioning in Northern Cascadia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Christine Regalla, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 345,291.00

This work provides the first detailed characterization of the behavior of past
earthquakes that have occurred on active, on-land, shallow faults in southern
British Columbia, Canada. The research has important societal benefits that
include providing key inputs needed for seismic hazard assessment in populated
areas of Vancouver Island, British Columbia and northwestern Washington, USA.
These types of data are necessary to help inform the development of public
policy that can reduce the loss of life and property due to future earthquakes.
Other important societal outcomes include contributions to STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) education and the development of a
diverse globally competitive STEM workforce by providing support for the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. The project also supports the
research of two female, early career scientists, and facilitates international
collaborations between industry partners, policy makers, scientists and
students.

This project is evaluating the role of slab geometry and oblique convergence in
the generation of forearc deformation in northern Cascadia by determining fault
kinematics and the Holocene slip history of three prominent faults on Vancouver
Island, British Columbia, Canada. Using a combination of bedrock mapping and
structural analysis, surficial mapping of offset Quaternary deposits, and
exploratory paleoseismic trenches, the research is testing the hypothesis that
newly identified active crustal faults contribute to active oroclinal bending in
response to the component of relative plate motion parallel to the strike of the
slab. This work provides the first documentation of Quaternary activity on a set
of faults previously thought to be last active in the Eocene, and provides
fundamental kinematic and slip history data necessary to test models of plate
boundary strain partitioning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.