* 1756397
* CSBR: NATURAL HISTORY: DIGITIZING AND CONSERVING SPECIMENS IN THE MANTER LABORATORY OF PARASITOLOGY
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Judy Diamond, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,988.00

The Harold W. Manter Laboratory of Parasitology (HWML) at the University of
Nebraska is an international biological resource that supports research and
education in ecology, biological diversity, and infectious disease. Housing
millions of specimens from all continents and oceans, the HWML is a hub for the
study of parasites, and enables scientists to make biological predictions, such
as how environmental change might affect parasite distributions, which can
impact human health, agriculture, forestry and other societal interests. This
collection also serves as educational resources to make scientific research
accessible to the public through virtual field trips and museum exhibitions.
This project aims to secure and make digitally available two recently acquired
parasite collections, and to purchase a new freezer to house the HWML's frozen
tissue collection of parasites from wild animals, the largest worldwide. This
award will enable the HWML to continue to serve as an international resource in
parasitology and will also support research opportunities in the collections for
undergraduate students and local science teachers, and the development of
biodiversity teaching resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HWML's mission is to
conduct and support research in parasite systematics, taxonomy, and
biodiversity; foster studies in parasite biodiversity; provide state-of-the-art
laboratory facilities and resources for parasite genomic, genetic, and
phylogenetic research; and promote long-term conservation and utilization of
parasite specimens in the laboratory's care. This project will complete full
integration of two recently acquired collections into the HWML's holdings: the
Hopla flea collection, which contains more than 300 species of fleas worldwide,
and the Gettinger collection, a collection of ectoparasites from Paraguay that
includes host-parasite data from several thousand mammals. Funding will also
allow the HWML to replace a currently failing freezer in the Parasite Genomic
Research Facility, thus securing long-term storage for the largest frozen tissue
collection of parasites from wild animals anywhere. These collections will be
digitized and made available via Arctos, an online database for biodiversity and
natural history collections, and shared with iDigBio (iDigBio.org). Researchers
worldwide will be able to access and analyze new parasite data to gain insight
into biological diversity, species rates, and general evolutionary processes.
Finally, funding will support research opportunities in the HWML for
undergraduates and Nebraska teachers and the development of resources to support
educators in teaching about biodiversity. The expected outcome is that
scientists will have improved capability to understand, anticipate, and respond
to the outcomes of accelerating environmental change, and to leverage museum
occurrence records to estimate geographic ranges of
parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.