* 1756479
* CSBR:  Natural History:  Enhancement of the Ethanol-Based  Collections of the Texas A&amp;M University Insect Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* John Oswald, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 425,779.00

The verifiable scientific basis for much of what we know about the diversity of
life on Earth resides in natural history collections. The specimens held in
long-term trust in these collections constitute an irreplaceable resource for
current and future generations of scientists seeking to answer the biological
questions of today, and the unknown questions of tomorrow. The Texas A&amp;M
University Insect Collection (TAMUIC) is a major research collection of
terrestrial and freshwater invertebrates with approximately 2.9 million
specimens and regional strengths in the faunas of the southwestern U.S. and
northern neotropics. The collection is an important node in the physical
infrastructure documenting invertebrate biodiversity throughout these regions.
It supports one of the most active educational and research programs in
systematic entomology in the U.S., and provides scientists across the U.S. and
around the world with access to high-quality specimens for research. The
supported project will enhance the TAMUIC in two significant ways. First, it
will allow the TAMUIC to acquire and incorporate the Dean Araneae Collection, a
nationally-important collection of spiders built up over the course of a 40-year
career by Mr. Allen Dean. Second, the acquisition of the Dean collection
presents a logical and timely opportunity for the TAMUIC to undertake a
comprehensive recuration of its entire collection of alcohol-preserved
specimens, and to capture fundamental taxonomic, geographic, and temporal data
from both collections in order to make those data available for use in studies
in many scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for scientific
solutions to complex environmental problems has become increasingly
collaborative and interdisciplinary, and relies more and more on materials and
data from multiple sources. Meaningful investigation of large-scale problems in
particular will come to depend upon ready access to shared sets of relevant data
that can be pooled on demand from multiple digital sources and subjected to
appropriate analysis. This project will capture and make available to the
research community more than 50,000 new, vial-level, digital records of
terrestrial and freshwater insects and arachnids. Importantly, it will also
facilitate the long-term preservation of the physical specimens upon which those
records are based. The ability of the TAMUIC to continue to serve as a source of
high-quality, ethanol-based materials for the scientific community will be
enhanced by the project's support for a comprehensive re-curation effort
covering all of the TAMUIC's alcohol materials, including conversion of the
collection from a free-vial to a double containment specimen storage system.
Collection cabinetry will be upgraded to meet applicable standards; curatorial
materials will be standardized throughout and upgraded to archival quality; and
ethanol collections will be consolidated into a single physical space. The
project is an integral part of the TAMUIC's long-term plan to upgrade its
resources to modern collections-community standards. Specimen data digitized as
part of this project will be shared with iDigBio
(iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.