* 1756904
* I-Corps: Supercapacitors for Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Zhaoyang Fan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the area
of high quality capacitor solution to replace the bulky and lossy aluminum
electrolyte capacitors (AECs), a ubiquitous circuit element used in power
systems and electronics for current ripple filtering, decoupling, and pulse
charging/discharging, among other purposes. Rising demand for high quality
capacitors is driven by automotive, telecom, medical and commercial electronics,
and by the rapid growth of process automation and internet of things (IoT) in
the industrial sectors. The widely used AECs have a low volumetric capacitance
density and high parasitic resistance. Their bulky size and high resistive loss
limits the system size and performance. Therefore, developing new technologies
of quality capacitors will have the opportunities to greatly improve the system
performance. These systems and applications span from inverters and DC power
suppliers for industry machines, electronic appliances and medical devices, mini
and low-profile circuit boards, to efficient storage of the pulse energy
harvested from the environmental mechanical vibration, motion, and noise, as
well as high-frequency high-power pulse generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will explore the market potential of high-frequency AC
supercapacitor technology for current ripple filtering in AC/DC conversion and
for pulse energy storage in environmental energy harvesting. These
supercapacitors based on the principle of electric double layer capacitance and
therefore provide a very large capacitance density. However, unlike conventional
double layer capacitors that can only be charged-discharged below a frequency of
1 Hz, the devices developed here run at hundreds to kilo-hertz high frequencies
and therefore suitable for ripple current filtering and pulse energy storage and
generation. The high-frequency characteristic of the device is achieved via
nano-engineered carbon fiber and graphene electrodes with suitable pore sizes.
This I-Corps project will evaluate the market opportunity of the AC
supercapacitor technology through customer discovery interviews. The feedback
from these activities will provide better understanding on the customer needs
and commercialization requirements, and therefore drive the technology
development.