* 1756404
* CSBR:   Natural History: Compactorized Shelving for the Wet Collections of the Auburn University Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 195,450.00

Biological Research Collections are important resources for understanding our
changing planet. Researchers use specimens to describe new species, understand
the relationships between taxa, explore the environment, and conserve our
natural resources as well as to train the next generations of biologists.
Collections in the Auburn University Museum of Natural History span plants and
animals, with particularly strong holdings from the very diverse Gulf of Mexico
coast region, and important collections from the rest of the world. Auburn
University completed a new, state-of-the-art facility for their collections in
2013. Since moving to the new facility, the collections have seen remarkable
growth, not just in terms of the number of specimens, but in the outreach that
the museum is able to perform for people in the state and region. The museum
absorbed collections from other university units and orphaned collections from
other institutions in the area, putting strain on the space available. The
collections stored in alcohol (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and invertebrates)
have grown at a particularly fast rate, and the alcohol storage area is limited
because of needed safety measures for the proper storage of flammable liquids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide compactorized shelving that will
dramatically increase the amount of space within the alcohol collections. Moving
invertebrate specimens from an area not currently rated for storage in ethanol
into the compactors will also allow growth of the dry collections (particularly
insects), which are also approaching capacity. This project will demonstrate the
complexity of managing collections and as an opportunity to teach a class in
museum curation techniques to graduate students and upper level undergraduate
students, and to further engage students to assist in the project. Open house
events at the Wehle Center are planned to provide programs to underserved
children in the area. Social media will be utilized to keep the public apprised
of the project and the resources that the collections represent. Digitization of
the collections will be completed, and all data will be available on the museum
site (aumnh.org) as well as data aggregators such as iDigBio
(idigbio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.