* 1756914
* Using Network Analysis to Examine the Political Ecology of Small-Scale Fisheries Management
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Cynthia Grace-McCaskey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 136,318.00

People in the United States and throughout the world are highly dependent on
fisheries for their food system infrastructure. Many fisheries are considered
small-scale fishing operations, which play an important role in supporting
livelihoods, contributing to food security, and combating poverty. Despite their
importance, debates continue regarding the sustainability of fisheries as well
as which management strategies are most effective in which contexts. In
addition, communities throughout the world are increasingly inter-connected due
to the globalization of markets and economies, the increasing use of
technologies such as cell phones and the internet, and large-scale migration. In
light of this, it is virtually impossible to find an example of a natural
resource being managed at the local scale, without being influenced by external
factors. Often, resources and resource users are subject to regulations and
management regimes at multiple levels (such as federal and territorial, as in
this case). Therefore, it is critical to examine how management institutions
across scales impact one another and influence key elements of management, such
as whether resource users cooperate with one another, and whether they
participate in management processes. Findings will be disseminated to
organizations and individuals that influence policy debates related to fisheries
management. The project also provides training for graduate students in methods
of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis, and broadens the
participation of groups traditionally underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce a multi-level analysis of
fisheries management structures and networks using a mixed-method approach. This
research will be conducted in St. Croix, US Virgin Islands, a small island in
the Caribbean whose residents are highly dependent on fisheries for nutritional,
economic, social, and cultural reasons. Dr. Grace-McCaskey of East Carolina
University will build on previous research conducted on the island to further
understand how social differences and inequalities among fishers, managers,
scientists, and other marine resource stakeholders impact fisheries management
processes. She will use a social networks approach to examine the web of complex
relationships among individuals that may hinder or facilitate the exchange of
information and resources. The study will conclude with a fisheries management
workshop at which time the results (including social network visualizations)
will be presented to encourage open discussion about social group interactions
and geared toward fostering and improving communication across stakeholder
groups involved in management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.