* 1756808
* Collaborative Research: Southern Ocean Convection in climate models: controls and Impacts
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Irina Marinov, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 357,558.00

Despite its critical importance for the global heat and carbon cycles, the
Southern Ocean, the vast ocean surrounding the Antarctic continent, is the least
understood region of the world ocean, particularly because of sparse
observations and our incomplete understanding of high latitude processes such as
deep sea convection, the mixing and subsequent homogenization of water column
properties over thousands of meters depth. Many climate models simulate strong
open sea deep convection within the Weddell and occasionally the Ross Sea, with
periods ranging from decades to centuries. This process brings a large amount of
heat from the subsurface and releases it to the atmosphere, changing ocean and
atmospheric temperatures and winds globally, and producing large holes in sea-
ice called polynyas. Interestingly, the largest Weddell Sea polynya observed
since the 1970s was seen from satellite pictures this past (2017) October,
making an understanding of polynyas ever more urgent. The mechanisms underlying
Southern Ocean convective variability, the reasons that it differs widely across
climate models, and the impacts of variability on ocean circulation, heat and
salt cycles remain unclear. This makes it difficult to determine whether models
simulate (or fail to simulate) Southern Ocean convection for the right reasons,
whether such events are likely to reoccur and whether past changes in convection
are exerting an impact on the course of modern climate. This proposal will
directly inform the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC-AR6)
assessment project, focusing on a previously understudied area, expanding our
fundamental knowledge of the Southern Ocean and its role in the global climate
system, and developing new model diagnostics. By providing insights into the
relationship between deep ocean convection and ocean/climate indices on multiple
timescales, this proposal will potentially inform design of future observational
networks. The proposed work will enhance education and dissemination of research
via undergraduate teaching and strong outreach activities both in West
Philadelphia, where Dr. Marinov will partner with a public elementary school,
and in Baltimore, where Dr. Gnanadesikan will continue his strong involvement in
the Science Olympiad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around four
major scientific questions and underlying hypotheses:1. What produces SO deep
convection and determines its frequency and intensity across coupled climate
models? 2. What are the global oceanic implications of Southern Ocean
convection? 3. How do changes in convection impact the transient climate
response and climate sensitivity? 4. How do eddy parameterizations and model
construction affect the representations of SO convection and resulting oceanic
teleconnections? The team will run a set of new simulations and PIs will analyze
(a) a suite of models already run at Johns Hopkins (JHU), (b) a suite of new
model runs at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GDFL), (c) models
submitted to the IPCC-AR5/IPCC-AR6 as part of the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project versions 5 and 6 (CMIP5,6). PIs will examine how different models become
"preconditioned" for convection by producing a buildup of heat at depth or salt
anomalies at the surface; how convective variability produces changes in key
water masses and how heat, salt, mass transport signals evolve over time. They
will examine the impact of convective variability within a large ensemble of the
same coupled climate model, as well as within versions of the GFDL models which
differ in model construction (hybrid vs. level coordinate), resolution (1 vs. ¼
degree ocean), and eddy mixing coefficients. A side benefit of the proposal will
be building a set of novel metrics than can be used for routine benchmarking and
evaluation of GFDL and CMIP6 models. These metrics will help evaluate
strengths/weaknesses of SO simulations, including tracking corrections in long-
standing model errors from one model generation to
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.