* 1756078
* Emerging Issues in Modeling Longitudinal Observations with Censoring
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Bin Nan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 106,999.00

Longitudinal studies--commonly referred to as cohort studies in epidemiology or
panel studies in sociology--are of fundamental importance in understanding time
related issues within the same group of subjects. In longitudinal studies, the
collection of information can be stopped at the end of the study, or at the time
of dropout of a study participant, or at the time of the occurrence of a
terminal event. Death, the most common terminal event, often occurs in aging
cohort studies and fatal disease follow-up studies, e.g., organ failure or
cancer studies. If not handled appropriately, the occurrence of terminal event
can cause serious bias in statistical inference, leading to incorrect
conclusions. The current literature has primarily focused on modeling the
longitudinally measured variables given that the terminal event has not happened
yet, hence the observed repeated measures "terminated" by a terminal event are
implicitly treated as incomplete data. Such a modeling strategy, however, is
inappropriate for many studies when some effect of interest is directly related
to the terminal event time, such as the medical cost data. In this project, a
conditional modeling strategy will be implemented, which treats repeated
measures up to a terminal event as complete data and directly models the effect
of terminal event time on a response variable. A related problem is some
predictor variable subject to limit of detection in regression analysis, which
occurs frequently in studies involving assay measures, where measures of certain
substance (e.g., hormone, air pollutant, or water contaminant) become unreliable
when their concentrations are below certain level due to technology limitation.
The current literature has focused on primarily ad hoc imputation or
unverifiable model assumptions for the predictor variable subject to limit of
detection, but these methods generally yield biased results. This project will
tackle this issue using robust statistical methods, which follow similarly the
conditional modeling strategy for terminal events, and yield more reliable
results than existing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
modeling strategies that model the effect of terminal event time directly by
treating it as a covariate in longitudinal studies. In such statistical models,
the usual relationship of interest between the longitudinally measured response
variable and covariates is kept when data collecting time is far from the
terminal event time, and the relationship becomes increasingly related to the
terminal event time when data collecting time is close to the terminal event.
Such models provide much more intuitive and sensible interpretations, and can be
applied to recurrent events data with the presence of a terminal event. Both
parametric and semiparametric models will be considered. Estimating methods for
parameters in the proposed models will be investigated. The asymptotic theory
for the case that the terminal event time is subject to right censoring will be
a major focus. A closely related set of longitudinal regression problems with
censored covariates considered in this project is about the issue of detection
limit for covariates. The validity of any estimating approach relies on how
reliably one can model and estimate the tail distribution of the covariate
subject to limit of detection. Due to the feature of this type of data,
parametric models are not verifiable and nonparametric models are not able to
gain any useful information about the missing tail distribution. The project
investigates semiparametric models, which are able to gain useful information
from observed data and are insensitive to model misspecification of the missing
tail probabilities.