* 1756087
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Cultural and Economic Logic of Small-Scale Farming
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Krista Harper, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 25,017.00

Once a local practice, much contemporary agriculture takes place on commercial
farms and plantations that distribute their products worldwide. With the world's
agriculture concentrated onto large commercial farms, many producers elsewhere
have abandoned farming for more profitable industries, such as tourism. Yet, it
is widely recognized that food security depends on maintenance of a diversified
economy that includes at least some modicum of local food production. This
project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, investigates this economic niche of local farmers, who
continue to farm even as economic benefits wane. The researcher asks why people
chose to continue traditional livelihoods and self-sufficiency even when it
seems to counter economic self-interest. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
invested in discovering more effective means of navigating food insecurity,
improving economic and agricultural policies, and promoting environmental,
cultural, and economic sustainability.

Dana Conzo, under the supervision of Dr. Krista Harper of the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst, will explore why agricultural producers remain
committed to small-scale farming when participation appears to not be in their
short to medium-term economic interest. It tests a classic hypothesis in
economic anthropology that human economic behavior is often driven by materially
irrational but culturally strategic aims. This project will be conducted in St.
Kitts; the Caribbean has long been recognized as an ideal laboratory for
examining longitudinal political economic trends because of its long engagement
with capitalist production and colonialism. St. Kitts' integration into the
global economy began as a sugar producer and has continued as a luxury tourist
destination, making it an appropriate location to investigate how and why people
maintain cultural practices in changing cultural, economic, and political
landscapes. Using a range of established ethnographic and geographic techniques
for data collection and analysis, such as participant observation, interviews,
and spatial analysis in ArcGIS, the investigator will interview small-scale
agricultural producers and trace the island's food and economic flows. The
findings will contribute to debates in economic anthropology about autonomy,
food security, land and labor practices, and globalization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.