* 1756992
* Credit Shocks and Equilibrium Dynamics in Consumer Durable Goods Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrea Lanteri, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 280,000.00

This project looks at one specific consumer durable, automobiles, and considers
the role U.S. automobile markets played in the Great Recession. The PI and his
research collaborator will use data on the price of both new and used cars.
Previous work on the effects of macroeconomic changes on vehicle purchases has
not fully considered how used vehicle purchases affect the market. This research
incorporates the effects of used car markets on the macroeconomy in an
innovative way. If a financial crisis makes it hard to borrow money, some lower-
income households will choose to continue driving old vehicles rather than
replacing their old automobiles with newer 'intermediate-age' used vehicles.
This in turn means that demand for these intermediate used vehicles drops, and
so the market value of used cars decreases. This decrease has a further effect
on the market for new cars. Higher-income consumers now know they will get less
from a trade-in of their current vehicle; in result, some of them delay new car
purchases. The decrease in new car purchases has effects on the entire
macroeconomy. The project will build a model of how these factors contributed to
the Great Recession. The model can also be used to evaluate the macroeconomic
effects of programs designed to stimulate demand for new cars. As a result, the
research funded by this award will contribute to better U.S. economic policy and
a stronger U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the role of
equilibrium dynamics in secondary markets for the behavior of purchases of new
consumer durable goods in response to macroeconomic shocks. The specific focus
is the effects of credit crises on car markets, and the research team will use a
rich micro dataset on prices of new and used vehicles in the U.S. around the
Great Recession with a quantitative general equilibrium model with heterogeneous
households. The projects thus contributes to our understanding of linkages
between the microeconomic decisions of heterogeneous households and observed
aggregate dynamics via general equilibrium effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.