* 1756179
* REU Site: Training and Research Experiences in Nonlinear Dynamics (TREND)
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Rajarshi Roy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2023
* USD 455,494.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
non-linear dynamics at the University of Maryland. Ten undergraduates per year
will spend ten weeks during the summer engaged in research projects in physics,
mathematics, or engineering. The main goal of the program is to engage
undergraduate students in cutting-edge research in the interdisciplinary area of
nonlinear dynamics. Through guided mentorship by faculty members and
interactions with post-docs and graduate students, undergraduates will gain
hands-on experience by participating directly in the research process. Students
will also be involved with a broad audience communication project and outreach
to underrepresented K-12 students. The program offers seminars and trips that
expose students to a wide variety of subjects and career opportunities while
building a sense of community, and aims to recruit and educate the next
generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential research
topics include: magnetic reconnection, turbulence, and nonlinear phenomena in
plasmas; chaos and synchronism in large systems of network coupled components;
dynamics of granular and soft-matter flow; development of singularities in
fluids and solids; nonlinear dynamics in optical systems and charged particle
beams; autonomous control of vehicles with forecast uncertainty; and nonlinear
physics of living systems. A weekly seminar series will complement and reinforce
the learning experience. The seminar topics will be equally divided into
research talks and skill development workshops. Research talks will expose
students to state-of-the-art research in nonlinear science at a level
appropriate for undergraduates. Skills workshops will focus on
fellowship/graduate school preparation, oral and written communication, and
research ethics. Students will give oral presentations and participate in a
poster session on the final day of the program, and funding will be provided to
all students to subsequently present their work at a relevant national or
regional conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.