* 1756155
* Generation Mechanisms of Nonlinear Internal Waves in Coastal Plain Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Ming Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 341,057.00

This research aims at significantly advancing our understanding of estuarine
mixing processes and improving the predictions of water-quality and
biogeochemical cycling in estuaries. Numerical models used in predicting
environmental conditions in estuaries often have difficulties in reproducing
stratification affecting our ability to accurately predict various
biogeochemical processes, including bottom water hypoxia. This may be related to
the lack of proper parameterizations for wave-induced mixing in the pycnocline.
Nonlinear internal waves are ubiquitous in the stratified coastal ocean and play
an important role in generating turbulent mixing and transporting biochemically
important materials. However, nonlinear internal waves have been rarely studied
in stratified estuaries, except for flows over sills at the entrance to deep
fjords. Turbulence and mixing in estuaries has been mainly attributed to bottom
boundary layer turbulence whereas little attention has been paid to breaking
internal waves. This project will re-analyze experimental data and use numerical
models to examine the role of internal waves in estuarine mixing. It will
provide educational opportunities for one Ph.D. graduate student who will be
trained in numerical ocean modeling, and advanced data analysis techniques. In
addition, undergraduate students will be involved in this project during the
summer months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidal currents in coastal plain estuaries
primarily move in the along isobath direction and are thought to be no-conducive
to internal wave generation. On the other hand, most coastal plain estuaries
feature a deep channel flanked by shallow shoals, with steep bathymetric changes
in the cross-channel direction. Moreover, lateral circulation has been observed
in many estuaries. It is hypothesized that when the internal Froude number
exceeds 1, the interaction between the lateral circulation and channel-shoal
bathymetry leads to the generation of an internal lee wave. The latter evolves
into a train of nonlinear internal waves through nonlinear steepening and
dispersion. It is also hypothesized that under strong tidal or wind forcing
conditions the lateral circulation generates frontogenesis and a bottom gravity
current which excites upstream propagating nonlinear internal waves. These
hypotheses are based on the recent observations of internal lee waves and
internal solitary waves in Chesapeake Bay and will be tested using process-
oriented and realistic modeling. The previously collected mooring data will be
re-analyzed to better quantify the relationship between nonlinear internal waves
and estuarine turbulent mixing. A realistic 3-D hydrostatic model of Chesapeake
Bay will be run to conduct hindcast simulations and interpret the observational
data. The generation, propagation and transformation of internal waves in
estuaries will be investigated using hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic models
configured over an idealized estuarine channel. The wave generation mechanisms
will be explored under a wide range of river flow, tidal and wind forcing
conditions. These model runs will be complemented by data analysis to identify
the connection between nonlinear internal waves and mixing in the
estuary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.