* 1757533
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Pervasive Computing for Smart Health, Safety, and Well-being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 348,575.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Temple University. This REU Site will host a diverse group of students from
universities across the nation to spend their summer working on research
projects related to pervasive computing solutions for improving health, public
safety, and well-being. Pervasive computing typically involves embedding
computational capability, usually on microprocessors, into everyday objects to
make them effectively communicate and perform useful tasks often with little
interaction directly from the end user of the object or device. This project
involves research into pervasive computing applications that have the potential
to benefit the broader community at large. The research is led by an experienced
faculty team that plans to offer a balance of theory, applications, and
practical skills as well as mentoring and professional development opportunities
for the students. The students will be part of a community of practice that
designs, implements, and assesses research projects that can impact the lives of
all citizens. The site will focus on recruiting under-represented minorities and
women, particularly drawing on undergraduate institutions where students have
limited research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
potential to develop new algorithms and technologies that lead to an advanced
understanding of the field of pervasive computing and its component areas of
networking, computer vision, and data analytics. The projects are led by faculty
mentors with strong research credentials as well as significant experience in
undergraduate mentoring. The projects will have access to state-of-the art
facilities in the new Science Education and Research Center as well as the
resources of the Center for Networked Computing. The focus of the projects
revolves around designing pervasive computing systems that employ sensing,
actuation, and computation embedded in everyday objects, landscapes, and
wearable items to improve the health, safety, and well-being of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.