* 1757419
* REU Site: Mote Marine Laboratory Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Estuarine and Coastal Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Emily Hall, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2021
* USD 372,747.00

Research training for the next generation of marine scientists and
oceanographers is an important focus for the Division of Ocean Sciences. The
Mote Marine Lab (MML) in Sarasota, FL will host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program from 2018-2020. The program will bring ten
undergraduates to MML each summer for a 10-week internship. The intellectual
focus of the internship is on estuarine, coastal, and marine sciences. Research
at the laboratory encompasses the diversity and interconnectedness of ocean and
coastal resources and includes basic and applied research on biological and
chemical features of estuaries and nearshore waters, and on behavioral and
physiological aspects of species inhabiting these ecosystems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct independent research projects with
the guidance of research mentors and will participate in a variety of
professional development activities, including workshops on scientific ethics,
scientific writing, the graduate school experience and career options, as well
as a seminar series, field trips and outreach events. The program conducts a
national search for applicants and seeks to engage students who are from schools
with limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports
student stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. This project
supports the national goals of developing the next generation of scientists and
the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MML REU Site will provide a
total of thirty undergraduates with internships over the three-year period.
Student will work with mentors who have a wide range of ongoing research on
topics such as ocean acidification, effects of Deepwater Horizon oil spill and
responses of estuarine or coastal communities to changes in environmental
parameters (e.g. temperature, salinity, dissolved
oxygen).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.