* 1757632
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Smart Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Lawrence Holder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/28/2022
* USD 370,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site will enable 10 undergraduates
each year to conduct hands-on research in the field of smart environments for a
period of 10 weeks each summer. Research participants from a wide variety of
institutions and demographic backgrounds will explore the links between multiple
applications including artificial intelligence, machine learning, data mining,
high-performance computing, pervasive computing, networking, distributed
systems, health, medicine, psychology, gerontechnology, and energy
sustainability. Within this context, participants will gain an appreciation for
how to collect large amounts of data from these environments, analyze the data
for new knowledge, and take actions to effect changes in the environments in
order to improve health, security, efficiency and sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site facilitates research and training in
multiple complementary disciplines including computer science, electrical
engineering, psychology, and health care. The team partners with other REU
programs on campus, and participants will interact regularly with other REU
students from around the country, with faculty from multiple REU programs, and
with graduate students from the related ongoing research programs in smart
environments. The program will enable interdisciplinary research that links
design of technology with health-based sustainable energy applications, and
creates new opportunities for undergraduates to study health, energy and human
behavior using the technology. Results of this program, including descriptions
of student projects, lessons learned, and quantitative and qualitative feedback,
will be disseminated via the program website. This program will also make a
contribution to a generation whose workforce is trained in multiple,
complementary disciplines. Finally, our planned recruitment effort and strong
mentoring component will spread knowledge of the benefits of the REU program
among the targeted populations, resulting in broadening participation in
engineering and related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.