* 1757000
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Assessing international non-governmental organization influences on coastal resource management by communities and users
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 08/31/2019
* USD 30,913.00

Where people who depend on the sea have input into how marine resources are
used, fish stocks and habitats are often healthier. Healthier fish stocks and
habitat are in turn good news for people who depend on the sea, especially in
lower-income coastal regions where people increasingly rely on fish for food.
One way to structure local involvement in decision-making is community-based
management (CBM), in which resource-dependent communities take active part in
making and enforcing rules (for example, how, where, and when community members
are allowed to fish). CBM has been offered as a way to improve developing-world
fish stocks and food security for vulnerable global populations, and has been
embraced globally by funders, non-governmental organizations, governments and
communities. In particular, international non-governmental conservation
organizations (INGOs) actively work to encourage communities around the world to
adopt CBM. Understanding how INGOs affect communities' decisions to undertake
CBM is thus relevant to national governments seeking to improve food security,
INGOs seeking to balance human needs with ecosystem needs, network organizations
seeking to empower sustainable local communities, and local communities seeking
to maintain local livelihoods and culture. However, how INGOs ultimately
influence the "why" and "how" of communities' decisions to engage in CBM remains
poorly understood.

This project proposes to investigate causal links between the activities of
INGOs and community-level adoption and implementation of CBM through a process
tracing approach. Data will be collected through fieldwork in Fiji, a nation
where INGO involvement in CBM is common. Interviews will be conducted with local
leaders in purposively selected Native Fijian case study communities that are
matched on community size and reliance on marine resources, but that vary on
INGO involvement, adoption of CBM, and implementation of CBM. In order to
triangulate findings, data collection will also include formal CBM adoption and
implementation documentation, as well as interviews with representatives of
INGOs active in the case study communities. Process tracing analysis will be
used to identify INGO activities and influence on a) material and normative
incentives for local adoption and implementation of CBM, and b) local decision-
making structures. Process tracing analysis will also test whether local
decision-maker attitudes mediate INGO influence on CBM uptake. Counterfactual
cases will allow for exploration of alternate pathways to local adoption and/or
implementation of CBM. Generalizability of initial case findings will be
examined through a broader survey of INGOs active in CBM in other regions of the
world. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.