* 1757212
* REU: Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography Multicultural Program
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Carolina Bonin, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 741,820.00

Hampton University and the Association for the Sciences of Limnology and
Oceanography (ASLO) will continue to manage a program with the goal of
increasing the numbers of under-represented minorities and under-served students
electing careers in aquatic sciences. This program is known as the Association
for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography Multicultural Program or ASLOMP.
Applications for the program are encouraged from diverse students, some of whom
are nominated by OCE REU PIs, and professionals interested in mentoring these
students. Participants receive a free membership in ASLO and support to attend
the annual ASLO Winter meeting and special pre-meeting workshops. ASLOMP will
support about 60 to 80 students and faculty each year for an additional three
years (2019-2021). The project leaders will cultivate the development of past
participants as they incorporate new cohorts of students. The objectives of the
program are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Expose more diverse undergraduates from the full
spectrum of ethnicities and backgrounds, and beginning graduate students to
cutting edge aquatic science through fully supporting their active participation
in ASLO meetings where they also present their own research.&lt;br/&gt;2. Link
diverse students to opportunities for internships, advanced studies, special
programs and potential employment through interactions at ASLO
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;3. Continue to bring new cohorts of diverse students into
the networks of aquatic scientists.&lt;br/&gt;4. Strengthen the significant
presence of diverse scientists in ASLO that will form a mentor core for the
ongoing recruitment of more underrepresented students into the field, and
continue to be a source of diverse candidates for ASLO leadership
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2013 the program embraced a broader meaning
for multicultural, inviting all types of students to participate, while
retaining an emphasis on building diversity through expanding participation of
students from under-represented groups. This expanded approach goes beyond
ethnicity and race, and includes those with disabilities, first generation
college students, those from underserved rural and urban areas, veterans and
non-traditional learners. These are not rigid categories and students that
demonstrate other ways of bringing diversity are also
welcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASLOMP program has received much attention and
many accolades. Dr. Cuker received the ASLO Excellence in Education Award
presented in 2009 for his work with this program. Feature stories on the program
have been included in a variety of journals, and results of an evaluation of the
ASLOMP program were published in 2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.