* 1757475
* Fall Semester Student Research in Oceanography and Marine Science at BIOS
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2021
* USD 439,550.00

Research training for the next generation of marine scientists and
oceanographers is an important focus for the Division of Ocean Sciences. The
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Bermuda Institute
of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), which is incorporated in New York, will provide
undergraduate students with experiential research training in the ocean sciences
during the fall semester in Bermuda. The program will introduce eight
undergraduate students per year to the techniques, skills and intellectual
processes required to conduct research in oceanography and the marine sciences,
including projects with long-term, ocean observation programs and near-shore
projects based in ecology and molecular biology. All REU students have an
opportunity to join BIOS scientists for a research cruise aboard the R/V
Atlantic Explorer. REU students will also meet visiting students from the USA,
Canada and the UK and local scientists from the Bermuda Government and from
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BIOS REU Site will provide a total of
twenty-four undergraduates with internships over the three-year period. Students
will conduct independent research projects with the guidance of research mentors
and will participate in a variety of professional development activities,
including workshops on scientific writing and ethics, the graduate school
experience and career options, as well as field trips. The program conducts a
national search for applicants and seeks to engage students who are from schools
with limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports
student stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. This project
supports the national goals of developing the next generation of scientists and
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The range of potential research
projects for REU students at BIOS is highly varied. Students may work on deep-
sea oceanography, near-shore marine ecology, molecular biology, and marine and
atmospheric geochemistry. BIOS is uniquely situated in the middle of the
Atlantic Ocean, allowing students the opportunity to study the open ocean in
conjunction with established oceanographic time-series programs or the near-
shore environment of one of the most northerly coral reef systems in the world.
Additional opportunities include studying the relationship between global change
and the physiological function and geographic distribution of marine animal
species; zooplankton ecology and population dynamics using traditional
morphological and distributional studies paired with cutting-edge molecular
tools; nitrogen cycling in the ocean; deployments of autonomous underwater
vehicles, and the interaction between the marine boundary layer and the free
troposphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.