* 1757967
* REU Site: Nanotechnology REU with a Focus on Community Colleges
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Carolyn Nichol, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 360,791.00

This REU site, Nanotechnology REU with a Focus on Community Colleges at Rice
University aims to broaden the participation of traditionally underrepresented
students in STEM by providing research opportunities to local community college
students in the area of nanotechnology, a cutting edge and rapidly progressing
field that cuts across many disciplines and addresses well-recognized, real-
world problems. Nanotechnology integrates the physical sciences and engineering
with applications in medicine, energy, and the environment that are particularly
appealing to recruit and retain college students in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Historically, economically disadvantaged and
first generation students have an underrepresented presence in STEM. Community
colleges serve a high percentage of underrepresented groups and present a rich
pool of future scientists and engineers. Undergraduate research can help build
confidence and research skills and in turn, play a pivotal role in a student's
decision to pursue graduate school or research careers. This REU Site aspires to
integrate local community college students with an enriching and meaningful
laboratory experience in a community of scholars with mentorship and support
that will facilitate their transition and retention into a four-year university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this REU site are: 1) facilitate the
development of engineering students from underrepresented groups and
economically disadvantaged populations; 2) educate community college students
about STEM research careers; 3) provide experiences in research laboratories
while demonstrating the excitement of STEM careers; 4) build and maintain
mentoring relationships with our participants; and 5) promote effective inter-
institutional partnerships between Rice University and community colleges in the
Texas Gulf Coast Region. The 10-week research experience will introduce students
to research, applications, and education and career opportunities in
nanotechnology in an inclusive culture. Students will interact with Rice
faculty, post-doctoral and graduate student mentors and teaching staff who will
be guiding them through program activities that include research methodology,
oral and written presentations, networking, career webinars, and college
transferring; along with local STEM industrial opportunities that will promote
the dissemination of the program's impact into their communities. REU
participants will present their research findings at the Smalley-Curl
Nanotechnology Institute's Summer Research Colloquium. These program activities
are designed to cultivate interest in STEM, provide skills and knowledge in
conducting research and scientific thinking, and assimilate community college
students in a university setting for a viable future in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.