* 1757630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Housing Costs and the Residential Mobility of Middle-Income Renters
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Rebecca Shakespeare, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 12,826.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how middle-income
renters make residential decisions in high-cost cities. This project will focus
on the impacts of increased housing costs on middle-income renters and how their
perceptions of housing cost change and their experiences of neighborhood change
impact their decisions to move or not move. This project will contribute to a
growing body of scholarly literature regarding neighborhood change and
residential mobility. It will increase basic understanding of population
dynamics in urban areas by examining and the reasons that middle-income
residents move in a changing city. Because this project will identify the
specific factors that influence residential mobility or immobility in middle-
income renters, project findings will enable policymakers and housing developers
to better understand and serve the needs of middle-income residents in
competitive housing markets and will facilitate development of more effective
policy interventions aimed at middle-income residents. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

Many urban areas in the United States have high and increasing housing costs. In
the ten years following the 2008 global financial crisis, the number of renters
in the United States has increased in every income group, indicating that
households who previously would have owned their homes now are renting. The
doctoral student conducting this research project will address two specific sets
of research questions: (1) How are new housing development, commodification of
housing, and increased housing prices related to the spatial distribution of
middle-income residents and middle-income affordable rentals? (2) How do housing
costs affect middle-income renters' perceptions of housing affordability,
provide information about their decisions to move or stay, and impact their
experience of neighborhood change? The student will employ a mix of research
methods to answer these questions. She will address the first question by
analyzing census data to identify spatial relationships between housing
investments and middle-income residential locations, she will develop a hedonic
model of where middle-income affordable rentals are likely to be. Geographically
weighted regression will be used to analyze the geography of the relationship
between investment and middle-income locations. The student will address the
second question using geo-narratives of residential histories to analyze the
spatially and temporally specific reasons for household residential histories.
Semi-structured interviews with middle-income residents will provide insights
into where they have lived, why they moved or did not move, and how they make
sense of the broader processes of housing commodification, investment, and
gentrification in their own residential experiences. This study will investigate
these questions through a case study in New York City, a high-cost U.S. city,
but the findings will be applicable to other high-cost of living metropolitan
areas in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.