* 1757634
* REU Site: Chemistry at the University of Connecticut
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jose Gascon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Connecticut is located in Storrs, CT. The principal investigators are Jose
Gascon and Alfredo Angeles-Boza. The site supports the training of 9 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This site, supported by the
Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate,
provides students with a diverse set of research projects in chemical sciences.
Students also take part in in technical workshops and professional development
seminars, which emphasize the development of communication skills and ethical
behavior in research settings. This program culminates in oral and poster
presentations, which is open to the University community, parents and faculty
from the students' home institutions. Participants obtain a foundation for
making informed choices about future careers in chemistry and establish networks
with peers from a range of disciplines and experiences. In the recruitment of
students, an emphasis is placed on women, underrepresented groups and students
from the nearby Central Connecticut State University (CCSU).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program introduces participants to a full breadth of
research-related activities, a number of ancillary technical workshops and
professional development seminars. The research projects span across all
divisions of the University of Connecticut's chemistry department, including
projects related to organic, inorganic, analytical, physical, biological, and
polymer chemistry. In addition to the research conducted in the host
laboratories, students participate in two hands-on workshops: one on
computational chemistry and the other on single crystal X-ray crystallography
held at CCSU. These activities introduce an intellectually challenging technical
component to the program that involves the entire cohort and provides a deeper
understanding about techniques that are instrumental to all fields of chemistry.
Overall, the program enhances students' enthusiasm for chemistry and prepares
them for post-graduate success in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.