* 1757946
* REU Site:  Team-Mentored Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Chemistry for Early-Stage Undergraduates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* LeGrande Slaughter, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 279,576.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
North Texas (UNT) is located in Denton, TX. The site is led by Profs. LeGrande
Slaughter and Hong Wang. It supports the training of 8 students over 10 weeks
during the summers of 2019-2021. It is funded by the Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate. Student scientists focus on
collaborative and interdisciplinary team-mentored research projects. The student
participants are co-advised by two or more chemistry research groups. They also
take part in professional development activities. These are designed to foster
knowledge of career opportunities in chemical research, ethical issues in
science, and scientific communication skills. This REU Site targets early-stage
science majors who have not yet experienced research. The program also builds
upon and strengthens UNT Chemistry's network of faculty partners in the
underserved Texas/South Central/New Mexico region. This will help to recruit
students from undergraduate-focused institutions, including several Hispanic-
serving institutions and Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects designed for participants are highly
interdisciplinary. They encompass joint computational/experimental studies of
selective organometallic catalysts and synthesis of new materials by soft-
landing mass spectrometry. The also include studies of corrosion mechanisms in
electronic devices, and pi-extended porphyrin materials for dye-sensitized solar
cells. The focus on team mentoring prepares participants to make substantive
independent research contributions within a collaborative team setting. It
enables them to thrive in the increasingly collaborative world of modern
scientific research. Research training is coupled with career development
activities addressing communication skills, career development, scientific
ethics, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.