* 1757084
* Neoclassical Growth with Long-Term One-Sided Commitment Contracts
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Dirk Krueger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 445,000.00

The project team seeks to develop a new model of an entire national economy in
which households can sign sophisticated financial contracts to solve insurance
challenges. However, the scope of that insurance is limited by information and
contract enforcement problems. The result is a model that is more realistic than
other general equilibrium macroeconomic models, and a model that is simple
enough to study a wide variety of issues facing the macroeconomy. In particular,
the project will give researchers a new framework for studying the interaction
between macroeconomic performance, financial intermediation, and household
inequality. Researchers and policymakers will be able to use the framework to
understand how this link is shaped by economic policy and impacted by
macroeconomic shocks. The team plans to include studies of specific government
policies and the ways that these policies can improve economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop a new,
analytically tractable general equilibrium macroeconomic model with
idiosyncratic income risk and endogenous financial contracts. To do so, long-
term contractual arrangements between risk-averse households and risk-neutral
competitive financial intermediaries will be embedded into a stationary version
of the neoclassical growth model. The project combines two strands of the
literature. The first is the standard incomplete markets model with uninsurable
idiosyncratic income shocks and neoclassical production. The second is the
researcher team's previous work on dynamic insurance contracts offered by
competitive financial intermediaries. The new model framework has a key feature:
limits to mutual insurance are derived endogenously rather than being imposed by
assumption. The resulting model will then be applied to transitions induced by
economic policy and to the analysis of business
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.