* 1757111
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Natural Disasters and the Sociotechnical Foundations of Governance
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 12,592.00

This dissertation examines how disaster-induced institutional reforms coupled
with post-disaster capacity building through reconstruction projects have
significantly enhanced governance effectiveness in the one low-income, fragile
state. Governance systems are composed of networks of public, private, and
international organizations that make collaborative decisions to solve public
issues. Increasing the effectiveness of governance systems is critical for
improving human security and prosperity across the world, especially in
developing country settings. Large-scale natural disasters often create windows
of opportunity for improving the effectiveness of governance systems by
reforming the rules and norms that guide decisions, interactions and operations
of networked organizations. Collaborative post-disaster reconstruction
operations provide opportunities for augmenting the effectiveness of governance
systems by improving resource capacity, informational infrastructure, and social
support base of interorganizational networks. While much work has been done on
expanding resource capacity of governance systems, especially in the context of
post-conflict reconstruction and state building, little research has examined
the sociotechnical foundations of governance effectiveness: how information and
trust facilitate social learning and adaptive capacity, especially at the nexus
of post-disaster reconstruction and governance reforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this dissertation research traces Nepal's
new constitution of September 20, 2015 and the resulting transition from a
unitary governance system to a federal system of seven autonomous provinces back
to the April/May 2015 earthquakes and the post-earthquake reconstruction
efforts. The objective of such process-tracing is to reveal the mechanisms of
change that logically connect the earthquakes and post-earthquake reconstruction
operations with the changes in Nepal's governance system. Setting up a pre-post
research design with a focus on short and medium-term effects, the research uses
several sources of secondary as well as original expert interview data to
measure changes in resource capacity, informational infrastructure, and the
social support base. Resource capacity measures are constructed using government
statistical reports, foreign aid donor reports, the Prime Ministers Disaster
Relief Fund data and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
financial tracking data. The informational capacity of the system is measured
using knowledge graph datasets of the "Global Data on Events, Location and Tone"
database that records organizations and their dyadic interactions in the context
of Nepal's governance system and post-disaster reconstruction. Changes in the
social support base are measured using news articles, opinion surveys of news
organizations and think tanks as well as multiple waves of post-earthquake
citizen feedback surveys conducted by civil society organizations and
international development organizations. Semi-structured expert interview data
and field observations from Nepal cross-validates the findings of the study and
uncovers nuances to the specified mechanisms of change. The resulting analyses
show how the 2015 earthquakes and post-earthquake rebuilding projects have
significantly shaped the governance system of Nepal. This case study contributes
to the broader literature in collaborative disaster governance, humanitarian
assistance, and post-disaster governance reforms in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.