* 1757933
* Summer Research Experiences for Students from Community Colleges and Four Year Institutions at Georgia State University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Suri Iyer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 329,857.00

This REU Site award to Georgia State University (GSU), located in Atlanta, GA,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. This program, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate, recruits undergraduates from community
colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions to participate in hands-on
research in different laboratories at GSU. Research projects at the interface of
chemistry and biology are available for student participants. This program also
provides the training, mentoring, skills, and motivation for students to pursue
a scientific career, thereby creating a vibrant, diverse, and well trained
scientific workforce critical to advancing discovery and innovation. The program
is open to all undergraduates, but there is an emphasis on recruiting local
students. There are many nearby institutions with limited research opportunities
that provide a diverse student pool, and by remaining close to GSU, students
have a chance to develop long lasting communities and mentoring relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participate in hands-on research, under the
guidance of a faculty mentor, on a topic that captures their interest. A wide
variety of projects are available to the students, including - but not limited
to - synthetic chemistry, computational chemistry, glycoscience, diagnostics,
protein design, protein dynamics, enzyme catalysis, drug design and nucleic acid
structure and function. The individual projects advance scientific knowledge,
promote independent thinking, and teach students to work in a collaborative
manner. Students also participate in regular professional development activities
designed to strengthen the skills necessary for a successful career in STEM. The
activities include networking events, group meetings, and seminars. Seminar
topics include scientific writing and presentation skills, critical analysis,
ethical and societal issues, career advice, and transferring to four-year
colleges (for community college students). The research activities improve our
fundamental knowledge of chemical and biological processes, and the diverse
student participants are well educated and trained to join the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.