* 1757477
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Model-based Reasoning in STEM Education at the Rochester Institute of Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Dina Newman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 336,993.00

The REU Site award to the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will support
the training of ten students for ten weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. The
goal of this site is to give students an opportunity to engage in research
projects on model-based reasoning. Modeling is an important practice of science
as models provide bridges between ideas and observations of the physical world.
Models are simplified versions of real-world systems that allow scientists to
ask new questions, test new hypotheses, and communicate explanations to a broad
audience. Major STEM education reform initiatives in K-12 and higher education
support opportunities for students to engage in the practice of modeling
throughout the STEM curriculum. These reform initiatives must also be supported
by a research base that includes well-defined goals, assessment tools, an
understanding of common student difficulties, and effective curricular
approaches. The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Model-based
Reasoning in STEM Education will give students an opportunity to engage in novel
research projects in this exciting and important
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discipline-Based Education Research (DBER) combines
disciplinary expertise in a STEM field with education research methodology that
undergraduate students can do, if provided with preparatory work and mentoring.
This DBER REU program will enable STEM students to apply their growing
disciplinary knowledge to important problems in education research. Over the
next three years, the program will select 30 diverse undergraduate students to
join the RIT STEM research community. During the program, students will engage
in rigorous education research projects with the support and collaboration of
research mentors. The program will help students prepare for DBER and/or
scientific research careers and graduate programs. These potential future
educators will be introduced to teaching, learning, and assessment of the core
scientific practice of modeling. Students in this program will disseminate their
findings at conferences and through scholarly publications. To support program
objectives, this DBER REU program has four core components: Mentored Research
projects, Professional Development Workshops, DBER Methods Workshops, and
Cohort-building Activities. The project will contribute to research around the
development and assessment of students' abilities in modeling, which is
essential for the efficacy of educational initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.