* 1757874
* REU Site: A Summer Research Program that Integrates Deaf, Hearing and Sign Language Interpreting Participants to Advance Chemistry Research and to Enhance Science Communication
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Christine Hughey, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 340,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to James Madison
University (JMU), located in Harrisonburg, VA, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Science
Directorate, Professors Kevin Caran, Christine Hughey, and colleagues in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry host an REU site that integrates deaf,
hard of hearing (D/HH), and sign language-interpreting students in chemical
research. JMU faculty members provide research opportunities in all major sub-
disciplines of chemistry, with expertise centered in synthesis, biophysical
chemistry and materials. In addition, students participate in a series of
professional development activities aimed at enhancing effective science
communication with other chemists, scientists in other disciplines, the public,
and those with communication disorders (e.g. deaf and hard-of-hearing).
Participants include students and faculty from JMU and outside institutions that
serve deaf students or institutions that do not have extensive research
infrastructure. By involving students in all aspects of the research process,
from experimental design to dissemination of results, this program aims to lower
the barriers, particularly for D/HH students, that hinder the pursuit of
graduate studies in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JMU Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry provides research opportunities for D/HH students and
faculty. The students participate in a variety of research projects. Some
examples include: the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide to formaldehyde, the
development of hybrid materials for photovoltaic applications, and the use of
molecular dynamics to elucidate the mechanisms of the binding of ubiquitin to
its substrate protein. D/HH participants are supported with professional
American Sign Language (ASL) interpreters and student interpreters in both
professional and social settings. This immersive experience provides
interpreting students the opportunity to learn and work in a science environment
with the goal of developing professional interpreters with experience in the
laboratory. In addition to the full-time student interpreters, additional ASL-
interpreting students are invited to campus to observe the REU program for one
week. The incorporation of these students expands the impact of the program by
exposing a larger number of interpreting students to the challenges and
opportunities involved in deaf communication in chemistry laboratories. All REU
hearing participants, including faculty and students from outside colleges and
universities, benefit from interactions with D/HH students and faculty, as
hearing participants gain an appreciation for the challenges and opportunities
associated with the inclusion of persons with disabilities. As a result of these
interactions, this REU program aims to lower barriers for collaboration between
these groups in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.