* 1757964
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: BigDataX: From theory to practice in Big Data computing at eXtreme scales
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Ioan Raicu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 333,106.00

This project extends the BigDataX program, a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) and the
University of Chicago (UChicago). The BigDataX site focuses on undergraduate
research in both the theory and practice of big data computing at extreme
scales. BigDataX includes a diverse group of 10 undergraduate students, who will
conduct research over a 10 week period, in the area of big data and how it will
impact the design, analysis, and implementation of run-time systems and storage
systems to support big data applications. This research will make extreme scale
computing more tractable, touching every branch of computing in high-end
computing and datacenters. These advancements will impact scientific discovery
and economic development at the national level, and they will strengthen a wide
range of research activities enabling efficient access, processing, storage, and
sharing of valuable scientific data from many disciplines. The proposed work
will place students in the middle of a technological revolution which will
revolutionize the computing domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of this proposal is to promote a data-centric view of scientific and technical
computing, at the intersection of distributed systems theory and practice. This
proposal includes 6 mentors, with a variety of complementing expertise from
theory to systems, distributed systems, storage management, and data science.
The mentors have extensive experience in mentoring undergraduate students,
collectively having worked with over one hundred students in research
activities, publishing dozens peer-reviewed workshop/conference/journal papers
at top venues together with undergraduate students. The students that will be
part of the BigDataX program will be exposed to big data applications, large
data sets, and various distributed systems such as the Mystic reconfigurable
testbed at IIT, Chameleon cloud and Theta supercomputer at Argonne National
Laboratory, the XSEDE national cyberinfrastructure, and the Amazon Web Services
cloud.