* 1757143
* Increasing the Competitiveness of 2- and 4-year Minority-serving Institutions (MSIs) in  Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2018
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 11/30/2018
* USD 171,229.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will conduct a proposal
development workshop for STEM faculty at 2-year and 4-year Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs) to advance their knowledge of and improve their
competitiveness in the National Science Foundation (NSF)'s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program. MSIs play an
essential role in the production of baccalaureate degree recipients of
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines as well as in the disproportionate
production of underrepresented undergraduate students who go on to receive
advanced degrees in STEM. Increasing S-STEM awards at MSIs will assist MSIs in
developing and sustaining student enrolment and matriculation in STEM majors.
Furthermore, ensuring the competitiveness of faculty and students will enhance
diversity in STEM education and STEM workforce, which in turn, will contribute
to America's global competitiveness.

The workshop will support two-person faculty teams from 20 MSIs interested in
developing competitive S-STEM proposals. Participants will also engage in a
series of post-workshop individualized sessions that will provide additional
proposal guidance. The workshop content and post-workshop technical assistance
will be delivered by a team of consultants with expertise in STEM and STEM
education, including NSF grantee PIs and education researchers. To enhance
individual and cross-institutional capacity and collaborations, QEM will create
and facilitate a community of practice comprised of S-STEM workshop participants
and require them to connect with each other and with QEM staff, consultants, and
NSF program officers. The online platform will allow the project to offer
additional support beyond the workshop including engaging in discussions related
to S-STEM program priority-areas and providing relevant feedback. Project-
related materials will be made available online to ensure broader dissemination
of information that will be beneficial to participating institutions as well as
other MSIs in relation to the S-STEM program.