* 1757459
* Support for the 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Sciences: Water  To held June 24-29, 2018 in Holderness, NH
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* William Arnold, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

The conference will survey national and international priority research in the
field of water quality. The science will focus on solutions to urgent societal
challenges for water safety and ecosystem health. Scientific advances will
include cutting edge research in separation technologies, water treatment, and
systems engineering for the production of food, energy, and material resources,
preventing exposures to hazardous chemicals, and remediation technologies. This
proposal advances US national interests and societal benefits by facilitating
communication of scientific progress towards improving water quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will survey priority and
emerging issues across all aspects of the field of environmental water research
focusing on challenges and the development of new technologies to meet these
challenges. A focus will be on developments in separation technologies, water
treatment, and systems engineering for the production of food, energy, and
material resources. Other topics include mitigation strategies for climate
change, exposures to hazardous chemicals, and remediation technologies. These
topics will be explored in sessions that focus on the broad themes of: 1)
Sustainable water and materials, 2) Chemical exposures and outcomes, 3) New
technologies for water, 4) Community-engaged science and public policy. These
are relevant to the program objectives of the Environmental Engineering program,
as well as Environmental Chemistry program in MPS, and NSF initiatives in
INFEWS, among others. This proposal advances the broader mission of NSF through
direct societal benefits by facilitating communication of scientific progress
towards improving water availability and quality, and protection of ecosystem
health. Solutions to the problems require ideas and interactions among multiple
disciplines to allow proper action and development of environmental policy. The
conference will advance discovery while promoting teaching, training, and
learning by offering a platform for graduate student and postdoctoral
researchers to present their research and participate fully in the conference
activities. The conference also provides a forum for interactions between senior
scientists and students and broad participation of scientists from groups
underrepresented in science and engineering. Assessment of the broader impacts
will be performed via survey of participants at the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.