* 1757597
* REU Site: Undergraduate and teacher research in physics at Northern Illinois University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Michael Eads, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2022
* USD 245,771.00

This award funds a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) and
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site at the Department of Physics of
Northern Illinois University (NIU). Research topics will focus on particle
physics, beams and accelerator physics, and condensed matter physics. Students
will work on cutting-edge research and will receive lectures on numerous topics,
including how to get started on their research, the usefulness of a degree in
physics, the long path towards attending graduate school, and other options for
fruitful careers after graduation. The program will take advantage of the
proximity of the NIU to nearby national labs, with several students working a
few days a week at Fermilab, and all students taking tours and trips to visit
both Fermilab as well as Argonne. Building on NIU's strong physics and science
teacher certification program, the RET component will allow local teachers to
experience real physics research and participate in lectures and programs that
aim to disrupt and disperse the roadblocks that women and minorities face in the
pipeline towards careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
topics for this proposal fall into three broad categories: 1) particle
physics,2) accelerator and beams physics, and 3) materials and condensed matter
physics. The particle and beams and accelerator physics research topics for this
proposal will be based in NIU's Northern Illinois Center for Accelerator and
Detector Development (NICADD), which hosts the University's accelerator,
detector and particle physics research programs. Students will be housed on
campus, and their work will be based primarily at the department, though some
participants working in beams physics or particle physics may work a few days a
week at Fermilab, depending on their research topics. Teachers in the program,
who are more likely to have their own transportation and families to attend to,
will have the option of working on campus or at
Fermilab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.