* 1757315
* Does introspection increase humanitarian concerns in judgment and decision making?
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 429,998.00

There is ample evidence that people are inconsistent in the way that they value
humanitarian objectives when making decisions about helping persons in distress.
Most people believe they should give substantial weight to other people's
welfare when making decisions about charitable donations, allocating scarce
medical resources, or providing support for refugees. Yet great compassion
extended towards individual victims often fades or disappears as the numbers of
people in need increase. In some circumstances, emotionally appealing but
normatively weak attributes may take precedence over needs. The resulting
failures to help others often appear to contradict one's considered beliefs in
the importance of giving them assistance. This proposal tests the hypothesis
that introspection about personal beliefs regarding how humanitarian concerns
should influence behavior will reduce underweighting of these concerns. We
hypothesize that introspection will help people make judgments and decisions
that better reflect their considered values. We propose a series of studies to
test predictions derived from three basic ideas: (a) that people unknowingly
weight concerns about others' welfare less than they believe they should weight
those concerns, a bias in humanitarian judgment and decision making; (b) that
introspection can increase awareness of the discrepancy between people's
personal beliefs and their exhibited behavior; and (c) becoming aware of this
discrepancy will lead people to reduce the inconsistency between their personal
beliefs and behavior by increasing the weighting of others' welfare in their
judgments and decisions. Understanding the role of humanitarian values in
important personal and policy decisions has broad significance. Millions of
lives and national and global security depend on these decisions. Do the
political, social, economic, cultural, security, and humanitarian values that we
assume should guide our decisions actually exist in some coherent and consistent
form? If so, what are these considered values and how do we ensure that our
decisions are in accord with these values? This research project aims to make a
contribution toward answering these vital questions by examining the degree to
which a simple introspection procedure can improve the coherence between one's
own values and one?s actions in a variety of humanitarian decision
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research yields several intellectual
contributions. First, the studies advance understanding of how introspection can
improve decision making, in contrast with claims in the research literature that
introspection and deliberation can harm decision quality. Second, by examining
people's response to introspection about normative decision processes, the
proposed studies advance understanding of how people monitor and revise
attribute weighting when making decisions. This enables the researchers to
differentiate between introspection and deliberation, concepts that are treated
similarly in the literature. Third, given that people often have clear beliefs
regarding how decisions should be made in specific contexts, the proposed
research advances understanding of the extent to which people fail to behave
according to those beliefs and how becoming aware of personal humanitarian
values can increase the correspondence between those values and actual
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.