* 1757334
* REU Site: Engaging Undergraduates in Interdisciplinary Evolutionary Science
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,09/30/2022
* Maurine Neiman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 383,770.00

This REU Site award to the University of Iowa, located in Iowa City, IA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. The focus of this REU is training in evolutionary science, with
students working on research projects across several disciplines. Three academic
departments will collaborate with the University of Iowa Museum of Natural
History (UIMNH) to offer research projects that span a wide range of topics,
including animal behavior, paleontology, and genome evolution. Students will
work on evolution-themed projects in one of these specific areas, but will also
work as a cohort to make broad connections among disciplines. As part of the
program, students will receive training in research best practices, participate
in career workshops, create a digital exhibit for the UIMNH, and make formal
research presentations based on their work. Housing, a meal allowance and
stipend will be provided to all participants. Students from underrepresented
minority groups and who have limited research opportunities at their home
institution are especially encouraged to apply. Students will be selected based
on previous academic performance, enthusiasm for conducting research, interest
in specific faculty research projects, and potential for future success in a
research-related career. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Students
will also learn skills in science communication including digital museum
exhibits to communicate the results of their research to the public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs
funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://biology.uiowa.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Andrew Forbes at
andrew-forbes@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Maurine Neiman at maurine-
neiman@uiowa.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.