* 1757199
* Inferences in Factor Pricing Models with Many Assets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Anna Mikusheva, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 170,113.00

Factor pricing models, which intend to explain non-trivial expected returns to
assets as compensation for risk assumed by asset holders, are important
benchmarks that academics and practitioners in financial industry use to
understand asset prices and to make investment and portfolio decisions. However,
current statistical and econometric techniques for estimating and assessing
factor pricing models often produce spurious statistical results. The goal of
this research is to develop more reliable new statistical techniques that will
work well in an environment that makes use of big data sets on assets returns
and that will address the empirically-important issues of observed strong co-
movements between asset prices and the weak explanatory power of some risk
factors. Given the broad range of applications for factor models, the techniques
and insights from this research will also be useful for researchers and policy
makers working with macroeconomic data, including Federal Reserves and Central
Banks. In addition, a key educational component of this research involves the
training of graduate students in the area of
econometrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research demonstrates the statistical
problems of the currently widely employed two-pass Fama-MacBeth procedure and
further creates more reliable new statistical methods. The investigator combines
several modern econometric and statistical approaches such as large-dimensional
asymptotics, drifting-parameter embedding (as in the weak-identification
literature) and factor models, in order to better approximate empirically
relevant features of commonly-used data sets. Each of these approaches brings
its own distinct statistical challenges that the investigator will solve by
proposing a new and original estimation procedure. One of the insights from this
research is that strong cross-sectional dependence between asset returns such as
an approximate factor structure can be exploited to create proxies for
dependence and that this can be used to build a correction. The weakness of
observed factors is an additional serious complication that the investigator
aims to solve. This research will develop new techniques for three distinct
tasks: (i) estimation and inference on risk premia; (ii) testing whether the
proposed factor pricing model is correctly specified; and (iii) assessment of
the quality-of-fit of a pricing model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.