* 1757420
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Materials Research for Undergraduates (REU) and Teachers (RET) in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Katja Nowack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 459,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project will provide 10 undergraduate students
each summer with an introduction to materials research, to encourage interested
students to pursue a graduate degree in a materials-related field. During the
10-week project, students will participate in a research project, integrate into
a research group, and work alongside faculty, postdocs, and graduate students. A
stimulating cohort experience is created through mentoring, leadership, ethics,
and presentation workshops, weekly seminars, field trips, a variety of informal
activities, and a concluding symposium. The project will also support a teacher
program that will increase student achievement in science by providing
professional development each summer for four teachers from schools that serve
large underrepresented minority and low socioeconomic status populations. The
progressive summer teacher experience introduces teacher to materials research
over six weeks and includes an option to return in a subsequent summer for an
independent, six-week research experience that will enable in-depth
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A wide range of
experimental and computational techniques and materials research topics will be
accomplished under this program. Individual projects will include computational
design, experimental studies of advanced polymer sensors, energy storage
technology and characterization of nanomaterials. With the guidance of top
researchers and their research groups, the participating undergraduate students
and teachers will construct scientific equipment, perform experiments, model
material properties, analyze data, and contribute to the general materials
knowledge base and to their own education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.