* 1757157
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Nudges in "Equilibrium"
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Hannah Trachtman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2019
* USD 24,994.00

Programs using mass media to promote health have been evaluated individually.
While many of these programs have been shown to be effective, there is little
research on how these programs interact with one another. This proposed research
will study how different mass media programs to improve health interact with
each other to affect other outcomes that were not targeted. It will develop a
theory and test it with an experiment in which individuals are randomly reminded
or incentivized to engage in one healthy behavior, two healthy behaviors, or
nothing at all. By comparing outcomes across these groups, the study will
discover whether these mechanisms cause interference between programs, and if
so, which mechanisms are most important. This is the first study that uses
theory and experiments to study the general mechanisms that may produce
interactions among interventions. The results of this study promise to directly
help the beneficiaries of programs that promote healthy (or otherwise
beneficial) behaviors in underserved communities by enabling policy makers to
coordinate programs more effectively. The results of this research will improve
the performance of many government and business programs, thus improving the
lives of many US citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study whether
there are mechanisms that cause behavior change campaigns to have spillovers or
interactions, identify those mechanisms, and understand their implications in
dynamic settings in different domains. Evidence of spillovers or interactions
implies that campaigns can be made more effective through coordination. The
research will take inventory of theories in economics and psychology that
predict spillovers or interactions, organize them into a simple framework, and
test the predictions of the framework with a field experiment. SMS reminder
programs about one ``target'' behavior or two such programs will be sent to
participants and compare responses to the effects on non-target behaviors to
establish if interactions exist, and distinguish between several possible
mechanisms. Two additional studies will: (i) explore how these mechanisms
operate in a dynamic setting, and (ii) investigate when to expect spillovers or
interactions. The insights of behavioral economics have led many governments to
establish "Nudge Units" to apply behavioral insights to policy. The results of
this research project will further enhance the use of nudges to improve policy
effectiveness in the US and around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation?s intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.