* 1757826
* REU Site: Molecular and Organismal Evolution at the University of Idaho
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Douglas Cole, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 363,930.00

This REU Site award to the University of Idaho, located in Moscow, ID, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018 -
2020. Participants conduct hands-on, independent research in the areas of
molecular and organismal evolution under the guidance of faculty mentors in the
Department of Biological Sciences. Research interests among faculty mentors
range from molecular processes of evolutionary change to the adaptation of
organisms on the landscape level. The summer program is enriched by weekly
research seminars, a series of professional development workshops, training in
ethical and responsible conduct of research, and a variety of social activities.
The program concludes with a student research symposium. Student participants
receive room-and-board, round trip travel to the University of Idaho, and a
stipend. Students are recruited nationally and submit application materials
through an online application process. Students are selected based on their
academic record, statement, letters of recommendation, potential to benefit from
the experience, interview with prospective mentors, and program goals. Selection
is accomplished by the Principal and Co-Principal Investigators in consultation
with faculty mentors. Special emphasis will be placed on the recruitment of
students from groups underrepresented in the sciences and from institutions
without extensive access to research opportunities. Information about the
program is assessed through follow-up surveys, including use of an REU common
assessment tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students may be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.uidaho.edu/sci/biology/research/summer-reu, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. David Pfeiffer at dpfeiffer@uidaho.edu) or the Co-PI (Dr. Doug Cole at
dcole@idaho.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.