* 1757560
* REU Site: Intensive Mentored Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in Psychology and Neuroscience at an Urban Public College
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Deborah Walder, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2022
* USD 377,696.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. The Brooklyn College (BC) of
the City University of New York REU program aims to advance discovery for the
scientific and broader communities while promoting mentoring, learning, and
professional development by: (1) immersing students from underrepresented groups
(primarily women, racial minorities, first-generation college students) in
innovative research in psychology and neuroscience; (2) guiding students through
the scientific process, from generation of research questions to communication
of results; (3) engaging students in didactics that highlight the relevance and
applied value of their laboratory work; (4) enhancing students' competitiveness
for graduate school and professional positions; and (5) boosting the research
competence of local middle and high school teachers with downstream positive
learning effects for their students. This REU program also enables faculty
members to supervise talented individuals who might otherwise miss out on
mentored laboratory and professional development opportunities, and contributes
to the training and advancement of the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central (scientific) component of this REU program is
a semester-long laboratory immersion, under the supervision of Psychology,
Biology, and Chemistry Department faculty mentors, which results in a completed
research project. We emphasize the generation of high quality research and
integration of psychological and neuroscientific theory with the design,
execution, and interpretation of data. We select ten students annually for
mentored research projects, especially undergraduates from ethnic-minority
serving, public two-year and four-year institutions in the New York metropolitan
area. Students also attend weekly didactics: a seminar that dually focuses on
psychology and neuroscience principles/research methods and professional
issues/career development; a journal club that familiarizes students with
scientific literature through learning to select, read, critically analyze, and
present summaries of original research papers; and a statistical methods seminar
that emphasizes data analysis, statistical reasoning, and presentation of
research findings in academic contexts. Given the importance of adhering to
ethical norms in research, our students also undergo an intensive scientific
ethics training. As a capstone experience, students present a poster at the BC
Science Research Day, where they compete for awards based on the quality of
their work and ability to communicate their findings. Many of our students work
with their mentors to publish their results in peer-reviewed journals. In
addition, the project has a RET (Research Experiences for Teachers) component,
which provides local middle and high school teachers with coursework in research
methods, mentored laboratory experience, and professional development
opportunities to enhance their research competencies and raise the level of
science education in local middle schools and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.