* 1757949
* REU Site: Neurotechnologies to Help the Body Move, Heal, and Feel Again
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 427,371.00

This new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award at the
University of Houston (UH) will establish a REU Site focused on
"Neurotechnologies to Help the Body Move, Heal, and Feel Again." This Site will
inspire participants to pursue, with confidence, graduate education and future
engineering careers with technical leadership. The REU site will pair 12
undergraduates per summer with faculty mentors from the multi-disciplinary
Industry-University Collaborative Research Center for Building Reliable Advances
and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN) at the Cullen College of
Engineering, for a 10-week research and educational experience in the field of
neural, cognitive and rehabilitation engineering. The REU Site addresses
society's current critical needs for the aging and disabled populations,
leverages current research strengths in the IUCRC BRAIN, and is expected to
resonate with undergraduate students and the general public, who have a rising
awareness of healthcare and innovative health management devices and are
interested in addressing the growing national need for effective management of
chronic diseases in the aging population. Thus, this site will give students an
opportunity to contribute to the development of safe, effective and affordable
personalized neurotechnologies for diagnostics, restoration, enhancement, and
rehabilitation of sensory, motor, affective, and cognitive functions. This goal
will be pursued by supporting innovative interdisciplinary research across the
multiple dimensions of brain function and behavior with the ultimate goal of
improving the national health in an inclusive environment that promotes the
active participation of underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program is led by an outstanding group of nationally recognized faculty mentors
from the University of Houston's Industry-University Collaborative Research
Center for Building Reliable Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC
BRAIN) to guide undergraduates in addressing grand challenges in neural,
cognitive, and rehabilitation engineering. The goal of the REU is to excite,
inspire, train, and nurture future undergraduates and to provide research
experiences in multidisciplinary projects with clear societal impact to students
who might not otherwise have opportunities for research experiences at their own
institutions. The site will actively recruit students underrepresented in STEM
fields and from non-research institutions. At the end of their REU experience,
students will understand the societal impact of engineering, develop research
laboratory skills and good engineering practices, obtain hands-on training in
research tools, cultivate soft skills, learn about innovation and
entrepreneurship in engineering, and participate in social activities that
promote a collegial and collaborative atmosphere among student participants,
while learning about the community. Research areas will include device
development, neural activity measurement, big data, neuromodulation,
neurorehabilitation and assistive devices, device interoperability, and human
subjects trials. The ultimate goal of this REU site is to advance the national
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.