* 1757087
* REU Site: Neutrino Physics at Virginia Tech
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Patrick Huber, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2023
* USD 186,231.00

This award supports a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in
physics at Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University (Virginia
Tech). The site will support six undergraduate students per year for ten weeks
of summer research in various projects in neutrino physics. The Center for
Neutrino Physics faculty will mentor the students carefully, with special
emphasis on their communication and dissemination skills. The program will
contribute to enhancing the students' knowledge, skills, and communication
capabilities in the various aspects of neutrino physics, thereby contributing to
the training of skilled graduates in science essential for a fast-paced and
rapidly growing technological world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects will be
available in a broad spectrum of research areas with focus on neutrino physics,
including electron/neutrino scattering experiments, the search for sterile
neutrinos, phenomenology studies, long baseline optimization for DUNE and the
study of the neutrino spectrum from nuclear reactors and supernovae neutrino
experiments and theory. REU students will have the opportunity to pursue
independent and productive activities, guided by an established team of faculty
members. In addition to experiencing the excitement of front-line research, the
students will develop the essential skills of a successful scientist, such as
critical self evaluation and self-assessment. The program will provide them with
the realistic aspects of research at graduate schools and beyond, such as the
design and running of experiments, the acquisition and analysis of data, the
development and testing of computer codes, the learning of appropriate
mathematical/analytic techniques, the formulation of theoretical ideas, as well
as the preparation of results for publications and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.