* 1757250
* Building an Economic Theory of Deception, Persuasion, and Information Sharing
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Joel Sobel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 213,492.00

This research project will develop a general theory for how individuals use
deceptive behavior for strategic advantage. The theory will prove a clearer
foundation for a range of applications. Many issues in policy and law involve
attempts to limit how people share information. For example, deception and fraud
are central issues for consumer protection and business law. In other contexts,
firms or governments may restrict the ability of their employees to share
information with outside parties. Game theory has given us powerful insights on
how people can use private information and deceptive behavior for strategic
advantage, but the existing theories use inconsistent definitions and are not
part of a single framework. The project will give us a better understanding of
when deceptive behavior is damaging, how and when to punish unauthorized
information sharing, and how the availability of detailed information about
individuals will affect targeted persuasion attempts. The project advances the
progress of science in game theory, and the new theory will help us understand
how to develop laws and policies that promote national
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes four main components. First is
a general program to clarify the foundations of strategic models of deception in
a framework that is flexible enough to permit non-equilibrium behavior and costs
associated with lying. The second is a model of persuasion in electoral
competition . The third is a model of unauthorized sharing of information that
investigates the costs and benefits of policies that punish individuals who
share information. The fourth project proves the shared assumptions needed to
rule out coordination failures in non-cooperative
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.