* 1757347
* I-Corps: Telemedicine Assessment and Management of Psoriasis
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Reza Fazel-Rezai, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the quality of life and care for people living with complex, chronic skin
conditions like psoriasis. This I-Corps project will allow customer discovery
research for a novel mobile-based imaging system for the automatic objective
assessment of psoriasis lesions and management of the treatment. The solution
developed here provides a personalized chronic disease management which
objectively assesses the disease progression and improves accessibility to
clinical professionals as needed toward next-generation patient management
systems. Psoriasis is an incurable skin disease affecting millions in the US who
often suffer from severe physical pain, discomfort, social isolation, and
psychological distress. This I-Corps project provides an objective evaluation of
disease improvement that will enable physicians to keep track of treatment
efficacy for various systemic and biologic treatments for each patient. It will
potentially help the approval process for new treatments for dermatological
diseases by simplifying the process of disease evaluation during clinical
trials. It will provide patient empowerment for taking control and preventing
disease progression and improve treatment adherence thus reducing economic
burden for the patients and the health system.

This mobile-based imaging system includes a mobile app that utilizes a unique
image processing and skin analysis algorithm that captures consistent calibrated
images and specifies the severity level of the disease. The system determines
Psoriasis Severity Index Score (PASI), a clinically accepted psoriasis scoring
method, as a quantitative measure and based on clinical guidelines provides a
descriptive measure (mild, moderate, or severe) to the user. It will work with
different classifications of psoriasis disease, different skin types and under
varying light conditions. It is developed based on extensive research in image
processing techniques through extraction of features that efficiently capture
the information about variations in color, texture and border irregularities of
the diseased skin. Cloud based processing and storage of disease severity
information over time enable automatic tracking of disease progression and
associated prescription mapping provides the ability to assess the efficacy of
the treatment. In addition, to improve the clinical diagnosis of psoriasis a
multimode hyperspectral dermatoscope is used to accurately map the distribution
of skin melanin and hemoglobin.