* 1757745
* REU Site: New approaches to engineering cells, tissues, and organs
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Ian White, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 354,811.00

The goal of this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site is to
advance the training and to increase the diversity of the next generation of
researchers and regulatory engineers and scientists. Ten participants annually
will pursue independent research to advance fundamental science in cellular and
tissue engineering while developing new technologies, including 3D printing and
miniaturized biological organ systems. Participants will also gain valuable
training through workshops in the relevant technical skills, as well as lab
notebook skills, technical writing and figure design, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval process, and the responsible conduct of research.
In addition, leveraging a partnership between the University of Maryland and the
FDA undergraduate researchers will have the opportunity to contribute to the
science of regulating the translatable outcomes of fundamental research in cell
and tissue engineering. Thus, this REU site not only enriches future engineers
and scientists, it also emphasizes the development of the next generation
regulatory engineer and scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this REU site,
mentored undergraduate researchers will investigate innovative approaches to
engineer cells, tissues, and organs. Projects include organ-on-a-chip (including
blood-brain-barrier, gut, kidney, lymph node), cancer cell microenvironment on a
chip, biomanufacturing-on-a-chip, and 3D-printed tissue engineering constructs.
Investigations into each of these topics will add to the fundamental knowledge
in cell and tissue engineering while advancing the engineering techniques of 3D
printed biological systems and organ-on-a-chip systems. Furthermore, by
inspecting fundamental bioengineering questions through the lens of the FDA, the
investigations will enhance the field of regulatory science. Advances in
molecular-, cellular-, and tissue-based therapies present significant challenges
for regulation and commercialization; a well-trained workforce with perspectives
on technology advances, ethical issues, and health safety will be critical to
the proper translation of these technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.