* 1757887
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Changing Coastal Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Brian Roberts, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 288,343.00

The Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON), located in Cocodrie, LA,
will host a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program
during the summers of 2018-2020. Student interns in the LUMCON REU program will
have the opportunity to examine the impacts of environmental changes on a
diversity of ecosystems first hand as a result of LUMCON's unique location: in
the upper end of one of Louisiana's larger estuaries (Terrebonne-Timbalier Bay),
in the heart of coastal Louisiana's expansive marshlands, close to and between
two major rivers (the Mississippi and Atchafalaya) that dictate the coastal
ecosystems morphology, processes and functions, north of a productive coastal
ocean, and close to the Gulf of Mexico (as the ship steams) including its
deepest parts. This setting, combined with the expertise of the LUMCON faculty,
provides an opportunity for student interns to pursue independent research
projects focused on a dynamic coastal and marine ecosystem. The research also
will support science-based policy and management. The REU program will recruit
nationally and will host six interns each summer for a ten-week research
experience. Students will conduct independent research projects and participate
in a variety of professional development workshops, field trips and educational
activities. Most of the funding supports student stipends, room and board and
transportation expenses. This REU award contributes to the NSF goal of training
the nation's future scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will
have opportunities to conduct independent research in a variety of areas,
including river/ocean interactions, delta formation and degradation, coastal
loss and restoration, biodiversity, physiological, behavioral and general
ecology, geomicrobiology, biogeochemistry, and acute and chronic anthropogenic
and environmental impacts including climate change, eutrophication/hypoxia,
ocean acidification, and oil spills on coastal and marine systems. The
combination of mentor research interests and expertise with the diversity of
habitats in this region provides a unique opportunity for REU interns to
participate in a scientific research and professional mentoring program that
interfaces fundamental research questions in coastal and marine ecosystems with
problems central to science-based policy and management
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.