* 1757554
* REU Site: Princeton Neuroscience Institute Summer Internship Program
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Jonathan Cohen, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 346,380.00

This REU Site award to Princeton University, located in Princeton, NJ, will
support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2018-
2020. All students will be mentored by faculty associated with the Princeton
Neuroscience Institute (PNI) and will be offered a GRE preparatory course;
computer programming classes; and other activities designed to help summer
students prepare for graduate school. Summer researchers are required to
participate in laboratory and safety training seminars and a workshop on the
responsible conduct of research. PNI's summer research program is for
undergraduates who are seriously considering graduate studies in neuroscience.
PNI seeks to support students whose participation will add to the diversity of
researchers in the sciences, and are from institutions that do not have large
neuroscience research programs. Applicants are required to submit an online
application, an unofficial transcript and two letters of recommendation.
Completed applications are evaluated by program staff and faculty. Program
participants are asked to join PNI's LinkedIn group and create an ORCID account
to assist PNI in monitoring their academic and professional
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Given the importance of a research experience in the graduate
admissions process, this program will provide students with opportunities that
they might not otherwise be able to obtain. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://pni.princeton.edu/summer-programs/pni-summer-internship-program/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Jonathan Cohen at jdc@princeton.edu) or the Program
Director (Dr. Ed Clayton at ec12@princeton.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.