* 1757517
* REU Site: Research In Neutrino Astrophysics at the University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Madsen Jim, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2022
* USD 194,932.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
neutrino astrophysics at the University of Wisconsin-River Falls (UWRF). Six
undergraduate students per year will participate in ten weeks of summer research
on projects with the IceCube Neutrino Observatory or South Pole neutron
monitors. Students will be integrated into a research collaboration that opened
the field of neutrino astronomy, and work in a department where learning and
involving undergraduates in research are priorities. Students will acquire a
broad range of research skills, will appreciate the value of fundamental science
to society, and will be mentored on giving effective scientific presentations
and in communicating science. To broaden dissemination to enhance scientific and
technological understanding they will also be expected to give a presentation on
their summer work, and participate in outreach activates, including
presentations at the UWRF Upward Bound program. Benefits to society will occur
when REU students apply the skills they acquire in computer programming, data
mining and simulations to their STEM area of interest in their respective
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will choose from research topics
including neutrino astrophysics, cosmic rays, particle physics, and neutron
monitor physics. Students will make contributions to the IceCube experiment that
will help advance understanding and knowledge in the field of neutrino
astronomy. IceCube is a unique telescope located at the South Pole which looks
at the universe via neutrinos. Some students will work on projects involving the
South Pole neutron monitors. These monitors observe low energy cosmic rays and
monitor solar activity. With access to IceCube's data or data from the South
Pole monitors, high performance computing resources, and personnel, students
will make real contributions while acquiring research skills that are
transferrable to many fields of science, technology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.