* 1757316
* REU Site:   Mechanisms of Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Eduardo Robleto, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 393,700.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nevada Las Vegas will support the
training of ten undergraduates for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-20. The
goal of the program is to provide students with research opportunities that
investigate evolutionary change using prokaryotic, eukaryotic and viral models.
The REU program takes a holistic approach towards training undergraduates and
the co-curricular program integrates three modules: Working like a Scientist,
Science Communication, and Career Exploration. Working like a Scientist asks the
participants to take ownership of their project by formulating hypotheses,
planning experiments, analyzing data, and reading primary literature. The
Science Communication module provides the participants with the opportunity to
speak at group meetings, receive mentoring on preparing an abstract, and present
at the Summer Research Symposium. The Career Exploration module consists of
presentations by REU mentors on possible career trajectories, and the
participants initiating Individual Development Plans. Participants will use an
online IDP program to reflect upon and identify milestones required to achieve
potential careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students will be trained over the 3 year period. Students from underrepresented
groups, first generation to attend college, and those from colleges with limited
research opportunities are encouraged to apply. An underlying goal is for
participants to gain the required technical, communication, and goal setting
skills that allow them to transition from trainee to apprentice scientist.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Applications are accepted
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://faculty.unlv.edu/microreu/ or by contacting the PI, Dr. Kurt Regner at
kurt.regner@unlv.edu or the co-PI, Dr. Eduardo Robleto at
eduardo.robleto@unlv.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.