* 1757353
* RII Track 1: Water Security in Delaware's Changing Coastal Environment
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2024
* USD 19,200,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many coastal regions of the world
have entered a critical period when multiple threats endanger water security,
defined as the capacity of a society to safeguard adequate, sustainable
quantities of high-quality water. In Delaware, threats to water security relate
primarily to water quality rather than quantity, and arise largely due to human
behavior, whether from agriculture run-off, household wastes, increased salinity
due to the influx of seawater, or degradation of ecological systems from an
expanding human footprint. This project aims to understand the major threats to
Delaware's water quality and develop technical and policy solutions for meeting
the challenges imposed by them. The project's partner institutions - the
University of Delaware, Delaware State University, Delaware Technical Community
College, and Wesley College - propose a jurisdictional network of people,
institutions, data, and technologies directed at enhancing water security for
human, economic, and ecosystem health. The project's educational and training
mission will develop a diverse workforce capable of addressing water security
challenges in Delaware and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates engineering, natural
sciences, and social sciences to predict the often-coupled behavior of water
resources and people. Transformative strategies to be used include the
application of advanced data analytics, the development and deployment of new
sensor technologies, and the use of new techniques and models. The threat
assessment research thrust will increase scientific knowledge of salinization
mechanisms, salinity effects on nutrient mobility, modes of transport of
nutrients across coastal watersheds, and the resulting biogeochemical impacts
and ecological stresses. The solution development thrust will obtain behavioral
and policy insights needed for the development of effective and socially
acceptable solutions. The social dimensions thrust's outputs will include early
warning systems, decision-support tools, engagement of stakeholders and
partners, and information for the development of evidence-based policies and
programs. The project will also establish a crosscutting enabling cores thrust
to interact with the other three thrusts by developing inexpensive water quality
sensors, microbiome analysis methods, and novel data services and analytics.
Education, outreach, workforce development, and diversity programs, along with
strong statewide partnerships, are the foundation of all other project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.