* 1757009
* Collaborative Research: REU Site--Northeast Partnership for Atmospheric and Related Sciences (NEPARS)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Jason Cordeira, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 04/30/2022
* USD 182,530.00

The Northeast Partnership for Atmospheric and Related Sciences (NEPARS) Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site brings together two primarily
undergraduate institutions with atmospheric and related science programs to
expand research opportunities for a diverse population of undergraduate students
early in their education. REU interns will conduct research in areas of
mesoscale and synoptic weather, microclimates, biometeorology, mountain
meteorology, modern climate, and paleoclimate to better understand their
physical processes, their predictability, and impact on society. The primary
objective of the NEPARS REU site is to provide learning opportunities to a
promising and diverse group of undergraduates which will help them prepare for
careers in STEM fields by conducting quality scientific research, building
professional networks, improving leadership skills, and developing effective
communication skills. Each year a cohort of 12 undergraduate students will be
offered paid summer research positions with the NEPARS REU to work with faculty
mentors from Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges (HWS) and Plymouth State
University (PSU). Six students and three mentors will work at each research
location during a 9-week summer research program. Additionally, the NEPARS REU
will partner with the Mt. Washington Observatory and the Department of
Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences at SUNY Albany to offer interactions
beneficial to REU student professional development. The NEPARS REU site has a
primary focus on participation of rising sophomores and rising juniors that have
just completed their first and second year, respectively, at two-year or four-
year colleges and universities across the U.S. offering degrees in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site will be structured so that students work in
pairs with a mentor. This will allow the students to develop experience working
as part of a research team, while they will also learn autonomy of research with
their own individual project within the team. Modern technology, such as video-
conferencing, will be leveraged so that students can communicate across the two
locations. The REU site has 4 objectives for students: 1) interact with, learn
from, and conduct research investigations with their peers and dedicated mentors
through the use of REU pairings and a REU cohort across two research locations,
2) explore and discover the social, cultural, and geographic diversity of others
with comparable academic interests from similar or vastly different colleges and
universities, 3) cultivate a greater understanding of atmospheric and related
sciences beyond the extent taught in the undergraduate classroom and lab,
including the development and enhancement of research skills while working with
observational and modeling datasets, and 4) develop effective leadership and
communication skills through a series of workshops and opportunities to interact
with professionals within the scientific community. Additionally the REU site
has developed two objectives for the REU mentors: 1) increase interactions
between two primarily undergraduate institutions to strengthen the respective
programs and support new, as well as existing, faculty research collaborations,
and 2) enhance faculty development as undergraduate mentors through training,
faculty-to-faculty mentoring, and by working with a diverse student population
from a variety of academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.