* 1757653
* REU Site:Research Experience for Undergraduates at the Temple Materials Institute (TMI)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Stephanie Wunder, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2022
* USD 365,925.00

Non-Technical Description: It is critical in our society to expand research
opportunities to students in academic institutions where research and advanced
interdisciplinary studies do not exist. The broader impact of this project is to
create a pipeline of such students. By interfacing the REU students with TUteach
mentors (pre-service STEM teacher candidates) and summer high school students
(who will also be at Temple University during the summer), the project will
instill a culture where students at any level can help and inspire other
students, and learn how to explain complex topics/problems at a more easily
understood level. The students participating in this project will be working on
problems that are of fundamental scientific and technological interest, and will
advance the state of knowledge in areas such as energy storage and conversion,
plasmonics and nanomaterials. Faculty mentors have been selected based on their
significant contribution to these fields, as partially measured by their
citation impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The objectives of
the project are to immerse 10 undergraduate students each summer in an exciting
and broad range of materials research in areas that will have enormous societal
and environmental impacts. The project will interest the students in pursuing
careers in areas such as energy storage, nanomaterials and catalysis. The
students targeted for recruitment are those from two year undergraduate
institutions who will eventually pursue 4 year degrees, but who will otherwise
be at a big disadvantage compared with their peers at research universities. The
project will aim to show the students that research or teaching in STEM fields
is an interesting and rewarding career path for them, and that they can
contribute to developing a future with a cleaner environment, and one that
minimizes energy consumption. The project will be interdisciplinary, combining
faculty from the Departments of Chemistry, Physics and Engineering. In addition,
the project will form cohorts (along with other undergraduate summer students at
Temple) of students who will work together on interdisciplinary project that
integrate experimental and theory/modeling research. This will not only
necessitate the development of communication skills, but is also the way in
which many complex problems must be investigated. The activities for the
students are designed to (i) give broad overviews of selected topics, e.g. 'Why
must batteries be improved?', 'What is an oxygen evolution catalyst?', 'What are
molecular simulations?' (via brown bag lunches); (ii) introduce students to the
ethics and language of science, i.e. how to write papers and give presentations
(via a weekly structured course); (iii) show what information from state-of-the-
art instruments can provide (via Temple Materials Institute workshop); (iv) give
the students practice and confidence in presenting their own research and also
in asking questions to each other and faculty members (via presentations of
their research). All activities are timely, as many deal with today's common
energy challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.