* 1757390
* REU Site: Summer Research in Neuroimaging for Cognitive Neuroscience
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Stephen Engel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 349,153.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. This project will provide undergraduate students training in
methods to measure brain activity in humans. Measurements of brain activity are
key to a number of efforts that serve the national interest, including
diagnosing and treating a wide variety of diseases, enhancing effectiveness of
intelligence and military personnel, and developing improved educational and
training methods for both children and adults. The project will give intensive
training to a diverse group of undergraduate students over the course of a 10
week summer program. The training will allow these students to fill critical
needs in ongoing projects, both within and outside academia, and to eventually
develop their own projects advancing the national interest. The program will
begin with a 2-week full day boot camp to cover basics of the methods to measure
brain activity (such as magnetic resonance imaging, MRI), which will be followed
by an 8 week placement in a cutting edge research lab. Frequent seminars will
provide students with the additional professional skills they need to succeed in
their future careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroimaging is the most commonly
used laboratory tool in in Cognitive Neuroscience, helping to unify the field
and drive research progress. Undergraduate training in neuroimaging, however,
has lagged because of its high cost and relatively technical nature. This in
turn has made it difficult for researchers to identify and recruit students into
their Cognitive Neuroscience laboratories that use neuroimaging, while also
placing a large training burden upon them. The goal of the proposed program is
to overcome the training gap in neuroimaging for cognitive neuroscience. Over
the course of a 10-week summer program undergraduate students will gain both
detailed knowledge of neuroimaging methods and intensive experience using them
in a research project. A 2-week imaging boot camp will give trainees facility
with fMRI and EEG imaging modalities. Students will then conduct individual
8-week imaging-based research projects within top Cognitive Neuroscience labs.
Twice weekly seminars will cover topics such as research ethics, scientific
writing, crafting graduate school applications, and how to navigate laboratory
structure, as well as the content of the field. Additional group activities will
form a bonded cohort of trainees with common interests in neuroimaging. The
research projects in which trainees will participate will collectively drive the
field forward, rigorously testing key hypotheses with state-of-the-art methods.
The participating laboratories have well-documented track records of such
research. The labs span three subdomains in the field, perception, cognition,
and clinical applications, and examples of topics under investigation range from
techniques to enhance memory and creativity, to factors that underlie drug
addiction in teenagers, to interventions to aid speech comprehension in people
with hearing loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.