* 1757579
* REU SIte: Southeastern Undergraduate Internship in Nanotechnology (SUIN)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Quinn Spadola, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 360,859.00

The Southeastern Undergraduate Internship in Nanotechnology (SUIN) offers
undergraduate students from the southeastern US, including Puerto Rico, the
opportunity to perform cutting-edge research at the forefront of nanoscale
science and engineering (NSE). This rapidly developing interdisciplinary field
will allow students to see the connections across all science and engineering
disciplines and inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers.
Research results obtained by the undergraduate participants will help in the
advancement of understanding phenomena at the nanoscale and how this information
can be used to improve applications in electronics, health, safety, environment,
infrastructure (among others) important to our society. Thus, the SUIN program
contributes to the pool of scientists and engineers trained in STEM and NSE
meeting a national workforce. The internship program will take place at the
Institute for Electronics and Nanotechnology at the Georgia Institute of
Technology (IEN/GT), which is a site of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure (NNCI)and the home of the Southeastern Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC). Students will develop research and
communication skills through close interactions with faculty, graduate students,
and staff. The program allows students from traditionally under-represented
groups to form strong relationships with faculty, mentors, and staff and with
each other that will facilitate professional growth and continued education.
Professional development offerings will encourage and provide resources for
participants to seek advanced degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SUIN REU
program will provide thorough training and compelling hands-on research
experiences at state-of-the-art nanotechnology facilities (cleanroom,
characterization, and assorted labs) at the Georgia Institute of Technology. A
large pool of faculty, mentors, and staff, dedicated to engaging undergraduates
in research, will provide projects in a broad range of nanotechnology fields
with substantial interdisciplinary content (materials, electronics, biology,
chemistry, physics, etc.), allowing students from many majors to participate and
interact. There are four main goals of the SUIN program: 1. Provide an
experiential nanotechnology research project with training on advanced equipment
and tools which exposes students to the breadth of NSE research topics; 2.
Encourage students to explore and pursue graduate-level research and careers in
STEM and NSE; 3. Recruit and provide opportunities for women, minorities, and
students from non-research institutions; and 4. Enhance student communication
and presentation skills and understanding of ethical issues in scientific
research. Undergraduate participants will be safely and quickly trained to use
the processes and equipment needed to carry out their research projects. This
advanced training will allow them to complete a well-defined nanoscale research
project and present the results at the end of program convocation at a NNCI
site. The program participants will interact through weekly REU and lab group
meetings, as well as with other on campus REUs during professional development
offerings and seminars. These interactions will allow all interns to see the
breadth of nanoscale science and engineering and its applications across many
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.