* 1757232
* EARS:  A New Class of Millimeter-wave Phased Arrays for Secure High Data Rate Systems with Low Power Back-Ends
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,02/29/2020
* John Volakis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 375,113.00

This project will research innovative approaches to develop methods and
fabrication techniques to enable practical access to the millimeter wave
spectrum. This is important for handling future cellular data traffic, expected
to grow at a rate of 40-70% annually. As existing cellular bands are already
crowded, it is necessary to explore other bands, and more specifically
millimeter-wave (mm-wave) frequencies. Critical issues for practical millimeter
wave transceivers on handhelds are power and bandwidth handling. With this in
mind, the goal of this research is to explore power-reduced and hardware-reduced
transceivers to realize several concurrent high gain beams for multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) communications and to concurrently overcome propagation
losses for cellular connectivity. Achieving these goals is expected to have
transformative impact on all aspects of wireless communications. Concurrently,
the large available bandwidth at millimeter wave frequencies will enable secure
wireless communications systems for large data rate transfers. This research is
also in line with the National Broadband Plan aimed at providing every American
with affordable access to robust broadband services. Moreover, this project will
train students in emerging wireless technologies. Specifically, a variety of
outreach activities are planned to attract undergraduates and underrepresented
students in engineering, including high school students through summer camps and
wireless connectivity projects relating to 1) medical sensors, 2) short distance
communication applications and 3) energy harvesting using ambient RF signals.
Examples of societal impact include the realization of reliable high bandwidth
handhelds and secure wireless communications systems for large data rate
transfers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several innovations are proposed to enable
practical use of the yet unharnessed capacity of the mm-wave spectrum. Among
them are: 1) Novel ultra-wideband arrays that incorporate balanced feeds. 2)
Hybrid frequency and code division multiplexing for secure high data rate
communications to cover an unprecedented 10GHz bandwidth. 3) A beamformer
architecture that combines all antenna array signals into a single analog-to-
digital (ADC)/digital-to-analog (DAC) converter without loss of signal path
identity. This is done by introducing a novel on-site code division multiplexing
technique. It is noted that reduction of ADCs and DACs by a factor of 10 or more
implies proportional reduction in power usage and back-end circuitry. 4) Hybrid
integration of the phased array with complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) and/or III-V transceiver and associated digital beamforming processor.
Antenna arrays will be fabricated on low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC)
substrates and be vertically integrated to ensure the highest possible gain and
compactness. 5) Indoor/Outdoor measurements of the aforementioned integrated mm-
wave system to characterize the impact of line-of-sight (LOS) versus non-LOS
links, range, angle of arrival distributions, pathloss/shadowing, and delay
spreads. Such outdoor measurements have yet to be performed at mm-waves using
beamforming arrays.