* 1757962
* EAGER:  Function of a Swi2/Snf2 motor protein at the intersection between transcription and double-strand break repair in archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Cynthia Haseltine, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 12/31/2022
* USD 293,742.00

All cells must convert information encoded in their DNA into RNA or proteins
needed for cell growth and division. As they transcribe this information, the
DNA at these sites is at an increased risk for damage and/or breaks. How cells
balance repair of DNA breaks that occur during the process of transcription is
not well understood. This EAGER project aims to address this question by
examining the function of a conserved archaeal nucleic acid remodeling protein
in both transcription and DNA repair. These studies are expected to provide new
insight into the interplay between DNA-break repair and transcriptional
mechanisms, which will be relevant across all domains of life. The research
directly incorporates student participation at multiple education levels and
provides a strong laboratory education for graduate and undergraduate students
as well as high school sophomores and juniors. These students are integral
contributors to the project and will be trained in biochemical, molecular, and
cellular methodologies that will prepare them for careers in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To maintain genome integrity, cells must cope
with multiple DNA structures that arise during replication, transcription, and
repair. Transcriptionally active regions of the genome are particularly
susceptible to DNA damage because specific nucleic acid structures produced
during this process have the potential to become double-strand breaks. This
project will address the fundamental question of how cells contend with DNA
double-strand break damage at critical areas of active transcription. Archaea
are prokaryotic organisms distinct from eukaryotes and bacteria that share
attributes with both, making them particularly valuable models for understanding
the evolutionary persistence of not only individual proteins but also major
cellular mechanisms. In this EAGER project, the role of an archaeal Swi2/Snf2
motor protein in mediating DNA repair in transcriptionally active regions will
be investigated. The research will incorporate both in vitro biochemical and in
vivo cellular approaches to establish Swi2/Snf2 protein substrate preferences,
determine the effect of the protein on R-loops, and evaluate its involvement in
mediating DNA break-repair at a defined transcriptionally active site. This
project is expected to provide a framework for integrated studies of the highly
conserved Swi2/Snf2 family proteins functioning as nucleotide remodelers at the
interface of DNA break-repair and transcription.