* 1757383
* Collaborative Research: A Long Term Perspective on Agricultural Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Amber VanDerwarker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 38,814.00

Drs. Amber VanDerwarker, Douglas Kennett, and Heather Thakar will undertake
research to study early plant domestication and the transition from foraging to
food production over the last 12,000 years in Central America. Previous
scholarship has focused almost exclusively on maize domestication because of its
importance for the development of complex political institutions throughout
Mesoamerica. This project expands this narrow focus on maize to include the
broader forest and field agricultural regimes. Given that most of the world's
population today is supported by agriculture, there is enormous value in
reconstructing the breadth of ancient cropping practices along with the economic
and societal resilience it affords. Ancient analogs that integrate field
cultivation and arboriculture provide alternatives to modern mono-cropping in
ways that can conserve soil fertility and promote cultigen diversity.
Archaeology is well situated to inform modern farming practices through the
documentation of ancient agricultural practices worldwide and the reconstruction
of cropping strategies practiced through time in particular regional contexts.
In regions such as Mesoamerica, which represents one of the few primary centers
of plant domestication, the nature and timeline of the establishment and
augmentation of agricultural and arboricultural systems is of great
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. VanDerwarker, Kennett, and Thakar will
examine both the (1) adoption, spread, and intensification of field cultigens
within an evolving regional food economy, and (2) the extent of forest
management and change in tree cropping systems. The research team will
accomplish these goals through the analysis of well-preserved plant remains from
El Gigante Rockshelter in Honduras, which was occupied intermittently for 11,000
years. The research team is composed of archaeologists specializing in
archaeobotany, archaeometry, and Mesoamerican prehistory, and will employ an
integrated analysis of plant identification, metric analysis, and direct
radiocarbon dating. This combined approach will allow the team to not only
document the timing and use of new domesticates, but will also facilitate the
reconstruction of field clearance and woodland management practices that shaped
modern forest communities in this region. The team will thus generate new data
and interpretations for long-term human-landscape adaptations while creating
educational and training opportunities for students and local Honduran
stakeholder communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.