* 1757607
* REU:  Global Engagement Research Experience for Undergraduate Students in Food Security: A focus on Indigenous Vegetables and Grain Crops; the "Forgotten Food" Crops of Kenya
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Anne Osano, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 316,357.00

This REU Site award to Bowie State University (BSU), located in Bowie, MD, will
support the training of 8 students in a 10-week program during the summers of
2019-2020. The program is hosted by the BSU Department of Natural Sciences and
the University of Nairobi in Kenya and Egerton University (Kenya, Department of
Crops, Horticulture and Soils). Students spend the first week at BSU for an
intensive boot camp on the history and culture of Kenya, safety,
ethics/responsible conduct of research, basic scientific principles, and skills
to prepare for the research project. The next 8 weeks are dedicated to research
at Egerton University (Year 1) or the University of Nairobi (Year 2) with field
sampling trips, followed by a concluding week at BSU where students present the
results of their research. Research focuses on the genetic, physiological, and
ecological mechanisms that underlie crop responses in a changing environment
with a goal towards food security. Example student projects include molecular
studies of aflatoxin grain contamination, sweet sorghum genotypes and ecotypes,
genetic and metabolite diversity of the indigenous vegetable Cleome gynandra,
analysis of sweet sorghum enzymes, and characterization of Rhizobia species in
Dolichos lablab. Workshops focus on professional skills (e.g., literature
review, experimental techniques and design, data collection and analysis, oral
and written presentation skills). Recruitment and participant selection will
focus on students with outstanding research potential with special emphasis on
students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 16 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research
is conducted, analyzed, and communicated. Many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences, and some will publish the results in peer-
reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used
by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of program. Students are required to be tracked after the program
and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. This
REU is also supported by the Division of Human Resource Development in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources. More information is available by
visiting https://www.bowiestate.edu/academics-research/colleges/college-arts-
sciences/departments/natural-sciences/research-experience-for-underg/ or by
contacting the PI, Dr. Anne Osano at
aosano@bowiestate.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.