* 1757503
* REU Site: Summer Research Program in Experimental and Theoretical Physics at The University of Texas at Dallas
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Jason Slinker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2021
* USD 266,961.00

This award supports a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics at the University of Texas at Dallas. The site supports between six and
eight students per year for ten weeks of research in projects in experimental or
theoretical physics. Student participants will develop research, problem solving
and communication skills by immersion in cutting-edge research in physics and
through a series of workshops and seminars. As well as developing independence
in research, working in the framework of a mentor's research group along with
graduate students, participants will build teamwork skills. Special workshops
will increase awareness of graduate school, academic and non-academic career
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be able to choose from research
topics including biophysics, computational physics, condensed matter physics,
cosmology and gravity. The key objectives of the program are to instill in the
participants the excitement of research and careers in science, and to build
their research skills both independently and in research teams. The development
of core, transferable research skills such as data analysis, computer
programming and statistics will underpin each of the research projects and will
be the focus of student workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.