* 1757995
* REU Site: Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science at Oregon State University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Holly Swisher, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2022
* USD 288,249.00

The REU program in Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science at Oregon State
University, run by members of the Mathematics Department and the School of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, will provide an 8-week summer
research experience to 10 undergraduate students during each year of the
program. We aim to broaden participation in the mathematical sciences by
recruiting and encouraging women, members of underrepresented groups, and
students at institutions with limited research opportunities to pursue careers
in mathematics. We also aim to advance undergraduate research in mathematics and
theoretical computer science, with a particular focus on number theory,
probability, and cryptography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will include
presentations by students, a colloquium series by local faculty, panel
discussions on topics such as conducting research and applying to graduate
school, and detailed publishing guidance. The students will work in groups of
two or three on a research project supervised by a faculty mentor. The projects
are designed to be at the forefront of modern research in their respective
areas, but also at a level which is reasonable to expect significant progress by
undergraduates in 8 weeks. Successful progress on these research problems will
advance mathematical knowledge and will further the role of undergraduates in
modern mathematical research. Our program is designed to provide a glimpse into
the life of a research mathematician, and to provide support and guidance for
students interested in careers in mathematics. Through our recruitment, we hope
to increase the numbers of women and underrepresented groups who pursue careers
in mathematics and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.