* 1757857
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at Indiana University
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Christopher Connell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This award supports the continuation of the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in the Department of Mathematics at Indiana
University, Bloomington. Preserving a valued tradition dating back nearly fifty
years, the program will offer an intensive summer research experience for
talented undergraduates working with some of our internationally recognized
faculty on unique projects. By providing a well-balanced and structured
environment together with milestones for both oral exposition and written
reports of results, the IU REU lays the groundwork for student success in their
projects. Participant success is further encouraged by the fostering of an
intense and collaborative work environment, and most importantly through the
regular working sessions with mentors. In addition to the abstract problem
solving skills and intellectual stamina gained by the participants, their
professional development is enhanced through regular research presentations by
faculty members, LaTeX writing workshops, tours and demonstrations of Indiana
University's libraries and extensive computational resources which are made
available to participants, and other similar opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Indiana University REU program provides an immersive environment
with a strong mentorship oriented approach to research. Eight students will work
one-on-one or in small groups with faculty members, spending eight weeks on IU
campus tackling carefully selected research problems. Typically, these problems
are unsolved, accessible, and mathematically significant. Topics in pure
mathematics are chosen from a broad swath of fields including: geometric group
theory, differential geometry, combinatorial topology and knot theory, surgery
theory, logic, complex and symbolic dynamics, aspects of category theory and
several more. Topics in applied mathematics are drawn from areas in computer
science such as recursion theory or homotopy type theory and areas of
mathematical biology and chemistry from polymer organization and cell function
to phylogenetics. Housed together in a dormitory and sharing common office
space, students benefit from being immersed in mathematics collectively and from
the spontaneous collaboration that naturally follows. Students disseminate their
findings by delivering presentations at a statewide undergraduate mathematics
research conference, giving formal lectures to peers, faculty, and graduate
students, and writing a formal self-contained research report detailing their
findings. Some of these reports are expected to develop into peer-reviewed
research papers. Ultimately, the program significantly helps prepare
participants to be the leaders in today's highly technical workforce, whether in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.