* 1757514
* REU Site: Program in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Paul Laybourn, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 346,310.00

This REU Site award to Colorado State University, located in Fort Collins,
Colorado, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2018-2020. The program scientific focus is in the area of molecular
life sciences. Participants present their research findings orally, by poster,
and in a written final report. Experiential challenges supplement educational
visits to government labs and biotech companies and participation in science
communication panels, ethics and professional development workshops. The success
of the program is assessed through surveys, focus group discussions and the
CIMER REU Common Assessment tool. Participants should have completed freshman
biology and chemistry. Participants must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents
and registered as undergraduate students. Students from underrepresented groups
or those attending colleges with limited research opportunities are strongly
encouraged to apply. Applications are evaluated by the Program Director, the Co-
Director and faculty mentors. Student application is evaluated holistically
based on GPA, courses completed, personal statement, and letters of
reference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. The REU site goal is to train undergraduates in research while
advancing discovery and understanding. This REU site strives to broaden the
participation of members of underrepresented groups (minority students,
particularly from four year colleges with limited research opportunities).
Society will benefit from a greater number of better-trained molecular
bioscience researchers and educator role models, particularly from
underrepresented groups. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after participation in the program to determine their career paths.
Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.bmb.colostate.edu/undergraduates/reu/program-description/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Paul Laybourn at paul.laybourn@colostate.edu) or the co-
PI (Dr. Thomas Santangelo at Thomas.santangelo@colostate.edu).