* 1757957
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemical Assembly at the University of Nebraska
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Mark Griep, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2023
* USD 339,683.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Nebraska, located in Lincoln, NE, supports the training of 10 students over 10
weeks during the summers of 2018-2021. The principle investigator is Professor
Mark Griep. This site is supported by the Division of Chemistry in the
Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate. It offers undergraduate
participants original research projects in the area of chemical assembly. These
projects, tailored to inspire student curiosity, give students the opportunity
to advance knowledge in areas such as biosensors and energy storage. While
engaging in chemistry research, students learn about careers in the chemicals
industry, the graduate school application process, and how to disseminate
research results through publications and presentations to a variety of
audiences. Participants take part in the Upward Bound Math Science (UBMS)
program, where participants teach and develop scientific communication skills
with economically disadvantaged high school students. The UBMS program helps to
inspire high school students to pursue science related degrees, propagating the
impact of this REU site. In a commitment to broadening participation in STEM,
this program supports women and students from underrepresented groups. By the
completion of this program, students develop complex analytical and
communication skills and have a deeper knowledge of science and engineering
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site offers a range of research projects
in chemical assembly, extending from the controlled assembly of colloids on
surfaces, to the synthesis of assembled nanoscale catalysts, and to the directed
modification of biomolecules. These projects guide participants from
undergraduate textbook learning to discovering and solving challenging research
problems. Students also develop skills by communicating their research to
scientists and the public, take part in field trips to explore industrial
careers, learn about careers in academia, and are trained in ethics in research.
Best practices gleaned from this site are shared with the wider REU community
through publication of a book on chemistry REU sites in an effort to disseminate
evidence-based, effective methodology more widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.