* 1757930
* REU Site: Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 400,970.00

The goal of Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in the
Geosciences is to engage 10 Colorado community college students per year through
participation in authentic research in the geosciences with emphasis on locally
relevant topics. Particular focus will be on engaging and supporting rural
Colorado students. RECCS participants will be mentored through a 9-week research
project overseen by preeminent scientists and will receive skills and scientific
communication training over the course of the summer. It is expected that the
research experience will guide students toward science degrees at four-year
institutions. Rigorous program evaluation will provide data to measure the
effects of engaging these students in research experiences and subsequent
student interest in pursuing STEM-focused four-year college or graduate school
degrees and scientific careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summer research
program will engage a diverse cadre of community college , especially those from
rural Colorado, in the sciences. Community colleges tend to be diverse in terms
of race, ethnicity, and income level, and often include rural, first-generation
college or veteran-status students. Studies show that research experiences help
students improve their understanding of the scientific process, their ability to
read scientific literature critically, and to integrate theory and practice.
These students are more likely than others to pursue future research experiences
or enroll in graduate school programs. The RECCS research environment is
designed to provide several layers of mentoring by scientists, professional
development trainers and RECCS staff, as well as peer-group interaction, to
instill a sense of belonging within the student cohorts. This structure will
ensure that participants receive the support they need to succeed in their
projects and to gain confidence in their scientific ability. The involvement of
scientists from Colorado University Boulder and local Federal Laboratories will
provide students with access to cross-disciplinary and cross-agency expertise
and foster connections and collaborations between those research groups. In
addition, RECCS also provides mentoring opportunities for early career
scientists. The engagement of students from different community colleges will
have a ripple effect on the students around them, hopefully inspiring other
community college students to pursue science internships and other research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.