* 1757365
* REU Site: Puerto Rico Chemical Learning Integrated in Materials and Biomolecular applications (PR-CLIMB)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Arthur Tinoco, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 297,183.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site is at the University of
Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras, located in San Juan, PR, and is lead by Arthur
Tinoco. It supports the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the summers
of 2018-2020. At this site, supported by the Division of Chemistry in the
Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate, students engage in fundamental
studies of materials and biomolecules for potential applications in water
purification, energy storage, sensing, drug design, and drug delivery. Students
further develop their skill sets for the biotechnology and pharmaceutical fields
through seminars and hands-on workshops. Alongside scientific research, students
take part in professional development seminars on topics including ethics in
research, strategies for producing high quality research and public
presentations, and funding opportunities for graduate work. Students also engage
in discussions with professionals in academia and industry about their
respective job fields. The participants are recruited from a diverse pool of
students with an emphasis on students from two and four-year institutions with
limited access to research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students who
participate in this nine-week program engage in fundamental exploratory efforts
using state-of-the-art technology for chemical and/or computational
characterization and for engineering materials and biomolecules for potential
applications in the areas of water purification, energy storage, sensing, drug
design, and drug delivery. The students work directly with advanced graduate
students or postdoctoral researchers who serve as co-mentors alongside
experienced faculty. Students also participate in workshops on topics such as
high-resolution NMR spectroscopy, chromatography, peptide
synthesis/purification/identification, X-ray characterization, electrochemistry,
nanoparticle characterization and surface analysis. Participants take part in a
series of seminars and develop science communication skills through oral and
poster presentations on their research. Ultimately this site prepares students
for graduate school and careers in Puerto Rico's pharmaceutical and
biotechnology industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.