* 1757493
* REU Site: Computational Modeling and Simulation in Applied Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Wandi Ding, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 241,470.00

This interdisciplinary REU Site program will prepare undergraduates for
research, employment, and advanced study in the emerging discipline of
Computational Science - a discipline that is critical not only for the
advancement of science, but for our nation's economic growth and security. With
the advent of more powerful computing tools, computational science is often
described as the third pillar of science, joining the traditional pillars of
theory and experiment. Students will work in small groups and with faculty
guidance while employing innovative computational tools to solve problems in
applied science. Students will acquire essential technical and professional
skills by participating in faculty-led workshops. One-on-one interactions with
faculty mentors, collaboration between students, independent inquiry, and guided
training will provide students with valuable skills in programming,
computational modeling, simulation, data analysis, visualization, research
management, and communication. The research conducted through this REU Site
program has the potential to produce high-impact, publication-quality results in
the fields of materials science, epidemiology, cellular biology, and molecular
dynamics. Targeted recruiting and selection efforts will ensure that under-
represented constituencies, including women, minority, first generation college,
and veteran students, are well represented in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU Site program is to
recruit undergraduate students into the fast growing, and interdisciplinary
field of computational science. Faculty will mentor students as they integrate
computation and mathematical/statistical theory to solve problems in molecular
dynamics, epidemiology, materials science, and cellular biology. Research
problems will form and test mechanistic hypotheses about the structure of
biological proteins, yield insights into the dynamics and control of diseases
that pose a major threat to public health, address computational topics in the
design of optical and acoustical metamaterials, and investigate fundamental
principles of cellular decision-making. These research projects, together with a
series of bi-weekly workshops, will support innovation by training students in
a) Python programming, including best practices for readability, documentation,
sharing, and structuring of code and b) tools (e.g. MDAnalysis, Comsol, and
Pymol) and techniques (e.g., machine learning, sensitivity analysis, and
parameter estimation) for model development, data analysis, and visualization.
Students with a strong background in mathematics, computer science, physics, or
biology, and an intense interest in applied science and computation are
encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.