* 1757757
* I-Corps: Nanofluidic System for Rapid DNA Sequencing and Biomolecule Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
revolutionize the healthcare industry by providing a fast, low-cost, and easy-
to-use DNA sequencer to healthcare providers for clinical use. DNA stores the
genetic information of all living organisms and the successful development and
commercialization of a fast and low cost DNA sequencing technique will be
important not only to the advancement of fundamental medical research in
biomarker discovery and oncology studies, but also to the future development of
personalized medicine which relies on treating individual patients based on
their unique genomic composition. The commercial sequencing methods such as SMRT
and NGS require either a high sequencing charge or a large capital investment.
The nanofluidic based DNA sequencer is a ?direct' sequencing technique that can
be significantly more cost effective than the existing commercial methods.

This I-Corps project opens up a new path for DNA sequencing. The core technology
of the nanofluidic based DNA sequencer is a nanochannel chip with embedded
nanoelectrodes capable of determining the sequence a single-stranded DNA by
measuring the unique electron tunneling properties of individual nucleotides.
Manufacturing of the nanofluidic system involves a sequential application of
MEMS processing, atomic force microscopy, and focused ion beam. The nanofluidic
system belongs to a group of novel chip-based DNA sequencing techniques which
utilize disposable chips to directly measure the DNA sequence. Unlike the
commercial methods which rely mostly on biochemical processing, the chip-based
methods do not require time-consuming sample pre-processing steps such as PCR
nor expensive facilities for parallel processing. The nanofluidic system
measures the electron tunneling current of a single DNA strand as it is dragged
across a set of nanoelectrodes. Since the molecular structures of the
nucleotides in the DNA strand are different, their tunneling currents are also
different. The nanofluidic system determines the DNA sequence by analyzing the
variation of the tunneling current along the DNA strand.