* 1757690
* Transfer-to-Excellence (TTE) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Bokor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2024
* USD 359,952.00

The United States is facing a severe deficit of scientists and engineers in the
upcoming decades. One of the main reasons is the lack of diversity of students
in STEM disciplines. Typically, students attracted by STEM majors are primarily
male and come from non-Hispanic white or Asian populations. The need for
appealing to and retaining students coming from non-traditional backgrounds is
evident, given the shifts in the U.S. population demographics. As a way to
address this issue, the Transfer-to-Excellence Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (TTE REU) program of the University of California, Berkeley (UC
Berkeley) supports retention in STEM fields by offering hands-on research
opportunities in nanotechnology, biotechnology, and robotics to increase the
confidence and persistence of community college students in their pursuit of
science and engineering education and ultimately technical careers. The nine-
week program brings 10 students per year from California Community Colleges
(CCC), the largest community college system in the U.S., to UC Berkeley, where
engineering faculty will host students in their world-class research
laboratories and mentor them in their own research projects. These schools will
provide a diverse pool of talented future researchers, including low-income,
first-generation, and/or underrepresented minority community college students,
who might not otherwise have the resources or opportunities to pursue careers in
research. Students will be engaged in leading-edge engineering research
projects, including nanotechnology, energy-efficient electronics, biotechnology,
sustainable engineering, body-centered sensors, mechatronics, greenhouse gas
research, and optoelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The renewal TTE REU program
is a comprehensive summer research program that provides: 1) challenging
research projects in leading edge engineering research laboratories; 2)
counseling to prepare students to transfer to competitive four-year
colleges/universities in science and engineering majors; 3) enrichment
activities to build students' confidence to continue in science and engineering;
and 4) exposure to the diversity of professional career opportunities that apply
science and engineering training. The TTE program partners with advisors of
Berkeley's Transfer Alliance Project to support its community college
participants for another academic year following their research experience as
the participants seek to transfer to a baccalaureate program. The main
objectives of this renewal program are increasing 1) the number of
underrepresented students who will seek and receive a baccalaureate degree in
STEM and 2) the diversity of students pursuing graduate degrees in STEM
disciplines. To accomplish these objectives, this REU Site will bring together
the Center for E3S, UC Berkeley Transfer Alliance Project (TAP), and UC Berkeley
engineering faculty. TAP will be a collaborator to provide academic advising and
enrichment programs that prepare community colleges students to be competitive
applicants to four-year colleges. Each TTE REU participant will be paired with a
faculty member and a graduate student or postdoc, who will guide the student in
independent research activities, at laboratory meetings, and through one-on-one
mentoring meetings. TTE REU participants will also participate in academic and
professional development activities to prepare for a baccalaureate degree and
career in science and engineering. In addition, all TTE REU participants will be
enrolled in a new online mentorship program after their summer research stay
ends. This online program will enable a long-term, sustained and formalized
mentoring relationship with all participants with the goal of retaining and
further stimulating the students' interest in graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.