* 1757418
* REU Site:   Great Lakes ecosystem research to build foundations for successful STEM futures
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Deric Learman, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 288,273.00

This REU Site award to Central Michigan University (CMU), located in Mount
Pleasant MI, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2019-2021. Research is conducted at CMU's Biological Station, Beaver
Island, MI. The interdisciplinary research theme will document how unprecedented
changes currently underway (e.g. invasive and non-native species and
anthropogenic stress) in the Laurentian Great Lakes, one of the world's most
important and threatened freshwater ecosystems, are affecting the structure,
function, and ecosystem services of the nearshore environment. Students will
develop research projects (ranging from limnology, fisheries biology,
conservation and spatial ecology, molecular ecology, and microbial ecology) in
collaboration with CMU faculty to gain hands-on experience in all parts of the
scientific process, from experimental design through data dissemination and
translation. Students will engage with multiple stakeholders (e.g. government,
private, and cultural) who have interests in Great Lakes resources and will
learn to relate their science to these groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from Tribal Colleges and
Universities and schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The educational
goal is to inspire, encourage, and prepare students to pursue careers in STEM
via meaningful research experiences. Students will be exposed to, and prepared
for, scientific careers and/or graduate education. Additionally, students will
develop communication skills to convey scientific information to the general
public and thereby learn how to become scientific leaders and environmental
advocates in their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://se.cmich.edu/cmubsreu or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Deric Learman at deric.learman@cmich.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Kevin Pangel at
pangl1k@cmich.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.