* 1757572
* REU Site: SURFO-Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* David Smith, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2021
* USD 255,812.00

Research training for the next generation of marine scientists and
oceanographers is an important focus for the Division of Ocean Sciences. The
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at University of Rhode
Island's Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO), which is located in
Narragansett, RI, will be renewed for two years. The program, called the Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography (SURFO), will bring twelve
undergraduates to the GSO campus each summer. Each student will work with a
research advisor and a graduate student mentor to develop and conduct a hands-on
project in an area of oceanography appropriate to each student's background
(mathematics, physics, biology, geology, chemistry, computer science, or
engineering) and interests. The intended outcome is to develop each student's
interest in ocean science research, to prepare them for careers and/or graduate
studies in the field and to retain them in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct independent research
projects with the guidance of research mentors and will participate in a variety
of professional development activities, including workshops on laboratory
safety, scientific ethics, scientific writing, the graduate school experience
and career options, as well as a seminar series, field trips and outreach
events. The program conducts a national search for applicants and seeks to
engage students who are from schools with limited research opportunities. Most
of the funding provided supports student stipends, housing and travel to attend
the program. This project supports the national goals of developing the next
generation of scientists and the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SURFO REU Site will provide a total of twenty-four undergraduates with
internships over the two-year period. Research opportunities available to REU
students at GSO primarily focus on quantitative aspects of oceanography (e.g.,
physical oceanography, geophysical fluid dynamics, population genetics and
biodiversity, biogeochemical cycling) in sub-disciplines that reflect the
breadth and inter-disciplinary character of the field, and which closely
parallel the strengths of GSO. Faculty and Marine Research Scientists conduct
research on oceanography topics as diverse as atmospheric chemistry, algal
blooms, benthic pelagic coupling, biogeochemical cycling, ocean and coastal
circulation, global climate change, instrument development, ecosystem dynamics,
geophysics, ocean optics, numerical modeling, remote sensing, pollution,
seafloor mapping. Additional faculty researchers and over thirty graduate
students are involved in research in the Department of Ocean Engineering located
at the Bay Campus. GSO also maintains close ties with the College of the
Environment and Life Sciences (CELS on URI main campus) that has over ninety
faculty and strong research programs in marine biology, fisheries, aquaculture,
geology, and marine affairs, with many who use seawater facilities at the Bay
Campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.