* 1757780
* REU Site:  Evolution, Ecology, Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Elena Kramer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 289,594.00

This REU Site award to Harvard University, located in Cambridge, MA, will
support the training of eight students for ten weeks during the summers of
2019-21. The main goal of the Evolution, Ecology, Environment (E3) REU program
is to leverage the extraordinary resources of the Harvard Department of
Organismic and Evolutionary Biology (OEB) and the interdepartmental Harvard
University Center for the Environment (HUCE) to increase the number of students
who pursue research careers in the fields of evolution and ecology, with a focus
on students of color and first generation students. In addition to an intensive,
mentored laboratory experience, E3 REU students will participate in several
types of ancillary activities: 1) professional development seminars, including
on ethics/responsible conduct of research, 2) the Leadership Alliance National
Symposium (LANS) research and mentoring conference, and 3) diverse cohort-
building activities. Applicants are invited to apply through the Leadership
Alliance Program and indicate their interest in the Harvard E3 REU. Our goal is
to reach students at undergraduate institutions who demonstrate an interest in
evolution and ecology but may have limited access to this type of research on
their home campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 24
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained over the lifetime of the program. By participating in the REU Site
program, undergraduate students will have cutting edge research experiences
within the context of a strong mentorship community made up of faculty, graduate
students, and peers. This experience will demystify the graduate school
application process, the student experience, and longterm career opportunities,
with a particular goal of building confidence and psychological
resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
https://gsas.harvard.edu/diversity/outreach-programs/summer-research-
opportunities-harvard, or by contacting PI (Elena Kramer,
ekramer@oeb.harvard.edu), or the Co-PI (Sheila Thomas,
sthomas@fas.harvard.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.