* 1757305
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Creating Labor Markets in Rural Tanzania
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Dahyeon Jeong, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

Title: Agricultural Labor Markets

Abstact

Efficient labor markets are important for ensuring that the right kind and
quantity of labor is employed in the right jobs to increase productivity and
ensure economic and social progress. Agricultural labor markets often do not
function as well as markets for many goods for a variety of reasons, including
the high cost of job search. The result of this is that employment, productivity
and incomes in the agricultural sector, especially in low income countries,
remain low. This research project will collect original data and use innovative
methods to test two possible reasons why agricultural labor markets do not
function efficiently to channel labor to where it is most needed: (i) high costs
of job search and (ii) lack of credit to finance employment. The results of this
research will provide inputs into the formulation of labor market policies
generally and agriculture particularly. The results are applicable to labor
markets in low income countries and would thus help the US target its aid
policies more efficiently. By improving the efficiency of agricultural labor
markets in low income countries, the results of this research would indirectly
help US businesses market agricultural inputs to farmers in these countries as
more and appropriate type of labor is employed in this sector.

Efficient agricultural labor markets are important for two reasons: labor is
the most important input in rural economies in LDCs and labor misallocation
decreases agricultural productivity. This proposal will use experiments to test
two sources of labor market frictions: high search cost due to limited
information and credit constraints faced by farmers. The researchers will design
and implement a village level randomized field experiment in which treated
groups receive job announcement information via text messages, a hiring loan, or
both and a control group that does not receive anything to test these
hypotheses. The experimental design will allow the researchers to identify a
causal effect of search cost and credit constraint on rural labor markets. The
design can be adapted to study other markets and the results could provide
economists a better understanding of the frictions in rural labor market. This
is an important contribution to the development economics literature. The data
collected by the researchers will be made available to future researchers. The
results of this research will inform US policies on rural labor markets as well
as guide the formulation of US aid policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.