* 1757916
* REU Site: Computational Methods for Discovery Driven by Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Kathryn Jensen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2022
* USD 370,390.00

The objective of this project is to continue the University of Minnesota (UMN)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in which students engage in
research that develops computational methods for scientific discovery across
disciplines that are driven by big data. Closely mentored by Computer Science
and Engineering (CS&amp;E) faculty, each student will contribute to active
research that addresses open questions in computational complexity, machine
learning, parallel and distributed computing, mobile and cloud computing, or
graphics and visualization. A UMN REU participant might use observation data to
simulate crowd behavior, analyze genome sequence data to better understand
microbial communities, develop tools to analyze chemical-genetic interaction
networks, improve spatial perception in a virtual environment, develop
visualization techniques to better understand massive data sets, enhance
parallel distributed processing through algorithm development or by harnessing
the computational power of a network of mobile devices, or use graph-based
approaches to better understand climate change. The diverse research of CS&amp;E
faculty represents collaboration across the University with faculty in genetics,
chemistry, climate science, neuroscience, architecture, medicine, and biomedical
engineering to propel all of these disciplines and computer science towards
previously unattainable insights and discoveries. In this 10-week summer
program, in addition to immersion in research, students will receive technical
training and professional development that encourages and prepares them for a
sustained career in the sciences. This includes Big Data Colloquia,
Communicating Science workshops, career mentoring, and public dissemination of
research findings. Towards an objective of increased participation and broader
impacts, this program will bring together nationally recruited students and
those from UMN and local institutions to establish a cohort with diverse
academic and cultural backgrounds.
http://reubigdata.cs.umn.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
University of Minnesota (UMN) REU Site program are to (i) intellectually engage
and excite participants to motivate their commitment to and pursuit of a career
in the sciences, specifically to foster academic persistence, (ii) increase
participation in and contribution to the sciences by women and underrepresented
minorities in computer science, (iii) train students for sustained contribution
to the sciences, particularly in computational methods for big data
transdisciplinary research, and (iv) professionally prepare and mentor
participants for a career in the sciences, i.e., to teach participants to be
effective communicators, be career savvy, and versed in the ethics of science.
Towards these objectives, in a 10-week summer program students are immersed
daily in research addressing open questions in computational methods for big
data. Throughout the summer, each student is closely mentored by a faculty
member and graduate student. Program activities help students quickly
acclimatize to research and independent work, and most importantly, motivate and
prepare students for academic persistence and a career in the sciences.
Activities include research tutorials, a Big Data Colloquium series, a
Communicating Science workshop series, career mentoring, and a poster
presentation at a campus-wide research symposium. The program combines a non-
resident and resident program to create a cohort of up to 25 students: 2 from
local institutions, 8 from a national recruiting effort funded by this grant,
and 15 students through other funding mechanisms. This combined program
increases diversity, improves program and impact sustainability, and capitalizes
on economic efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.