* 1757924
* Education Innovation Initiative - Summer Undergraduate Research Institute EI2 - SURI
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Guy-Alain Amoussou, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 332,997.00

The Education Innovation Initiative (EI2) - Summer Undergraduate Research
Institute (SURI) in Cybersecurity (EI2-SURI) is designed to implement, in part,
Bowie State University's first signature program - Education Innovation
Initiative - to develop students' identities as scientists/researchers with the
integration of carefully selected support activities that enable students to
feel and become part of an active research community. EI2-SURI is significant
because it supports two critical needs in cybersecurity and workforce
development in relation to securing the national defense. As the various types
of cyber threats continue to increase, so has the demand for trained
cybersecurity professionals. This has resulted in a serious shortage of
qualified professionals in the private and public sectors. EI2-SURI proposes to
build the capacity for ten traditionally underrepresented minorities annually.
The fellows are recruited from the Mid-Atlantic region, the District of
Columbia, Maryland and Virginia (DMV) and Prince George's County where Bowie
State University resides. Fellows are provided with real-world research
explorations and experiences in cybersecurity. The results of planned projects
will be enhanced student competency in research-related activities, advanced
academic skills and increased diversity in STEM fields. The success of the
proposed efforts is sustained by the integration of evidenced-based strategies
related to establishing communities of learning. These communities include
faculty mentors, graduate and undergraduate fellows and cybersecurity alumni,
who are actively engaged in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EI2-SURI is actively
engaging a diverse community in the investigation of cybersecurity issues
related to vulnerability tracking in industrial control systems, analysis of
software vulnerability; secure software design and testing, malware detection,
and network security.  Specifically, the following interdisciplinary cyber-
related investigations optimize the best solutions to prevent and detect
vulnerabilities: (1) Vulnerability Tracking in industrial control systems for
Supervisory, Control, and Data Acquisition Systems designed to mitigate the risk
to critical control systems, by demonstrating the feasibility of monitoring the
execution of embedded Linux Kernel modules; (2) Analysis of Software
Vulnerability to use visual analytics to deliver actionable security
intelligence to defend software systems; (3) Security of Blockchain to compare
various hardware, encryption algorithms, and implementation approaches; and (4)
Network Systems' Data breaches to assess current vulnerability management
protocols. The method used will include approaches such as data analytics and
event log mining. Additionally, project-based learning will be used to actively
engage the research community. To support the research and successfully build
the community, the program planning and organization is structured around key
activities including the program start-up package and orientation; research
project development and implementation, weekly start up, weekly research forum;
various seminars and workshops such as attending graduate school and monetizing
intellectual property, industry and agency visits; and the program culminating
research symposium. One expected outcome is that fellows publish their research
findings and explore ways to patent their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.