* 1757443
* REU Site: Teamwork in Biology Inquiry: From Molecules to Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Wendy Smith, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 427,602.00

This REU Site award to Northeastern University, located in Boston, MA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-
2020. Undergraduates will participate in team-based interdisciplinary research
across biological levels while exploring related research questions from
different perspectives. While each participant will have a specific project with
a mentor, participants will work in pairs with pairs of faculty advisors and
other lab members. This program will encourage both scientific inquiry and
professional development, promoting a deeper understanding of the
interconnectedness of life and also preparing students for advancement in
research. Research project topics will be diverse (e.g., skin regeneration,
microbial biofilm formation, social immunity, mitochondrial DNA inheritance,
termite-mammalian fungal interactions). Student growth will be fostered by
mentored group meetings as well as expert-led interactive sessions to improve
leadership abilities and performance in research teams. Additional enrichment
will include workshops on graduate studies, career opportunities, ethics and
responsible conduct of research, and seminars exploring interdisciplinary
themes. Each participant will present a poster of the individual project at a
summer research symposium.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Among the target populations will be returning
veterans and reservists enrolled in undergraduate STEM programs, and students
underrepresented in the sciences including first generation college students and
underrepresented minorities. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
will be encouraged to present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by
all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.northeastern.edu/cos/biology/undergraduate/reu-site/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Wendy Smith at W.Smith@northeastern.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Rebeca Rosengaus at
r.rosengaus@northeastern.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.