* 1757773
* REU Site: Software Assurance and Security in Emerging Technologies: Research Experience for Undergraduates
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Renee Bryce, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 372,996.00

This project establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
the University of North Texas on the topic of software assurance and security in
emerging technologies. The proposed REU Site will i) expose undergraduate
students to hands-on research experiences in security and software development
and testing, ii) enhance their research experience, iii) promote their interests
in research, and iv) seed their desire to pursue advanced degrees and careers in
CS. The project aims to increase the number of students that pursue graduate
studies by exposing students to exciting and attainable research goals, giving
them the opportunity to build their resumes with research experiences and
publications, and providing a supportive community of peers and mentors that
encourage them to be successful. By introducing competition and collaboration as
drivers for research innovation, the project intends to achieve a unique and
cohesive undergraduate research experience that entices students to pursue
graduate studies. Students will gain a background to learn state-of-the-art
technical knowledge, the ability to think independently, and the confidence to
work on challenging problems. As a result, they will be better prepared to enter
the graduate school pipeline. The project's broader significance and importance
are that it trains three diverse cohorts of ten students recruited from
minorities and underrepresented groups including female students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merits are that it exposes
students to an intense research experience that combines security and software
development and testing research with emerging technologies (i.e., web, mobile,
and wearable applications) as artifacts used for evaluation of the different
research techniques. The intellectual merit of this REU site is reflected in
each individual research project, which has interesting and crucial applications
that participants can easily identify with. Some projects, designed for highly
talented students, seek to advance knowledge and understanding by addressing
unsolved problems. Others seek to employ security and testing techniques to
solve the real-world problems. The projects will also apply an intellectual
approach to encourage students through active learning, free and open exchange
of ideas, team spirit, and recognition and rewards for achievements.
Specifically, the objectives are to foster i) creative and independent thinking,
ii) problem-solving skills and hands-on experience, iii) enthusiasm and
confidence, and iv) critical thinking, communication and organization skills.
The student projects are designed to include individual and collaborative tasks
that foster a strong connection to the group and a better understanding of the
larger context of their work. Students work in collaborative teams that explore
research questions and innovations in the areas of message integrity,
computation on encrypted data for different resource-constrained devices, test
suite prioritization, and test suite reduction. The students will investigate
cryptographic algorithms and protocols that are suitable for mobile and wearable
environments and aim to achieve end-to-end message level integrity and to
support computing on encrypted data. They will also conduct empirical studies
that hypothesize about the fault detection effectiveness of test suite reduction
and test suite prioritization by coverage-based metrics. Empirical studies
examine the techniques in the context of emerging technologies (web, mobile,
wearable, etc.).