* 1757952
* REU Site: Data Science in the Life Sciences, Environmental Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Lisette de Pillis, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 349,101.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in Data Science in the Life
Sciences, Environmental Science and Engineering at Harvey Mudd College will
provide nine undergraduate students per year from across the United States with
opportunities to learn and apply data science concepts and tools to projects in
the (i) biological and life sciences, (ii) environmental science and (iii)
engineering and industrial applications. The students can apply to the REU
program by ranking their favorite projects and recruitment will consider the
applicant's skills and likelihood of having a successful experience as well as
attracting students from traditionally underrepresented population groups,
including women, African American and Hispanic/Latino students. The
participating students will spend a total of 10 summer weeks at Harvey Mudd
College (a member of the 5 Claremont Colleges that also include Claremont
McKenna, Pomona, Pitzer and Scripps) and will work on their research projects
with an experienced faculty member. They will be supported by state-of-the-art
infrastructure such as computing facilities, libraries and laboratories.
Students will also engage with their peers in a series of data science and
professional skill workshops. Social events and educational field trips round
out the program. Domain-specific research using data science methods and tools
provide the students with important skills that prepare them for graduate
studies and are useful for analyzing and solving problems in many disciplines
and environments. The professional skill modules, including research ethics,
time management and scholarly publishing, will complement and enrich the
technical training and further equip students with competencies needed to become
well-rounded, successful researchers. As computational capacity continues to
expand at a rapid pace, there is an increased need for data science literacy
among all scientists and engineers. Exposing the students to relevant concepts
and tools in data science through this REU program is aimed at encouraging them
to pursue careers in STEM-related fields and helping fill the persistent skill
and labor gap in the U.S. by producing graduates who can have an impact on
science and technology in the public and private sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects that are part of the Harvey Mudd
College REU program in Data Science in Life Sciences, Environmental Science and
Engineering address new and open problems in different STEM disciplines using
computational, mathematical and statistical methods and tools. The participating
faculty mentors maintain active research activities in these tracks that offer
data and hypothesis-rich environments for exploration and in-depth analysis.
Example projects include the analysis of flow cytometry data, modeling of
epidemiological and public health data such as surgical cataract coverage in
developing countries, spatial data modeling and analysis for health risk
assessments related to unconventional oil and gas development, testing hybrid
mathematical models in atmospheric chemistry, and developing predictive models
for sports coaching such as real-time coaching recommendations based on play-by-
play basketball data. These projects involve high-dimensional data analytics and
use different techniques to extract insights such as simulated data to validate
mathematical models of effective health intervention coverage, multivariate
spatial regression and Kriging, time series analysis of cloud-chamber data on
air pollution models, and algebraic analysis of partially ranked data coupled
with predictive techniques used in machine learning to predict player
performance. In addition, students will also receive hands-on training in R,
Python, MATLAB, become well versed in Linux command line processing, batch
scripting, data movement, use of XSEDE supercomputers, and version control. They
will be exposed to big data environments such as Hadoop and Spark, learn to use
relational databases and write SQL and PostgreSQL queries, and work with ESRI's
ArcGIS to model high-resolution spatial data. While the technical training and
participation in real research processes is the main component of the REU
program, necessary soft skills for successfully developing and running research
programs are taught as well. This includes the group's participation in Harvey
Mudd College's successful weekly Stauffer lecture and open lab series as well as
a series of custom-tailored workshops involving additional personnel from the
College's academic departments and the Writing Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.