* 1757650
* NSF REU-Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates site to create "Pathways Opening World Energy Resources" (REU - POWER)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Bradley Lehman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 361,454.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates site to
create "Pathways Opening World Energy Resources" (REU - POWER), located at
Northeastern University, Boston MA. The REU-POWER site will provide rising
sophomores, juniors and seniors with a summer-based experience working with
professors from across the College of Engineering, engaged in research on topics
pertaining to the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) Grand Energy Challenge.
There is special emphasis on the recruitment of underrepresented minority (URM)
students, and because of this, REU-POWER can particularly create professional
development programs that address particular barriers of URM STEM populations.
Specifically, REU-POWER will (1) provide annual financial and mentoring support
for 10 qualified URM scholars; (2) impact the well-documented U.S. national need
for a more diverse energy workforce; and (3) help advance research to make
renewable, solar and clean energy more prevalent in society, to help solve the
NAE Grand Energy Challenges. The success of the REU-POWER model will be
disseminated to other institutions to follow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other unique
aspects of the REU-POWER site includes the development of: 1) hands-on short
courses with experimental renewable energy labs for all participants; 2) formal
mentor training that includes educational modules for mentoring URM engineering
students; 3) extensive professional development seminars; 4) formal research
training including daily reflection journals, poster presentations and technical
writing of a research digest with a faculty member; and 5) recruitment from a
unique pool of highly talented URM students that have already expressed interest
in energy careers. A primary goal of the REU-POWER site is to excite and engage
undergraduate students to pursue careers in the energy field, whether in
research labs, industry or to continue their studies in graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.