* 1757799
* REU Site: Back to the Future
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Michael West, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2022
* USD 356,710.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The National Science Foundation 'Back to the Future'
Research Experience for Undergraduates Site at the South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology will expose a diverse group of undergraduate students, including
Native American students and women, to the research environment and to help them
develop as professionals. The focus of the student research is the study of
metals and metal production, an area of vital technological importance to
national interest in areas of defense, manufacturing, resource utilization, and
energy. Students will also participate in research projects with the National
Park Service focused on the preservation and analysis of historical artifacts as
well as activities that highlight the importance of metals throughout history,
hence, the 'Back to the Future' theme. This context will give students a broader
appreciation for the nature of current and future research as well as the impact
of engineering in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The REU
Site: Back to the Future at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology is a
10-week summer project that will provide research opportunities in metallurgical
and materials engineering that enhance the global competitiveness of the nation
in the areas of advanced materials and manufacturing, mineral beneficiation and
resource recovery, strategic metals, and energy-efficient materials. The project
will address challenges faced by future engineers by providing a research
experience within a unique cultural and holistic framework. This framework will
be provided by teaming with the National Parks Service on research that has
historical significance and innovative activities led by faculty from
engineering, science and the humanities that explore the interface between
engineering, history, and art (the Back to the Future theme). Students will
participate in an integrated supplemental training program that nurtures their
research skills and career development. This program includes advanced technical
communications training, workshops and seminars to give historical context for
current trends in research, as well as activities that connect students to each
other and the community. The diverse nature of program activities will attract
students of varied background and intellectual typology. The Site will provide
opportunities for underserved students in engineering with an emphasis on two-
year community and Tribal Colleges from the region. The site will also
strengthen ongoing Native American NSF initiatives in the region including All
Nations Louis Stokes, Tiospaye, and the Oglala Lakota College / South Dakota
State University / South Dakota School of Mines Pre-Engineering Education
Collaborative (OSSPEC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.