* 1757812
* REU Site: Integrating Research in Sustainable Energy and the Environment across Disciplines  (IR-SEED)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Kai Jin, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 410,206.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas A&amp;M
University-Kingsville (TAMUK) seeks to provide impactful summer research
opportunities and experiences to underrepresented students in the emerging
fields of sustainable energy and environment. This will enable them to
understand their own levels of aptitude and interest in a career in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and give them the tools to
prepare for the next stage in education and career development. The intellectual
merit of this REU Site lies in constructing a new and critically needed pipeline
for the next generation of sustainable energy researchers, equipped to address
the broad theme of sustainable energy research and social and environmental
issues, which is a theme of local significance and global implications. The
research, educational, and career mentorship provided by the program is
envisioned to stimulate the students to look at their academic work in a new
light and to provide a spark for possible careers in academic research or
industrial innovation. Participating students will tackle various research
topics by working collaboratively with other participants, interact with faculty
mentors and Ph.D. students from different engineering departments, and develop a
holistic perspective of sustainable energy and environment research. The site is
designed to guide students to work both independently and collaboratively, with
each team consisting of two undergraduate students. Each student will be
required to write a conference paper style report of their research for
publication and deliver an oral and poster presentation of their summer research
projects in the final competition at the end of 10-week program. The REU site
fits within an initiative in the College of Engineering at TAMUK to involve
undergraduate students in research and boost the participation of US citizens
(especially Hispanic and female students) in graduate research. The REU site
builds on a vision of grooming aspiring researchers from underrepresented groups
to embrace the challenge of energy research and developing future leaders who
proactively contribute to the nation's energy self-reliance
agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site is designed to develop and implement
a model environment for multidisciplinary collaborative efforts where research
and education are tightly integrated around the different facets of sustainable
energy and environment research. Ten students from various engineering and
science departments will be recruited through a nationwide search with special
emphasis on Hispanic and female students. It features a 10-week
interdisciplinary team approach to mentoring students on different research
projects. The proposed sustainable energy research consists of three major
research areas: 1) Energy Harvesting, 2) Energy Utilization, and 3) Energy
Policy, Environmental and Social Impacts. The specific objectives are: 1)
providing research opportunities in the different aspects of energy research to
undergraduate students, especially Hispanic and women; 2) increasing the number
of underrepresented students who participate in graduate education; and 3)
building collaborative links among faculty and students from different
engineering departments at TAMUK. Through participation in cutting-edge research
with faculty mentors working at the forefront of their respective disciplines,
students will engage in complex scientific studies on sustainable energy and
environment research topics. The program is structured to teach students how to
formulate research questions and develop/modify research plans with the guidance
of their research mentors. In addition to the hands-on collaborative research
experience, technical and social activities will be incorporated into the
program to provide students with a solid foundation in analytical, writing, and
presentation skills, helping to enhance the interaction between REU students and
faculty mentors. The students will also gain experience with reporting and
discussing their research results in multiple
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.