* 1757627
* Chemistry and Biochemistry REU Site to Prepare Students for Graduate School and an Industrial Career
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Daniel Ess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 331,950.00

This award to Brigham Young University from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at
the National Science Foundation supports a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site with a Research Experience for Teachers (RET)
component led by Professors Daniel H. Ess, Rebecca Sansom, and Kara J. Stowers
at Brigham Young University. To address the national need for a highly qualified
science workforce, this site annually provides ten REU and two RET participants
with a ten-week summer program to conduct individual chemistry or biochemistry
research projects using state-of-the-art equipment and techniques. Research
projects emphasize problems relevant to industrial chemistry. Visits to chemical
and biochemical companies, along with workshops and seminars on current and
grand challenges in industry, effective communication, team interactions, and
delivering scientific presentations, prepare REU participants for graduate
school and future industrial careers. Inspiring the next generation of
scientists, both REU and RET participants work with the BYU summer chemistry and
biochemistry camps for youth. REU recruitment emphasizes participation by
students from two-year colleges and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants complete independent research
projects in the following areas: design of miniaturized mass spectrometers and
micrometer microfluidic devices, biochemistry biomarker assays and drug
discovery, inorganic homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyst development,
computational chemistry, organic anticancer and vaccine synthesis, physical
spectroscopy, materials creation and characterization, renewable energy, and
water containment detection. These independent technical research projects,
facilitated by BYU chemistry and biochemistry faculty, and student mentors,
provide participants with rich experiences in problem solving and scientific
discovery, preparing them to earn advanced degrees and enter the industrial
chemistry workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.