* 1757929
* REU Site: Collaborative Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2022
* USD 370,000.00

Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has the potential to affect several real world
domains such as hospitals, homes, schools, offices, or infrastructure sites
where robots are uniquely able to assist a human team member to achieve a common
goal. However, there are many challenges for effective human-robot collaboration
that impinge on this promise, such as communicating with human partners using
natural language, providing information to an operator through a visual
interface, or quickly providing information so that a person is able to offer
assistance. We propose an HRI direction that provides several closely-related
projects for undergraduate research experiences. The project team will mentor 10
undergraduates each summer, pursuing research directly impacting assistive
robotics, in the following technical areas: development of autonomous robot
capabilities targeted for care environments, such as networked robotics devices
cooperating with care professionals to perform complex tasks in support of aging
in place; human command-and-control infrastructure for operations that utilize
robots for technology support; and connectivity and security for a network of
robots, computers, and embedded devices collectively used to mission-critical
goals while utilizing unused parts of the wireless spectrum. The goal of this
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site is to develop and evaluate
robotic systems whose function is to help bridge the human-robot collaboration
gap and achieve the above objectives efficiently and effectively. The summer
activities for undergraduates will provide hands-on science and engineering
activities related to current research projects, and professional development
with training sessions on writing a graduate school application and how to apply
for fellowships to support graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site
will develop new autonomous robot capabilities and supporting network and data
science technology to address real-world challenges of operating autonomous
systems in hospital, clinic, home, and infrastructure environments. This site
will develop solutions for semi-autonomous robot behavior with humans in the
loop, wireless network connections in rapidly changing frequency domains, and
processing high volumes of real-world data. The proposed site presents five
projects related to these computing domains: Empirical Study of Socially-
Appropriate Interaction; Language-Based Human-Robot Collaboration; Autonomous
Robotic Exploration of Underground Mine Environments; Multi-robot Collaboration
and Human in-the-loop for Safe, Accurate and Reliable Inspection; and Network
Management of Heterogeneous Robotics Devices in a Wireless Environment. This REU
site links these projects together through the common objective of developing
assistive technology. Students will develop domain knowledge, mathematical
skills, and interdisciplinary competency. The possible intellectual properties
resulting from this project will include study on long-term human-robot
interaction, wireless networking for challenging signal environments, autonomous
robot capabilities for human-robot teaming, and data science tools for
processing high volumes of data from real-world systems.