* 1757451
* REU Site: Sustainable Land and Water Resources: A Community-Based Participatory Research Experience for Undergraduates
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 637,401.00

This REU Site is focused on training students in the implementation of
Sustainable Land and Water Resources. Its goal is to introduce undergraduate
students to key elements of research on land and water resources essential to
improving management practices, with a focus on Community-Based Participatory
Research (CBPR) and diverse interdisciplinary research teams. Each year,
students divided into three teams to conduct research that integrates Earth-
surface dynamics, geology, hydrology and other disciplines. Research teams are
hosted by two Native American communities (Confederated Salish Kootenai Tribes
and Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa) and the University of Minnesota
to work on projects developed in collaboration with the tribes' resource
management divisions. This REU Site incorporates an interdisciplinary team-
oriented approach that emphasizes quantitative and predictive methods, CBPR,
indigenous research methods, and traditional ecological knowledge. The REU Site
encourages participation by underrepresented students and students who are
unsure about how they fit into the world of science to pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site introduces a new paradigm for undergraduate
research incorporating place-based and community-based participatory research.
The PIs are building knowledge on increasing participation in REUs by non-
traditional students and students from groups underrepresented in STEM. The
researchers have developed a proven, structured, scaffolded method of teaching
science research and writing, which takes students who may have never written a
technical research paper and provides them with the skills and support needed to
routinely deliver high quality intellectual outputs and increase their
intellectual self-confidence in the process. The mentoring plan for the REU Site
is focused on helping mentors to: a) prepare to mentor highly diverse teams of
students; b) support mentors to deal with the expectations, issues and
challenges that arise when you are mentoring teams that have a large number of
nontraditional students; and c) help mentors get acculturated to conducting
research on tribal lands and with Native people. The students, faculty, graduate
and post-doctoral mentors, tribal professionals and other community members are
intimately engaged in CBPR, developing projects that inherently support tribal
resource management goals. Results are disseminated to tribal authorities and
community members as well as the broader scientific community. Outcomes of this
REU research paradigm will concurrently establish a legacy of broader scientific
capacity within reservation communities and provide pathways to scientific
discoveries with a shared foundation of trust and
respect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.