* 1757884
* REU Site: Making Future Communities: Infrastructure and Interaction Design for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* David Wilson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2023
* USD 332,997.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site engages a diverse group
of 10 undergraduate students each summer in an intensive 9-week research
experience. The goals of the REU Site program experience are to increase
interest in attending graduate school, to enhance preparation for careers in
research and innovation, and to broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in the field of computing. To achieve these goals, the REU participants work
together with faculty, graduate students, and peers to gain experience and
better understand how computing research can have societal impacts. Each project
has a theme that explores how the increasing connectivity of everyday physical
objects will help to shape future communities. Research project work provides
participants with a firsthand opportunity to apply and expand their knowledge,
to better understand the societal and global impacts of research, to bring these
experiences back to their home institutions and to apply lessons learned to
envision and make future communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
REU Site at the University of North Carolina-Charlotte (UNCC) is to create a
collaborative community that supports and engages a diverse group of
undergraduate students in research to advance the state of the art in cyber-
physical systems. The technical approach involves an exploration of the
underlying infrastructure for cyber-physical systems, as well as the
applications and interactions that are enabled by that infrastructure. The Site
research theme of Making Future Communities through cyber-physical systems
targets advances in interdisciplinary research across the focus disciplines of
human computer interaction, security, networking, and visualization. The REU
Site mentoring approach aims to cultivate a community of learning through
regular training in research skills; tiered mentoring of faculty, graduate
students, and peers; and communicating and sharing research results. The UNCC
REU Site emphasizes participation of promising students from underrepresented
groups in computing and from institutions that have limited research programs.