* 1757362
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Testing a new hypothesis for global patterns in leaf form using Viburnum (Adoxaceae)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Erika Edwards, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2018
* USD 65,616.00

Scientists have long recognized a global pattern in leaf shape between tropical
and temperate climates: tropical leaves have smooth margins while plants living
in cold regions have leaves with teeth or lobes, like a birch or a maple. The
relationship is so strong that paleobotanists use leaf shapes in fossil floras
as a proxy for temperature, allowing for estimates of climate change through
time. But there is still no mechanistic understanding of why this relationship
exists. The PIs hypothesize that the evolution of complex leaf margins in
temperate plants results in part from the way that young, immature leaves are
packed into overwintering buds. This is inspired by recent mathematical models
of efficient leaf folding within buds, and by observations of within-plant
differences in leaf form. Viburnum is a lineage of ~170 species of woody shrubs
and trees that have shifted between tropical and temperate forests many times
throughout the past 50 million years, and exhibit the expected changes in leaf
shape. The PIs will document timing of growth, leaf lifespan, and patterns of
leaf-packing within buds, and gather additional data on a suite of relevant
morphological and physiological traits on a set of Viburnum species spanning the
tropical-temperate gradient. They will also continue long-term phenological
monitoring of ~30 Viburnum species in a common garden. This is a highly
collaborative and interdisciplinary project, involving biologists from four
other nations as well as an applied mathematician. The PIs will also develop
educational modules designed for elementary school children aimed to bridge the
gap between math and biology, using origami and basic geometric principles to
understand common leaf shapes.