* 1757792
* REU Site: Preparing a Diverse Workforce through Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Research
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 448,583.00

This award is for renewed funding of the REU Site at Center for
Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA) at
Northwestern University (NU). The REU site takes advantage of CIERA's
interdisciplinary nature, providing students with access to mentors across
departments, and insight into the cross-departmental connections between
astronomy and astrophysics and other STEM disciplines. The program will be
offered annually to 8 students. The available mentors come from the departments
of: Physics and Astronomy; Applied Math; Earth and Planetary Science; and
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Available research projects cover
astronomical topics and methods ranging across theory, computation,
instrumentation, and experimentation. The students will have access to a wide
range of cutting-edge facilities, including instrument labs and the Quest high
performance computing facility at NU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
exposure, the REU students will learn how astronomical studies prepare them with
a wide range of skills and can lead them to diverse professional paths. NU
CIERA's REU site gives students the experience of doing interdisciplinary
astronomical research, exposes them to a wide array of exciting research areas
in astrophysics, and builds a community among the students and NU researchers.
The Site recruits a significant fraction of its participants from
underrepresented groups in STEM by partnering with Chicago-area minority serving
institutions. Through high-quality research experiences and profesional
development activities, the NU CIERA REU Site will contribute to the development
of a diverse, sophisticated, and highly competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.