* 1757344
* Mapping the Inventor Gender Gap: Analyzing Regional &amp; Organization Variation in the Inclusivity of the Innovation Economy
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Fiona Murray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 520,037.00

This project examines the gender gap among US inventors by mapping the patenting
activity of female versus male inventors (FIs vs MIs) across regions (cities,
economic areas, states), sectors, and types of organizations. It is critical to
understand these patterns to explain the very low presence of female inventors
in today's innovation economy. This problem holds significant implications for
the inclusive growth of economies. To better understand the gap, this project
examines the differences in the regional context where female and male inventors
operate. While prior work has explored the role of location (e.g. agglomerations
of firms) on innovation, little is known about the role of location on gender-
based inventor activity. The goal of this project is to fill this hole by
examining key questions such as: Where are female inventors located? What
locations and fields have a higher relative presence of FIs (i.e., higher
inclusivity)? Within given regions what types of organizations are more
inclusive? Do regional industry clusters support higher rates of FIs? How do
female versus male inventors source knowledge inside their organizations and in
the external environment? To answer these questions, the research develops new
indicators on the geography of inventors and their patents by gender. The
mapping of inventors is extended to European Union countries to aid
comparability in FI inclusivity across countries, and inform policies to promote
gender equality. The project also develops an inventor mapping tool that
provides interactive maps and visualizations that help policy makers, firms, and
researchers to understand variation across regions in the participation and
performance of inventors by gender. In this way, this project can inform the
design of policy initiatives (e.g., programs to mobilize inventors) to influence
locational attributes and firm practices that could reduce the inventor gender
gap and, ultimately, reduce the inefficiencies in the match between science and
technology skills and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address our core
questions regarding the gender gap, this project develops new statistics on
female inventor inclusivity (e.g., percent of inventors that are women and the
percent of patents attributed to women) at the organization, field (industry
cluster and technology class), and regional levels since 2000 onwards. These
inclusivity indicators, together with data on STEM education and occupations,
will identify what locational and organizational attributes are associated with
female participation. Beyond detailed descriptive analysis and visualizations,
the new data is used to assess a variety of explanations for the gender gap in
patenting. First, women are not selecting STEM-based skills that are compatible
with participation in patenting. Two, women in STEM are under-represented in
patent-intensive fields and organizations. Third, women are more geographically
constrained than men (e.g., due to lower income or family obligations), and so,
they could benefit specially from being in locations and organizations where is
easier to access knowledge and collaborate with nearby inventors. Overall, this
work offers important policy and managerial advice to improve the inclusivity
and performance of the innovation economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.