* 1757636
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in High Efficiency Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,12/31/2022
* John Lee, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 12/31/2022
* USD 368,076.00

Information Technology (IT) systems range from small embedded systems such as
smartphones to large computer facilities such as data centers. Whether small or
large, IT systems proportionately use lots of energy. They also waste a lot, as
in shorter battery life or higher data-center operating costs, so improving
their efficiency fulfills a critical national need. The objective of this
project is to propose solutions to increase energy efficiency in IT systems by:
1) developing a well-trained student workforce, and 2) proposing new techniques
and approaches capable of reducing energy consumption and losses. Students will
be introduced to the research area of applying power optimization techniques to
IT systems. The target populations are underrepresented students and those from
institutions that do not offer PhDs. In addition to academic mentoring by
Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) faculty, this project
includes mentors from industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, IT curricula
have been developed with disciplines that focus on parameters, such as
performance and runtime optimization. Little or no attention has been devoted to
achieving energy efficiency and consumption thresholds, especially from the
software and algorithmic perspectives. This project will provide original
experiences and singular opportunities for undergraduate students to work on
innovative strategies to reduce energy consumption and losses in IT systems. In
addition to the potential change in the career paths of the selected students,
this project suggests how the electrical and computer engineering curricula can
be impacted to incorporate energy efficiency in both hardware and software
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate novel
methodologies in reducing energy consumption and losses within IT systems, which
can be accomplished with a multidisciplinary approach. Topics will range from
hardware to software solutions with efficiency as the main figure of merit.
Traditionally, Multiple-Voltage Multiple-Frequency (MVMF) has been used to
reduce energy consumption in computing systems. This project proposes MVMF2,
which not only dynamically changes the computer clock frequency, but also
dynamically changes power supply switching frequency for further loss reduction.
While MVMF2 is considered a hardware optimization managed by software, the
second research topic - a higher efficiency power supply based on a new power
converter design - is purely a hardware solution. The third and fourth research
topics are software solutions to reduce energy consumption in high memory demand
applications and processing big matrix multiplication, respectively. The fifth
research topic deals with energy consumption reduction techniques in wireless
Internet of Things devices by modeling and optimizing power saving modes, such
as reduced power operation, cyclical sleep, among others.