* 1757018
* The Human Dynamics of Security Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Louisa Lombard, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 141,547.00

This project explores what ethical and cultural factors drive the long-term
stability of security infrastructures in post-conflict settings. Peacekeeping
has become the signal means of conflict mitigation in the world, and it has
recently undergone radical shifts. No longer just keepers of signed peace
agreements, peacekeepers today are asked to enforce and protect amid ongoing
hostilities. How do peacekeepers develop ethical compasses to navigate a work
landscape that has such divergent moral signposts? Peacekeepers deployed with
the mandate of civilian protection are daily confronted with situations in which
their roles and authorities are ambiguous. Protection has become the ideal,
intended to make peacekeeping an expression of human solidarity, but
stakeholders and peacekeepers argue vehemently over what it entails. Why a
person might put on a uniform and fight for one's country or kith, or for one's
survival, has by now been well-plumbed. But we have little understanding of
motivates the ethical decisions that underlie peacekeeping missions, especially
since there is such disagreement as to whether these goals are best achieved
through bellicose means. How do peacekeepers make decisions in carrying out
their work? What happens when they are tested by situations that stress their
moral claims? Findings will be disseminated to organizations and individuals
that influence policy debates related to peacekeeping and conflict resolution.
The project also provides training for undergraduate and graduate students in
methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis, and broadens the
participation of groups traditionally underrepresented in science. It also
improves scientific infrastructure through international scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Louisa Lombard of Yale University
examines how peacekeepers make ethical decisions, and navigate situations where
formal policies stress moral and ethical claims. To understand the domains that
span the psychological, the social, the situational, and the materiality of
ethics and decision-making in a hierarchical context, this project uses
participant observation, interviews, and document analysis, primarily based in
peacekeeping training and post-deployment centers as well as in several
countries to which peacekeepers are deployed. Sites are selected for their
ability to provide a full contrastive range of ethical decision-making
frameworks. She follows Rwandan peacekeepers, known among peacekeepers as
professional but also willing to use force, through their training and post-
training deployments. Rwanda, site of the world's most famous failure of
peacekeeping, has in the 23 years since its genocide publicly vaunted its
protection-based vision for peacekeeping. The data collected from in the Rwandan
field research experiences will be analyzed and compared against data collected
from interviews with Indian peacekeepers, who have been involved in peacekeeping
for far longer and are far more critical of aggressive peacekeeping. The project
will make important contributions to anthropological and broader scientific
theories of morality, humanitarianism, and ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.