* 1757989
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates in Food Safety, Food Engineering, and Nutrition
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Satish Parulekar, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 355,470.00

This REU Site at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) will focus on training
undergraduate students in food safety, food engineering, and nutrition. This
area is of national importance and has direct implications on the safety and
nutrition of our food supply. Therefore, the problems solved by the students
would have a significant impact on the society. The intensive research
experience provided by this program can greatly influence the future of young
engineers and scientists. By performing research projects related to food
safety, engineering, and nutrition, which affects the entire population of the
U.S., we have the potential to advance the discipline while influencing young
engineers in their career. The program will target both students with or without
previous research experience. This focus combined with support from community
college programs will impact students at critical career transition points. In
addition to targeted research experience, students will be provided with a
broader understanding of the field of food science (emphasis on food safety,
food engineering, and nutrition), which can help them understand the
opportunities available in this field. The students will undergo rigorous
mentoring and professional development training which will help them in fine-
tuning the skill sets required to become successful scientists, engineers, and
entrepreneurs. Food science is a STEM area which produces far fewer graduates
than the available job opportunities. This REU program will inspire students to
work in the food science area and prepare &amp; inspire the next generation
workforce to keep our food supply safe and nutritious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goals of the proposed NSF REU site are: 1) to provide hands on research
experiences to undergraduate students in food safety, food engineering, and
nutrition, 2) to provide exposure to these fields, 3) to systematically train
the students in transforming basic research ideas into practical applications
aimed at solving real world problems for improving the safety and nutrition of
our food supply through interactive seminars and discussions, 4) to
systematically mentor the undergraduate students to hone their research and
professional skills through mentoring workshops, student
presentations/discussions, interaction with graduate students, and K-12
outreach, 5) to expose the students to broader fields of food science to enhance
their knowledge in this field (with special emphasis on food safety, food
engineering, and nutrition) through seminars and tours, and 6) to train the
students on research and professional ethics. Projects are offered in a broad
range of topics including applications of novel food process engineering
technologies (high pressure processing, pulsed light processing, and cold
plasma) for ensuring food safety and nutritional quality, addressing special
issues in food safety such as with low moisture foods, understanding
physiological chemistry of plant bioactives in humans, modeling &amp; simulation
of food processing technologies, developing affordable nutrition through kinetic
hydroponics, and repurposing of food ingredients for controlling pathogenic
biofilms. Eight mentors from Illinois Institute of Technology and the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration will be mentoring ten undergraduate students for a ten
week period during the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.