* 1757815
* REU Site: Biomedical Materials, Devices, Therapeutics, and Emerging Frontiers
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Mary Staehle, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 361,237.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Rowan University
funds student development and the advancement of interdisciplinary biomedical
engineering and science research focusing on biomedical materials, devices,
therapeutics, and emerging frontiers. The Site will provide opportunities for
ten, diverse undergraduate participants each summer to conduct novel, cutting-
edge research under the direction of faculty mentors from three colleges - the
Henry M. Rowan College of Engineering, the College of Science and Mathematics,
and Rowan's Cooper School of Medicine - and eight academic departments, with the
Department of Biomedical Engineering as the lead. Students will participate as a
group in weekly seminars and workshops that provide comprehensive professional
development and allow cross-cultivation of the individual research experience.
This REU Site will advance the field and prepare students for future advanced
careers in engineering and science relevant to medicine and healthcare and
provide a holistic experience for development of strong research skills.
Enhancing or improving quality of life and health benefits society and is a
cross-cutting theme in the National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenges
for Engineering in the 21st Century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU
Site is to provide undergraduates an exciting research experience that will
prepare and motivate them for further education and careers in science and
engineering as well as advance and support novel biomedical engineering and
science research. The REU Site cohort will be a diverse group of undergraduate
participants from four-year institutions and community colleges that have
limited opportunity to engage in research activities. This REU site will be
beneficial to the students' appreciation of interconnected and multi-
disciplinary topics within the fields of science and engineering, understanding
of related concepts between inter-related disciplines, presentation and problem
solving skills, appreciation for life-long learning, and desire to pursue
advanced studies and careers in science and engineering. Research projects will
advance the field and be interdisciplinary in nature and will include
biomaterials and tissue engineering, micro/nano systems and device development,
regenerative medicine, biomolecule detection, medication development and
evaluation, nanoparticle synthesis and development, and personalized medicine.
Undergraduate and graduate student mentors from Rowan University will
participate in the program and provide peer contacts.