* 1757127
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy and Ultramicroelectrode Studies of Electrocatalysis at Nanoparticle Ensembles of Microdimensions and at Single Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Cynthia Zoski, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2020
* USD 272,912.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Cynthia Zoski of New Mexico State University is
studying electrocatalysis at finite nanoparticle ensembles and single
nanoparticles on conducting surfaces of ultramicrodimensions where kinetic
investigations are carried out under high mass transport conditions.
Nanoparticles are an important part of the overall catalyst design in energy
devices such as fuel and solar cells. These studies provide wide-ranging
knowledge on the relationship between nanoparticle size, distribution, and
catalytic activity. These studies also address a key issue in electrocatalysis
regarding the nature of intermediates and adsorbed species on a catalyst surface
while the electrode reaction occurs, which aid in diagnosis of reaction
mechanisms, with relevance to molecular recognition, sensing, and to infectious
diseases where biofilm integrity and the relationship to quorum sensing and
bacteria micro-colonies are of interest. Broader impacts also include training
of post-doctoral fellows and graduate students in multi-disciplinary scientific
research in areas of national importance, and developing a new course in
advanced electrochemical techniques which targets post-doctoral fellows,
graduate and senior undergraduate students from chemistry, chemical engineering,
physics, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
electrocatalysis at nanoparticle ensembles and single nanoparticles, development
of simulations to describe their behavior, fabrication and analysis of ensemble
and single nanoparticle electrodes through single nanoparticle collisions at
ultramicroelectrodes, and the use of scanning electrochemical microscopy to
study the kinetics and nature of the reactivity of electrogenerated oxide films
and those adsorbed as a result of an electrocatalytic reaction. The collision
approach to nanoparticle electrodes allows control over the number of
nanoparticles on a surface, flexibility in selection of the electrode material
and nanoparticle type (e.g. metallic, core shell, alloy) and size, and a direct
comparison between finite ensemble and single nanoparticle kinetics at the same
electrode. The shape of collision transients provides insight into the
microscopic details of the nature of nanoparticle interaction with an electrode
and the kinetics of electrocatalytic reactions such as oxygen reduction at
single nanoparticles. Using transient surface interrogation scanning
electrochemical microscopy to study the nature and reactivity of oxide films
overcomes the difficulties in traditional electrochemical experiments where the
working electrode itself is used to find intermediates and the response is
convoluted with the current from the electrolysis and capacitive charge.