* 1757781
* REU Site: Cybersecurity Research of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Remzi Seker, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 295,959.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. This project focuses on
cybersecurity research for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). In each summer, ten
undergraduate students will participate in research for eight weeks to
understand cybersecurity challenges for UAVs, and how to design algorithms and
techniques to protect UAVs from cyber-attacks. This program will provide a
research experience with a balance of theory, hands-on practical skills, and
applications. The project is led by a team of experienced faculty who will
mentor the participating researchers through a number of professional
development activities that prepare them for future careers as professionals in
the field of cybersecurity and UAVs, which are areas of critical need for the
workforce of the future. This project will provide great opportunities for
undergraduate students, especially for those from underrepresented and minority
groups and institutions with limited research resources, to be involved in real-
world cybersecurity research of UAVs. This project will conduct a nationwide
recruitment process with particular emphasis on the southeast region of the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU site is to involve
undergraduate students to integrate fundamental and state-of-the-art
cybersecurity research using UAVs as the platform. Students will understand and
study cyber-attacks targeted at UAVs and investigate corresponding cyber
defenses. Research activities in this project will explore the cybersecurity of
UAVs from multiple angles, including secure communication, data privacy
protection, secure control systems for autonomous UAVs, etc. By conducting
diverse but coherent research projects, students will gain in-depth
understanding and hands-on experience in cybersecurity research for UAVs, as
well as general computer and data security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.