* 1757413
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity in Chemistry (SUROC) at UNC Chapel Hill
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Gerald Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 318,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill is located in Chapel Hill, NC. It supports the
training of 29 students in total for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021.
The principal investigators are Gerald Meyer and Leslie Hicks. This site is
supported by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate. Students engage in a diverse set of research projects in chemistry,
ranging from catalysis to solar energy conversion. Alongside hands-on research,
students also participate in learning modules on ethics, communication, and
entrepreneurship that includes site visits to a large industrial company and a
small startup company in the Research Triangle Park of North Carolina. Taking
part in cutting-edge research and tailored learning modules, students gain an
appreciation for the subtleties of fundamental chemistry research and are in a
position to make informed decisions about their career path. Students with
limited access to research opportunities are especially
recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants benefit from mentors who are
international leaders in their field and work in state-of the art facilities on
topical problems with far-reaching impact in chemistry. The participants engage
in cutting edge research and have the opportunity to make meaningful
contributions in projects related to catalysis, polymer design and synthesis,
solar energy conversion, redox biology, and nanotechnology. Through mentoring
and peer interaction, students gain skills in efficient and effective use of
scientific research tools, critical reading of scientific literature, design and
implementation of experiments, and in written and oral communication for various
audiences. Completion of this program enhances the research and mentoring
experiences for undergraduate students who may not otherwise have such an
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.