* 1757976
* The Bessie Coleman Project - Using Computer Modeling and Flight Simulation to Create STEM Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Jacqueline Leonard, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,199,884.00

This strategies project advances efforts of the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and
promote practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue
careers in the fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics
(STEM). Specifically, the project will use computer modeling and flight
simulations as mechanisms to provide unique entrées to STEM and STEM careers for
predominately underrepresented elementary and middle school students in the
Rocky Mountain and Mid-Atlantic regions of the United States. Named for the
first African-American woman to receive a pilot's license, the Bessie Coleman
Project builds on extant knowledge and understandings of complex systems in
aviation and aerospace to develop, implement, and test the impact of a
culturally specific, place-based, thematic curriculum and extension activities
on youth engaged in informal STEM learning programs related to computer science.
This focus on the intersectionality of computer science learning and 21st
century information and communications technology (ICT) skill preparation is a
national priority at the forefront of educational reform. Research has shown
strong evidence that computer coding can motivate student learning and broaden
student opportunities in STEM. Likewise, research has shown encouraging benefits
of students learning coding as a pathway to develop computational thinking
skills. K-12 schools, academic institutions, and informal STEM education sectors
across the country are particularly interested in effective strategies to
prepare teachers and students in computer science and coding, particularly youth
from underrepresented groups in STEM. This project explores the potential and
impact of the Bessie Coleman Project as an effective approach to address this
national need among three critically underrepresented groups in computer science
in four different states. The findings will advance knowledge applicable for
both formal and informal contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three-year
project duration, approximately 1,000 rural and urban elementary and middle
school students will engage in a broad range of project activities - from 3D
computer modeling and game design (grades 4-5), to flight simulation using
drones and Raspberry Pi (grades 6-8). The students are predominately of Native
American, African-American/Black, Hispanic and Asian descent, participating in
after school computer science clubs and summer camps at project sites in
Colorado, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Wyoming. Expeditions to air and space
museums, opportunities to engage with field experts, guest speakers, and other
extended learning opportunities are integral to the program. Forty-two classroom
teachers and 12 informal educators and staff from Boys &amp; Girls Clubs and
Makerspaces will receive training to implement and facilitate the program in
their site locations. An iterative research design is used to investigate the
three overarching research questions: (a) What learning experiences involving
emerging technologies effectively enable diverse populations of students to gain
familiarity and relevant competencies with these technologies, and what factors
influence the outcomes of the learning experiences? (b) What culturally-
responsive instructional and curricular practices and models, including place-
based education, used by teachers enhance student understanding of and interest
in STEM occupations, and what factors influence the outcomes of the practices
and models? and (c) In what roles and in what ways do business and industry
workforce members (i.e., STEM professionals) motivate students to become aware
of, interested in, and prepared for STEM careers in the STEM workforce and
support teachers in efforts to promote STEM workforce awareness and interest?
Formal and summative evaluations are carried out by an Advisory Board and an
external evaluator. The research and project findings are locally and nationally
disseminated through libraries, a resource guide, a blog, community involvement,
conference presentations and journal publications. Ultimately, the project
endeavors to increase students' computational thinking abilities, STEM interest
and motivation, and persistence in STEM career pathways, especially in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.