* 1757402
* Collaborative Research: Establishing and Propagating a Model for Evaluating the Long Term Impact of Pre-College Computing Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Monica McGill, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,052.00

There is a critical need to increase the number of skilled technology workers
within the United States, with computing skills becoming increasingly important
as the nation moves further into the 21st century. This need is fueled by the
realization that the number of tech workers needed to maintain political and
economic security far outweighs the current workers available now or in the
immediate future. To increase interest, commercial, governmental, and not-for-
profit educational groups have sponsored numerous initiatives aimed to bring
computing to more students, recently with a K-12 emphasis. This project seeks to
determine the long-term impact of these activities as a mechanism for growing
the skilled technology workforce within the United States. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create the resources and tools
necessary for identifying best practices for identifying the long term impact of
these pre-college computing activities on participants, including analyses of
data based on gender and ethnicity. The project's scope will include two phases:
1) the identification, review, and analysis of past and current pre-college
computing activities and their impact on participants to determine the major
influencing variables and 2) the creation and implementation of a formal process
for collecting data related to pre-college computing activities, including major
influencing variables, necessary for educational researchers to be able to
evaluate and analyze the long-term impact of these activities. Two significant
outputs from this project are the creation of instruments available for
measuring the long-term effects of pre-college computing efforts; and
measurement results from using these instruments to evaluate the effects of
current and past pre-college computing efforts.