* 1757060
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Do rehabilitative prison policies work? Evidence from a natural experiment in the Dominican Republic
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Elisabeth Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 40,000.00

High crime rates among those released from prison is of great concern among
policy makers because of high social cost and loss of human capital. Despite
these concerns, economists do not understand the sources of increased
recidivism. Understanding the sources of recidivism will therefore contribute to
economic science as well as the formulation of policies to reduce recidivism.
This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate whether
rehabilitative prisons reduce the rates of recidivism and labor-market
participation of prison releasees. The project will also investigate how
prisoners, once transformed by their prison conditions, fit into, and affect
their communities when they are released. The research will use experimental
methods and data from two alternative prison systems---the traditional punitive
system and a modern rehabilitative system---to provide empirical evidence on
these questions. The PIs have access to unique data sets on prisoners released
from traditional prisons and rehabilitative prisons. The results of this
research project will contribute to the development of policies to make the U.S.
correctional system more efficient and therefore establish the US as a global
leader in penal reforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research project will study the effects of rehabilitative prisons on recidivism
rates, labor market attachment of prison releasees, and how releasees contribute
to their societies. The PIs have access data sets of prisoners released from
traditional and rehabilitative prison. The research will use two quasi-
experimental research design projects to identify causal parameters. The first
project uses instrumental variables approach to compare individuals randomly
assigned to judges with varying preferences for incarceration and prison type to
identify the causal effect of incarceration in punitive prisons or
rehabilitative prisons on recidivism, and the difference between them. The
second project uses a differences-in-differences estimation strategy that
exploits the differential rollout of rehabilitative prisons to identify the
long-term effects of additional rehabilitative time. Individuals introduced into
rehabilitative prisons at the same time with remaining short sentences serve as
a counterfactual to those with long remaining sentences because the prisons sort
individuals into homogeneous groups across many factors, but not time. Both sets
of estimates will provide rigorous evidence on the effects of large-scale prison
reform on recidivism. This information is important for US policymakers and
prison official as they respond to large-scale incarcerated population and the
perceived failure of the current system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.