* 1757523
* REU Site: Modern Optics in the City of Light, A Collaborative REU Site in Paris
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Steven Yalisove, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2023
* USD 415,782.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics hosted at the University of Michigan. This international REU site,
Modern Optics in the City of Light, will bring eight undergraduates to Paris
each summer to conduct research, collaboratively, with faculty at the University
of Michigan's Center for Ultrafast Optical Sciences (CUOS) and several Parisian
research institutions: the University of Paris-Sacley, Ecole Polytechnique,
Ecole Nationale de Techniques Avancées (ENSTA), the Institut d'Optique Graduate
School, Université Paris-Sud 11, and Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan. The
students will be in research teams that include the student, a faculty member at
UM and a faculty member in one of the Parisian institutions. The students will
spend one week in Ann Arbor, followed by nine weeks in Paris. Each student will
keep weekly on-line research diaries to aid in communication with each full
group. A CUOS faculty member or research scientist will accompany the students
to Paris and stay for one week to ensure that the students get a good start. The
students will be housed in a local hotel in Ann Arbor and at the Cité
Universitaire in Paris. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that will be
conducted will include both on-going collaborative projects between CUOS and the
French institutions and new collaborative projects. The research in all projects
will all involve the use of ultrafast lasers to discover very current, state-of-
the art phenomena in a wide range of fields including  relativistic optics,
plasma physics, materials spectroscopy, nano-machining, patterned biological
cell templating, high power fiber lasers, plasma x-ray sources, dynamics of
nano-magnetic materials, terahertz imaging, biomedical imaging with shaped
pulses, and the fatigue life studies of materials , as well as other topics.
This site is supported by the Physics REU program and by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.