* 1757749
* REU Site: Interactive Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* James Henderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2023
* USD 318,863.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The educational objectives of the Interactive
Biomaterials REU Site at Syracuse University are: to train students in leading-
edge research techniques through independent biomaterials research projects in a
multidisciplinary, collaborative, and open laboratory environment; to provide
multifaceted mentoring opportunities and network-building experiences that
ultimately increase the likelihood that participants will pursue graduate
education in their chosen discipline; and to train students to be effective
communicators of their research to their peers and the scientific community.
These objectives are accomplished through participation in independent,
interactive biomaterials research projects in faculty laboratories, one-on-one
mentoring from faculty advisors and graduate student mentors, an innovative
career mentoring program, student research presentations, team building
activities, and social events. The REU Site aims to engage undergraduate
students in meaningful and stimulating research and educational and social
experiences as a means of increasing their enthusiasm and preparation for future
graduate level study and careers in biomaterials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The research projects
available to students in the REU will advance fundamental scientific knowledge
in areas that include shape memory polymers, stimulus-responsive polymers, drug
delivery, control of bacterial biofilms, cell-biomaterial interactions, tissue
engineering, and molecular modeling of interactive biomaterials. These
hypothesis-driven, multidisciplinary research projects draw upon the collective
expertise of the faculty of the Syracuse Biomaterials Institute, and, in many
cases, foster collaborative research across faculty laboratories, academic
departments, and institutions. Distinguishing characteristics and contributions
of the Interactive Biomaterials REU Site include: an educational experience that
starts with efficient and effective team building and then centers on research
projects appropriate to the undergraduate but sufficiently challenging to allow
for students to make meaningful contributions for which they are trained to
clearly communicate to diverse technical or lay audiences and readerships; a
research environment that provides world class multidisciplinary laboratory
facilities and diverse projects and mentors from across three participating
institutions who are trained and continually supported by the REU Site
leadership throughout the program; a student recruitment and selection process
that yields diverse cohorts carefully matched to projects and faculty mentors to
maximize the educational experience of the students; and rich and diverse
integrated professional development activities designed to support and launch
the students' professional goals without distracting from the fundamental
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.