* 1757954
* REU Site in Interdisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 384,244.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The REU Site at Southern Illinois University
Carbondale will provide research opportunities for an average of 14
undergraduates per year (including 2 supported internally) for a 9 week period
each summer. Students will be involved in interdisciplinary projects in the
broadly defined area of materials research. Inclusion of faculty mentors from
various disciplines (Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, Microbiology, and the
Materials Technology Center) will enable the REU students to develop skills
needed to excel in both academic and industrial research environments, where
interdisciplinary teams are standard and researchers must communicate
effectively across disciplines. Students will also be required to think about
the application of their research to new technologies and the manufacturing of
new devices, and will have the opportunity to present their results to a diverse
audience. The Site will recruit primarily from 2-/4-year institutions residing
in neighboring states or the Mississippi Delta region, as well as those with
traditionally high enrollment of students from underrepresented groups. Students
participating in this Site will learn to network with other scientists and
engineers through various social activities including weekly lunches with
faculty mentors and weekend trips to cultural, industrial, and recreational
locations. Primary goals of the site include: (1) creating a positive image of
science and engineering as a career choice. Students will leave the program with
a greater sense of the trials, tribulations, and rewards that await them; (2)
providing a nurturing environment and instilling a sense of confidence in the
art of discussing and practicing science; (3) improving the participants? oral
and written communication skills; (4) teaching of basic research tools,
including literature searches and the operation of modern instrumentation; (5)
fostering a collaborative teamwork approach to research; and (6) increasing the
number of domestic students, especially those from underrepresented groups, who
choose to pursue STEM careers. A detailed assessment plan will be followed to
enable evaluation of our efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
The mentored research projects associated with this Site promise to be excellent
training grounds for working in materials and related fields. Students will be
exposed to a variety of transformative projects at the forefront of science and
engineering, including: (1) studies related to the synthesis of advanced
functional materials (metal organic frameworks, inorganic heterostructures, thin
films, nanocomposites, novel electron-accepting materials; electrospun
nanofibers, nanoscale/microscale heterogeneous catalysts, etc.); (2) materials
characterization (via electron microscopies, solid- and solution-state nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, optical/magnetic transport
measurements, ultraviolet/visible/infrared/two-dimensional-infrared/Raman
spectroscopies, etc.); (3) theoretical/computational studies (wherein students
will learn how to study materials via density functional theory calculations,
molecular dynamics simulations, etc.); and (4) materials applications varying
from energy storage and photovoltaics, to biosensors and contrast agents, to
polymer lithography for device fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.