* 1757641
* REU Site: REU Program at University of Texas at Arlington (UTA): Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ishfaq Ahmad, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 325,778.00

In this Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site, the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering (CSE), in partnership with several other
departments at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), proposes a REU
program focusing on assistive technologies (AT) for people with disabilities
(PWD). Undergraduate students are quite capable of performing tangible research,
given the right motivation, facilities, mentoring, and guidance. Moreover,
participation in active research can greatly enhance their educational
experience and can be effective in motivating them to graduate studies. The
proposed theme encompasses innovative and novel topics that can help PWD meet
barriers of different kinds - attitudinal, architectural, and technological - in
accessing employment, navigating public spaces, freely communicating, and living
independently. Our REU program is a summer-long research experience for 10
carefully selected participants. The program includes close mentoring that will
provide participants with a balance between technology research focus and
grounding in pragmatic aspects that shape PWD's lives and assistive
applications. The program also encompasses five weeks of intensive training in
scientific research techniques and the technical areas, followed by five weeks
of instruction in broader aspects of computer coding, technical writing,
presentation skills, and aspects of a graduate career. The proposed innovative
theme will excite students intellectually, as well as supporting their passion
and creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People who have disabilities make up one of
the largest minorities in the world. The World Health Organization estimates as
many as 975 million of those 15 years of age and older live with disabilities.
For PWD, AT can create a positive influence by removing or reducing many
barriers. AT include devices, systems, equipment, and software that make
inclusive environments possible and thereby allow PWD to participate fully in
society. Through close and frequent interactions between faculty and
participants, the proposed theme of AT will expose participants to innovative
and novel inter-disciplinary projects through research and prototyping. In the
proposed REU program of CSE at UTA, participants will work on computer
programming, algorithms, sensors, data analytics, machine learning, and as well
as other aspects of basic and applied computer science and engineering. The
prototype projects undertaken by REU participants, even though small in nature,
will contribute towards inventive methods, techniques, systems, and apps by
enhancing the fundamental knowledge base in related fields, while creating new
avenues for cross-disciplinary research. By incorporating an important theme of
AT in the diversity-rich UTA environment, we expect to increase the pool of
diverse and talents students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.