* 1757619
* REU Site: Nanoscale Science Undergraduate Research Experience (NanoSURE) at UNC Charlotte
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Thomas Schmedake, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 299,492.00

Non-Technical Summary: Advances in nanoscale science and engineering are
providing the means to design and control matter with sub-microscopic precision
and enabling breakthroughs in medicine, electronics, solar energy, and many
other high-tech fields. Many of these advances are at the interface between the
traditional disciplines of chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering and
require special training at the undergraduate level. The NanoSURE REU site at
UNC Charlotte will provide an innovative and interdisciplinary nanoscale science
research experience for a diverse pool of talented undergraduates. The students
will participate in research teams exploring nanoscience solutions to various
challenges including drug-delivery, catalysis, manufacturing, and renewable
energy. Many of the students will belong to minority groups underrepresented in
STEM fields, and many of the students will come from institutions in which
access to research training is limited (HBCUs, PUIs, and community colleges).
The site will also recruit military veteran students considering STEM careers to
participate in the program. The NanoSURE REU site will also partner with a
science museum in Charlotte to provide training in scientific outreach and an
opportunity for the REU students to disseminate science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The proposed activities of this
REU site are focused on interdisciplinary training in nanoscale science and
engineering. Students chosen to participate in the program will be assigned to
ongoing interdisciplinary nanoscale science research projects, including for
example: (1) Dynamic RNA Nanoparticles and Reconfigurable Nanoassemblies, (2)
Multifunctional Silica-Based Nanoparticles to Improve PDT for Cancer, and (3)
Enhanced Photocatalysis using Non-metal Plasmonic Nanomaterials. The site will
advance the national need for developing a generation of workers prepared for
the interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary challenges of nanoscale science and
engineering fields through the following objectives: (1) actively recruiting a
diverse population of undergraduate students to participate in on-going research
experiences in nanoscale science and engineering with faculty members committed
to undergraduate mentoring; (2) introducing students to a variety of nanoscale
science research methods, breakthroughs, and challenges early in their college
experience to direct their career paths into nanoscale science related fields of
study; (3) engaging students in interdisciplinary research opportunities that
encourage communication and cooperation across traditional discipline
boundaries; (4) enhancing the student experience by providing workshops,
seminars, and social activities that will positively impact their professional
development and encourage their participation in graduate studies; and (5)
developing scientific communication skills by providing many opportunities to
disseminate results to each other in cohort meetings, to the public through a
collaboration with a local science museum, and ultimately by submitting a
summary paper in a peer-reviewed journal format and participating in an annual
undergraduate research symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.