* 1757005
* Collaborative Research:  Measuring G with a Microsphere in a Magneto-Gravitational Trap
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Brian D'Urso, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,417.00

The gravitational constant of the universe "G" sets the strength of gravity both
in Newton's and Einstein's theories of gravity. But despite its central
importance to our understanding of gravity, experiments over the past 20 years
have led to measurements of G that disagree enormously beyond the reported
errors. Are these discrepancies evidence of a non-constant G, reflective of some
new gravitational theory beyond Einstein, or are they simply due to
misunderstandings of experimental errors? To tackle this question, we are
undertaking an effort toward a fundamentally new experimental design for
measuring G, which involves a magnetically-suspended, micron-diameter sphere
that oscillates back and forth in a magnetic trap. The oscillation frequency
will shift due to the introduction of carefully-machined masses placed near the
oscillating sphere, and we expect our measure of this frequency shift will
determine G to about ten parts in a million--on par with other state-of-the-art
experiments, but with largely independent, and hopefully better-understood
sources of error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose measuring G, the Newtonian
gravitational constant, using a novel experimental setup. The measurement
approach is based on the time-of-swing method, where a pair of field masses
modifies the spring constant, and thus the oscillation frequency, of a simple
harmonic oscillator. The unique feature of the proposed approach is that the
simple harmonic oscillator consists of a microsphere levitated in a magnetic
trap in ultra-high vacuum. This system has several features that make it
uniquely suited to precision measurements, including a low oscillation
frequency, ultra-high quality factor (Q), and multiple degrees of freedom for
compensation of drift in the oscillation frequency. One of the key challenges in
the experimental design is stabilizing or compensating the oscillation
frequencies so frequency shifts can be resolved well enough to measure G to 10
ppm. Thus, the first year will be dedicated to optimizing the experimental
design to this end, with a goal of presenting a proof of principle for this
novel approach, as well as a path forward to performing the state-of-the-art
measurement of G. The proposed strategy has also been chosen to minimize the
systematic errors that have plagued other measurements of G. First, the time-of-
swing method is simple to analyze, with zero first-order sensitivity to
misalignment. Second, most of the recorded data will be taken in the form of
precisely time-stamped images of the particle, which can be analyzed and
reanalyzed as needed. Third, all data will be made freely available for other
groups to study, analyze, and compare with our reported results. This will
ensure that there is confidence in the new measurement despite disagreement
among past measurements of G.