* 1757652
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Fluorine Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Haoran Sun, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2022
* USD 207,960.00

This REU Site award to the University of South Dakota (USD), located in
Vermillion, SD, supports the training of 6 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2018-2020. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF Chemistry Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program. This research program is in USD's Department of Chemistry and
provides students with research opportunities in different aspects of fluorine
chemistry. Students participate in workshops covering safety issues that are
particular to fluorine chemistry, as well as in workshops on analytical
chemistry that relate to the characterization of halogen-containing substances.
In addition to research activities, the students take part in weekly meetings to
discuss scientific issues related to fluorine chemistry, the process of
commercialization, and graduate school opportunities. Communication of research
results, both during and following the research experience, is also emphasized.
The University of South Dakota is well situated geographically to serve both
Native American and small primarily undergraduate institution student
populations. Student research projects are integrated into the existing Center
for Fluorinated Functional Materials (CFFM), a state-funded research center in
the Department of Chemistry at USD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorine chemistry is
increasingly vital in the pharmaceutical industry and in materials science
applications, particularly in the fields of renewable energy and battery
technology. Faculty in the USD Department of Chemistry offer a diverse array of
research projects related to fluorine chemistry including the synthesis of
fluorinated monomers used in luminescence sensors and electronic devices;
inorganic doped lanthanum fluoride upconversion nanoparticles for forensic
applications; electrochemical deposition of fluorine monomers for battery
technology; fluorine-carbon bond activation and catalysis; analytical surface
enhanced Raman spectroscopy detection of agrochemicals; and computational
fluorine chemistry. Students benefit from meeting weekly as a group to discuss
the different opportunities, applications and hazards of fluorine chemistry.
Students also meet with recognized leaders in the field who are current members
of the CFFM advisory board. This REU site represents a unique opportunity to
train a future workforce in the theoretical and practical aspects of fluorine
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.