* 1757951
* REU Site:   Training in Redox Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Donald Becker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 298,186.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nebraska, located in Lincoln, NE, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. The program focuses on redox biology which involves oxidation-
reduction linked biological reactions, redox signaling and regulation, and
cellular defense mechanisms against oxidative damage/stress. REU participants
will conduct research under the guidance of a faculty mentor in the Redox
Biology Center. The mentors offer multidisciplinary approaches and share a
common goal of understanding critical redox-active processes. Students will
receive training in different areas including molecular biology, microbiology,
biochemistry, biophysical chemistry, and protein crystallography, and will
utilize state-of-the-art equipment and facilities. Students will attend journal
club meetings, career development seminars, lunch discussion groups,
ethics/responsible conduct of research training, and social activities to
enhance their cohort experience. The program will conclude with students
presenting their research at a campus-wide event. The program will be assessed
by various means, including an REU common assessment tool. Participant selection
will be made by faculty and will be based on academic achievements, research
interests, and career goals. Students at smaller institutions with limited
research opportunities and those from underrepresented groups are encouraged to
apply. Participants receive a stipend, full room and board, and travel
assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The goal of this
program is to involve undergraduate students in broad-based research and
significantly impact their career decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by
visiting http://redoxbiologycenter.unl.edu/summer, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Donald Becker at dbecker3@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Julie Stone at
jstone2@unl.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.