* 1757222
* Optimal Auction Design with Common Values: An Informational Robust Approach
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Benjamin Brooks, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 276,582.00

This award funds research to develop new methods for identifying the best ways
to buy and sell goods via auctions. Auction methods are widely used by
governments and private firms. For example, web-based electronic reverse
auctions are increasing used as a procurement method by Federal agencies. At the
same time, agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission, the
Department of the Interior, and the Department of the Treasury use auctions to
sell everything from Treasury bills to oil and gas leases. This project will use
game theory to find auction rules that will perform well in a wide range of
situations. It seeks to develop rules that will work well when bidders place the
same value on the auctioned good but have different information about the exact
value. The project advances the basic science of auction theory, and will lead
to better procedures for public procurement and better methods for generating
public funds from the sale of natural resources such as timber, oil, and gas.
The methodological component of the project could lead to the development of
more efficient online trading platforms. The project therefore benefits the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to characterize revenue
maximizing auctions when bidders have a common valuation for the good being
sold. This research will develop new theories of optimal robust auctions that
provide favorable revenue guarantees across different models of bidder beliefs
and across different kinds of equilibrium behavior. Existing theories identify
optimal auction designs that are highly sensitive to modeling assumptions. This
project will develop auction designs that are less sensitive to model
misspecification. Besides advancing the theory of optimal auctions, the project
will also develop and demonstrate methods for designing mechanisms in models
with rich information or potentially complex equilibrium
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.