* 1757804
* REU Site: AWaRE Advanced Wireless Research Experiences at the University of Notre Dame
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Bertrand Hochwald, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 369,789.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the Notre Dame University. This REU Site will host a diverse group of
undergraduate students who will spend their summer working on research on next
generation wireless technologies. Wireless communication is already ubiquitous
and is moving rapidly towards fifth-generation mobile services to enable a broad
range of wireless services which are fundamental to our everyday lives as well
as to the development of new technologies. This REU Site provides students with
the opportunities to explore the challenges of next-generation wireless networks
and to be involved in research that may impact the understanding and uses of the
wireless communication spectrum over which wireless signals are transmitted. The
research is led by the faculty of the Notre Dame Wireless Institute. Students
will receive hands-on experience in the design, implementation, deployment,
evaluation, and measurement of wireless technologies and mobile networks using
state-of-the-art equipment and systems. The site will provide mentoring and
other professional development opportunities that should impact the future
academic and professional careers of the students. The site plans to attract
talented undergraduate students from across the nation, particularly focusing on
recruiting students from groups traditionally under-represented in the computing
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pillars of this REU Site involve collaboration
between the Notre Dame Wireless Institute, the City of South Bend next-
generation advanced wireless research platform, and Notre Dame's membership in
the Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Industry-University Cooperative
Research Center. The technical focus of the research is on experimental
discoveries using facilities, a research environment, and expertise unique to
the Wireless Institute. A broad range of wireless research is targeted including
millimeter-wave wireless, antennas and circuits, radar signal processing,
turbomachinery sensors, full spectrum sensing with low-cost pervasive sensors,
drone communications, crowd-source WiFi characterization, Bluetooth low energy
ad-hoc networks for emergency responders, and manufacturing floor operational
efficiency via wearable wireless devices. The project has the potential to
develop new technologies and expand the understanding of the wireless spectrum.