* 1757646
* REU Site in Physics at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Garfield Warren, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2023
* USD 316,722.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site in physics at Indiana University (IU). The program will support up to
15 participants for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-20 to carry out
experimental and theoretical research projects in a broad range of areas in the
IU Physics Department and the IU Center for Exploration of Energy and Matter
(CEEM). Special programs for the students include orientation sessions on lab
safety, weekly seminars on current research in physics, discussions on
professional development and scientific ethics, and short progress reports. At
the conclusion of the program, the students will present their results in talks
at a closing symposium and develop a way to share their results to a technical
audience. They will also be encouraged and supported to continue working on
their projects as well as to present their work at professional meetings during
the following academic year.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program provides
promising undergraduate physics majors with significant and challenging
experiences in scientific research in a research-intensive environment. Students
will be matched to projects appropriate to their level and interests, and early
contact of students and mentors will be encouraged. The participants will gain
original research experience by working as integral parts of ongoing research
programs under the supervision of faculty members and senior research staff.
Students will learn about a broad range of current research areas through
seminars and peer interactions. Research projects will be available in a variety
of areas, including experimental and theoretical research in astrophysics,
biophysics, condensed matter physics, elementary particle physics, materials
physics, and nuclear physics. The program emphasizes the development of clear,
honest, and concise scientific communication and presentation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.