* 1757658
* REU Site: Nature's machinery through the prism of physics, biology, chemistry and engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Hugo Sanabria, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 533,225.00

This REU Site award to Clemson University, located in Clemson, SC, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021.
Program participants work with faculty, postdocs, graduate students, and other
undergraduates on collaborative research exploring biology through the prism of
physics, biology, chemistry and engineering (e.g., computational and
experimental approaches for molecular insights into amyloid aggregation, studies
of how missense mutations affect protein-DNA binding affinity, and quantifying
properties of active polymer networks and gels from cytoskeletal proteins). The
focus is on cross-disciplinary training; while each participant has a specific
project with their own mentor, participants are paired to work together within a
larger collaboration. The program includes a biophysics boot-camp, seminar
series, workshops on research tools and professional development, journal club,
off-campus field trips, ethics training, and cohort-building activities.
Participants regularly present their contributions to collaborators and hear
about the research of their peers. Each participant presents a poster of their
own work adjacent to their collaborator's poster at the final summer research
symposium, writes their own research manuscript, and is encouraged to present
their work at scientific conferences. Participants also engage in outreach
activities throughout the summer.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
and from underrepresented minority groups, will be trained in the program. The
program is designed to give participants a sense of the mutual contributions
that physical scientists can make to biology, and that biologists can make to
the physical sciences. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
www.clemson.edu/physics/biophysics-reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joshua
Alper at alper@clemson.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Hugo Sanabria at
hsanabr@clemson.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.