* 1757945
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates - Emerging Issues in Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Dongwan Shin, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 295,984.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology. This REU Site will
host a diverse group of undergraduate students who will spend their summer
working on research problems dealing with emerging areas of cybersecurity. Sound
approaches to cybersecurity are essential for protecting the computer and
communication devices of individual consumers as well as public and private
companies and organizations and the government from the increasing threats of
cyber attacks while also preserving the privacy concerns of citizens. The
projects are led by faculty from the Computer Science and Engineering Department
who are actively engaged in cybersecurity research. The university faculty will
collaborate with RiskSense, a cybersecurity company, to develop research
projects that have real-world relevance and that can impact the practices of the
cybersecurity industry. The site will provide mentoring and other professional
development opportunities that should impact the future academic and
professional careers of the students. The site plans to attract talented
undergraduate students from universities in New Mexico and the surrounding
southwestern area of the country and target students from groups traditionally
under-represented in the computing fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
projects in this REU Site address a range of topics including document format
malware detection, machine learning for botnet detection, access control for
smart grid, privacy-preserving location-based services, secure data logging for
mobile devices, and developing user mental models against semantic attacks.
Students will use state-of-the-art facilities and current methods and techniques
to develop solutions to fundamental challenges in cybersecurity. The goals of
this site include providing students experience in cutting edge research in
cybersecurity, broadening participation in computing, motivating students to
pursue graduate studies in computer science, and preparing the future
cybersecurity workforce. This site provides an immersive research environment
and cutting-edge research projects to undergraduate students who have limited
access to research experiences and cybersecurity experts. The site will be one
of the first REU Sites in the southwest region of the country focusing on
cybersecurity. The site has the potential to impact the cybersecurity workforce
of the region. Through participation in the summer research program, the
undergraduate students should acquire skills that will lead to rewarding
professional careers in a field of emerging importance and impact.