* 1757893
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Smart &amp; Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Mina Guirguis, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Manuel Perez Quinones
* 04/30/2023
* USD 379,812.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site engages students in
research in the emerging area of Smart &amp; Connected Communities (S&amp;CC),
the essential building blocks of smart cities. Through a nationwide recruitment
process, cohorts of 10 undergraduate students will participate in a 10-week
summer research program, for three summers, hosted at Texas State University.
Special efforts are made to recruit students from primarily teaching
universities and colleges while ensuring the participation of women, veterans,
and minorities. The project includes mentoring by experienced computer science
faculty members, technical seminars and workshops, student presentations, and
professional development opportunities. These activities are carried out in an
intellectual environment that develops the students' professional careers
through enhancing their technical, communication, and social
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component in this REU Site falls along
three main thrusts in building the next generation of information and
communication technologies supporting the development of S&amp;CC: (1) models,
mechanisms and tools for smart human-environment interactions to monitor and
protect smart infrastructure against accidental failures and malicious attacks;
(2) new methods for collecting and analyzing various types of data ranging from
human biosignals to activity and crowd-sourcing data, to promote health and
well-being of citizens in urban settings; and (3) novel scheduling and
monitoring methods for intelligent transportation systems that would decrease
congestion, promote safety and reduce adverse environmental impacts in urban
settings. Evaluation of the proposed methods is done through theoretical and
numerical analysis, simulation experiments, and real implementations with
various devices, sensors, and robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.