* 1757042
* International Linguistics Olympiad (ILO) 2018: Prague, CZ, July 26 - August 1, 2018
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Lori Levin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 04/30/2020
* USD 29,282.00

Attracting and training new students in linguistics is essential to meeting the
nation's needs for research in language and communication. This award will
provide travel support for two teams of American high school students to
participate in the 16th International Linguistics Olympiad, which will take
place in Prague, Czech Republic, in July 26-30, 2018. More than 100 of the
world's brightest and most motivated high school students will gather for the
Linguistics Olympiad. The American teams, each comprised of four students, were
top finishers in the North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO),
held in January and March, 2018. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
Linguistics Olympiad provides students with a hands-on experience of the
scientific approach to linguistics and the documentation and analysis of
language. Unlike math and science Olympiads, which focus on material that
students have already mastered, linguistics Olympiads introduce new material
through logic puzzles in languages unfamiliar to the students. In the course of
solving a puzzle, the students can discover something about the grammar or
sounds of a language, its conceptual system, its associated culture, or its
historical relationship to other languages. In addition to fostering insight
into human linguistic and cultural diversity, this competition fosters meta-
linguistic reasoning that is essential for computer science, language
technologies, and indeed any career involving analytical problem-solving skills
and the ability to present a logical argument supported by data. Because it has
been the tradition of linguistics Olympiads to base half of the score on the
written explanation of the answer, the contests also encourage the ability to
clearly present a hypothesis and explain how it is supported by the data. After
attending a training session at Carnegie Mellon University, the US team will
travel to Prague to compete with teams from 30 other countries. The IOL serves
as a capstone international experience for the winners of NACLO, allowing the
team members to compete and interact with other students who share their talents
and interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.