* 1757097
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH IN DRMS: Disgust-Driven Prosocial Behavior:  Message Processing and Persuasive Effects Over Time
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Sahara Byrne, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2019
* USD 14,412.00

This dissertation research aims to understand the influence of disgust-evoking
imagery on prosocial decision making and behavior. Grotesque visuals are
frequently used in persuasive messages to depict dire need and influence concern
for the welfare of others. Yet, little is known about the potential for disgust
to motivate prosocial behavior. Increasing reliance on the goodwill of private
citizens to mitigate social ills, and the important role persuasive messages
play in motivating such behavior, heightens the need for inquiries into the
effects and potential consequences of persuasive strategies employing visceral
emotion. In addition to informing our understanding of the persuasive potential
of disgust, this research contributes to basic knowledge about how moral action
is motivated within individuals by exploring the interaction of emotive and
cognitive factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emotion research has often connected
disgust to anti-social judgments and rejection behavior. Disgust inductions in
these studies are, however, usually incidental or irrelevant to the decision
task. In contrast, integral emotion inductions, such as the depiction of disease
in a persuasive appeal, are triggered by the decision situation and are relevant
to the decision task. Therefore, integral disgust may have different effects on
message processing and behavioral outcomes. This research explores processes by
which disgust may trigger prosocial responses. A key features of these
controlled experiments include the use of the classic "dictator game" to measure
behavior and social judgment tasks to explore potential unintended consequences
of disgust in the context of prosocial persuasion. &lt;br/&gt;A first experiment
tests the assumption that disgust is insensitive to context by examining
information processing effects when disgust cues are used in a prosocial
persuasive message (integral emotion) compared to when disgust cues are not
connected to the decision-making context (incidental emotion). A subsequent
experiment compares the differential effects of grotesque versus clean
portrayals of need and tests for a sleeper effect of disgust. Whereas, study 1
addresses the question of whether persuasive arguments may alter emotional
appraisals, study 2 examines whether these responses change over time.