* 1757998
* REU Site: Physics Research at Brigham Young University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jean-Francois Van Huele, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2023
* USD 480,194.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) and Research Experience for Teachers (RET) site in physics at Brigham
Young University. The program will develop students' abilities in physics
research by hands-on experiences. Direct mentoring and group training will help
the students acquire the skills needed to get started in research. Group
training will include instruction in experimental and computational techniques,
preparation for graduate school, and scientific writing and presentations.
Students will also benefit from close mentoring by faculty. This contact will
give them role models for professional ethics and standards and opportunities to
discuss many aspects of graduate school opportunities and careers in physics and
related fields. The RET component will impact the experience of secondary
teachers who participate in the program but also the students they teach. RET
participants will be encouraged to look for ways to incorporate their summer
experiences in their classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating students and
teachers will participate in a ten-week summer physics research program in
computational plasma physics, ultrafast nonlinear optics, experimental and
computational condensed matter physics, x-ray and XUV sources and optics,
microfabrication technology, visible astronomy, or materials science.
Participants will experience the joy of research by being involved in a research
project from proposal presentation through performing the research and reporting
results. The award is funded by both the Division of Physics and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.