* 1757017
* REU Site: EXERCISE - Explore Emerging Computing in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Enyue Lu, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 369,995.00

The project is a renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
EXERCISE (Explore Emerging Computing in Science and Engineering) site at
Salisbury University (SU) for the next three years. EXERCISE is an
interdisciplinary project that explores emerging paradigms in parallel computing
with data and compute intensive applications in science and engineering. The
goal of the project is to offer student participants, particularly from
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), a valuable research experience in
parallel computing. The project will promote "parallel thinking", an important
computational thinking skill guiding current generation students into the
twenty-first century computing era. The site will prioritize recruiting under-
represented students and females, and attract students from local historically
black college and universities (HBCUs), PUIs, and community colleges on
Maryland's Eastern Shore into computational science and engineering majors and
the general Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The
Principal Investigator, together with faculty mentors, will supervise a 10-week
REU program that gives a diverse cohort of students a taste of computational
thinking in the domain of parallel computing and also an understanding of the
graduate school experience. The host institution SU will collaborate with the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore, an HBCU, and the University of Maryland
College Park for multi-disciplinary faculty expertise and diverse summer
activities including field trips, social activities, high school outreach, and
graduate school application information
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processing complex information and large data in
conventional von Neumann computer architectures is becoming increasingly
difficult. Computers are undertaking a fundamental turn toward concurrency
architectures such as hyperthreading, multi-core, and many-core architectures.
Emerging parallel and distributed computing paradigms adapted to these
concurrent architectures have begun to demonstrate the power of solving problems
with large datasets and high computational complexity in a wide range of
applications. However, there are fundamental difficulties in program semantics
related to process interleaving: a parallel program can yield inconsistent
answers, or even crash, due to unpredictable interactions between simultaneous
tasks. Secondly, communication, memory access, and I/O overhead may result in
run-time delays. Finally, it is difficult to ensure that programs consume
resources in a manner that simultaneously achieves efficiency and meets
performance goals. The REU Site will focus on four aspects of parallel
computing, namely: algorithms, software, architecture and applications to
address these parallel computing challenges. Students will work with faculty
mentors in completing cutting-edge research projects to tackle data and compute
intensive applications that emphasize the above four aspects. By the end of
program, students will acquire valuable skills, gain a broader and deeper
understanding of research, and develop greater confidence in their abilities. In
particular, they will be exposed to emerging paradigms in parallel computing
such as Map-Reduce and Graphical Processing Unit computing, and will have
opportunities to explore concurrent software and multiprocessor architectures,
and design efficient parallel algorithms, and to tackle data and compute
intensive problems in computer and social networks, image and natural language
processing, pattern recognition and machine learning.