* 1757388
* REU/RET Site: Physics and Astronomy at the University of Minnesota
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 11/30/2021
* USD 359,348.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics and Astronomy at the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities. The site
will engage ten undergraduates per year in summer research projects. Each
student works in a research group to make the transition from mastering old
knowledge to participating in the creation of new knowledge. As described in the
National Academy of Sciences report Rising Above the Gathering Storm, the
national need for trained scientists and engineers is expected to increase
dramatically in the coming years. Classroom instruction is an important
component of a scientific education, but the primary way of preparing the next
generation of research scientists is by having them perform scientific research
as enabled through this site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to participating
in frontier research, the participants attend weekly research seminars given by
faculty members, tour the Ash River NOvA Neutrino Detector in northen Minnesota
to see an example of big science performed outside of a single university
laboratory and take ethics and safety training. Undergraduate research topics
include projects in Condensed Matter Physics, Particle Physics, Biophysics, High
Energy Astrophysics and Cosmology, Space and Planetary Physics, and Astronomy
and Astrophysics. At the conclusion of the summer program, participants describe
their results through oral presentations to their peers, in poster
presentations, and through a written report. This award is supported by the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates Programs in the Division of Physics and
the Division of Astronomical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.