* 1757191
* SBE - RCUK:  Sequential Bargaining with Externalities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Matias Iaryczower, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 229,999.00

This award funds research in economic theory that builds new models of how
individuals participate in groups that provide public goods and carry out joint
projects. These models will give us new methods to study a variety of different
applications. They can be used to study how individuals participate in a
collective effort to create open-source software, how creditors bargain over
bankruptcy restructuring, how non-profit leaders can raise funds for an
organization with multiple goals, and how people make decisions to adopt new
technologies. The project could result in better ideas for how to best
coordinate individual efforts and contributions to advance important team
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies sequential contributions to
public goods and joint projects in environments with transactional frictions.
The first component focuses on the presence of a principal as a source of
coordination for the completion of a single public good or collective agreement.
The analysis considers the effect on outcomes and welfare of strengthening the
formal bargaining power of agents relative to the principal. The second
component studies sequential contributions to competing public goods in a fully
decentralized environment without a principal. The team studies efficiency,
delay, and the optimal organization of tasks and teamwork. The third component
introduces a principal into the multiple joint projects environment. The
researchers study how principals actively manage the intertemporal externalities
generated by multiple projects. Students will benefit from participating in the
project through exploring the results of the models under alternative
assumptions and aiding in the numerical computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.