* 1757329
* CAREER: Bridging the Gap between Engineering Simulation and Reality of Home Energy-Efficiency Improvements via Big-Data Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Yueming Lucy Qiu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2023
* USD 502,000.00

CBET 1652696 PI: Qiu, Yueming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
transform empirical analysis of home energy-efficiency improvements into an
accurate, generalizable, and scalable process. The research program will (1)
develop a big data-driven energy-efficiency causal impact evaluation framework
and provide reliable statistical evidence of the realized energy savings; (2)
examine how various factors in the human-environmental ecosystem (e.g., occupant
behaviors) interact with energy-efficient technologies; (3) evaluate whether an
energy-saving benchmarking message can alter the effectiveness of energy
efficiency; (4) quantify the impact on power grid, economic incentives, and
environment based on timing of energy savings; and (5) refine engineering energy
savings simulation modeling. The education program will (1) engage a group of
energy practitioners through an advisory group; (2) educate the general public
on energy efficiency through an open-access tool; (3) facilitate communication
among researchers across related fields through an interdisciplinary workshop;
and (4) train future engineers and scientists with an interdisciplinary mindset
and effective skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key scientific contributions are
anticipated to stem from both a large-scale building energy dataset as well as a
new computational energy-efficiency evaluation framework that incorporates
knowledge and advances from various disciplines. To construct valid baseline
energy use, the framework uses control group, pre-installation period, control
of time-variant covariates, flexible fixed effects, and panel regressions. This
evaluation framework is timely now that smart meters are becoming the norm. The
project uses a comprehensive dataset from Phoenix metropolitan Arizona that
includes 15 min-interval customer-level energy demand data from 2013-present for
48,000 residential customers, ensuring statistically robust and representative
results. Multi-year appliance saturation surveys on customer-level energy
efficiency features, technologies, occupant behaviors, building attributes, and
demographics, together with the proposed evaluation framework, should overcome
key shortcomings in existing evaluation studies, including inappropriate
baseline energy construction, selection bias, and omitted variable bias. This
project also should uncover the complex impact heterogeneity of energy
efficiency. For evaluation of environmental and economic benefits, intraday data
of technology-specific impacts will offer more precise results than previous
studies using average daily data. The project will also refine relevant
engineering-modeling techniques of energy efficiency performance.