* 1757869
* REU Site: Dare to BE FIRST - Biomechanical Engineering Foundations in Impactful Research, Science &amp; Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jill Higginson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 376,553.00

The Center for Biomechanical Engineering Research (CBER) at the University of
Delaware (UD) offers a renewal of the comprehensive Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site: "Dare to BE FIRST" Biomechanical Engineering Foundations in
Impactful Research, Science and Technology (BE FIRST). A rapid growth in
biomedical research and related industries is projected to dramatically change
the landscape for engineering in the U.S. The employment outlook is projected to
grow 23% from 2014 to 2024, which is much faster than average for all
occupations (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2015). Accordingly, there is an
enormous need to provide appropriate training for the emerging workforce who
will contribute to the process of translating new devices and engineering
technologies from bench to bedside. This REU Site program will leverage CBER's
strengths in cutting edge biomechanics research in order to expose undergraduate
students to the power of quantitative skills in solving biomedical problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Annually, CBER will host a total of 20 undergraduate
students (10 students supported by NSF) who will spend 10 summer weeks involved
in the following activities: a hands on research experience in a state-of-the-
art biomechanical research lab, clinical site visits to broaden the scope of
learning, scientific and professional development workshops, opportunities for
networking and communication among interdisciplinary students and mentors, a
research symposium where students synthesize results for diverse audience and an
annual fall workshop to promote interest in biomedical engineering and the REU
program. Students will be recruited from minority institutions and historically
black colleges and universities around the U.S. as well as other institutions
with limited research resources. The goal of this program is to improve students
engineering and research skills which will influence the academic pursuits of
this group of talented and diverse young engineers and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.