* 1757207
* RII Track-1: The New Mexico SMART Grid Center: Sustainable, Modular, Adaptive, Resilient, and Transactive
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American power grid requires
modernization to serve the increased electrical needs of the public. The goal of
this project is to create a new interdisciplinary research center leading to a
Sustainable, Modular, Adaptive, Resilient, and Transactive (SMART) next-
generation electric grid. NM EPSCoR will establish a SMART Grid Center to
address the power, communication, and control needs of the electrical
distribution network. The goal is to provide consumers the ability to decide how
to generate, store, and manage energy on the existing electricity distribution
infrastructure. The Center will align with the New Mexico State Science &amp;
Technology Plan?s focus on technology development to ensure energy stability,
security, resilience, and sustainability for the State. It will also support the
development of a well-trained STEM workforce for New Mexico, the hiring and
retention of new faculty, and an increase in diversity at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New
Mexico SMART Grid Center will transform the existing electricity distribution
infrastructure by holistically incorporating microgrid optimization, operations
optimization, microgrid controls, and tariff and customer behavior in the design
and demonstration of interconnected Distribution Feeder Microgrids (DFMs). With
simulation studies and field validations, the research team aims to demonstrate
that the DFM-based architecture: 1) is optimally suited to sustainably
accommodate the emerging trends in electricity generation, storage, and
utilization; 2) is flexible and can be adapted to various geographic and
socioeconomic conditions; 3) can be interwoven with a secure and robust
communications and controls infrastructure; 4) is more resilient than
alternative options; and 5) enables new business models and continued innovation
in the delivery of energy services. Building on existing expertise and
infrastructures, the SMART Grid Center will develop new technologies, protocols,
models, and algorithms for the future electric grid that can be broadly applied
to future socio-cyber-physical systems, the Internet-of-Things, smart cities
research and deployments, big data applications, and coordination in multi-agent
systems. This project will coalesce ongoing independent studies and field
validations across New Mexico under a unified, well-integrated,
interdisciplinary program that includes academia, national laboratories, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.