* 1757702
* REU Site: Exploring Globalization through Archaeology
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Todd Ahlman, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2022
* USD 408,620.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. The Exploring Globalization through
Archaeology REU is an international eight-week summer program designed for
students to acquire research and technical skills in the multidisciplinary
fields of anthropological archaeology and forensic archaeology, and to prepare
them for graduate study or employment following graduation. International
experience is critical to the development of a globally competitive workforce,
and this project will engage students with people from different locales and
experiences in research designed to explore the history and development of
modern globalization along with its impacts on human societies. The project
seeks to: 1) expose underrepresented ethnic and racial minorities, women, and
veterans to scientific research in an international setting; 2) expose students
to the processes of formulating and designing scientific research projects and
gathering field and laboratory data to address scientific research questions; 3)
develop students? communication skills, both written and verbal, through
presentation of their scientific findings to professional and general audiences;
4) encourage students to undertake scientific research while working in teams as
well as individually; and 5) encourage students to pursue further education or
career opportunities in science-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Exploring Globalization through Archaeology REU site is modeled as a team-based
learning experience where students will work in teams using cutting-edge
technologies and standard methodologies from anthropological archaeology and
forensic archaeology to collect and analyze data that answer questions about
modern globalization. Students will be involved in the scientific study,
analysis, and interpretation of landscapes, architecture, material culture, and
human skeletal biology leading to a broader understanding of the range of human
responses to globalization. By incorporating evidence from domestic,
agricultural, military, mortuary, and institutional sites, students will examine
globalism through multiple lines of evidence reflecting the diverse experiences
and responses of people to the societal changes wrought by globalization.
International projects, like this REU Site, provide students opportunities to
engage with individuals and institutions from different locales and experiences
facilitating the development of skills necessary to participate in a globally
competitive workforce. Students will work in collaborative teams while pursuing
individual research projects and be directly mentored by professional
archaeologists and forensic archaeologists. Students will receive training in
archaeological and forensic archaeological field and laboratory methodologies,
material culture identification, cataloging, curation, digital mapping,
geophysics, historical research, and 3D virtual visualizations. Throughout the
project, participants will be tasked to prepare scientific reports on their
research projects as well as blog and social media posts and oral and video
presentations for a diverse set of audiences. Following the field and laboratory
phases, students will present their research at a professional conference and
pursue publishing their research in professional journals and other
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.