* 1757351
* RII Track-1 Consortium for Research on Environmental Water Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quality of surface and ground
waters is of great concern across the United States. The factors that control
water quality are complex and include land use practices and soil and geological
features of the landforms within the watershed. Montana is home to a variety of
land uses that have the potential to significantly impact the quality of waters
in different ways, including agriculture (rangeland grazing and grain
production) and mining. This project is based on the comprehensive analysis of
the nature, sources, and extent of environmental pollutants in ground and
surface waters associated with rangeland and crop production agriculture and
surface coal mining in Montana. The project will result in significant advances
in the ability to evaluate and predict the concentrations of pollutants in
natural water. This understanding of the sources and concentrations of
pollutants will lead to efforts to prevent pollution and to remediate polluted
water. The project will also make significant investments in STEM education
including outreach programs for Native Americans, and will investigate how a
community's trust in water quality management decisions is related to the
community's ability to respond to water
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the sources, and fate and transport, of pollutants
originating from rangeland and crop production agriculture, and from surface
coal mining in Montana. The primary focus of the project is to study the fate of
agrichemicals such as nitrate and pesticides across landscapes and into ground
and surface waters. The research will include analysis of the interactions
between these chemicals and their uptake across microbial membranes associated
with agrichemical transformation, and their impacts on biofouling of reverse
osmosis systems used for removal of pollutants. The sources and fates of arsenic
and heavy metals released during coal mining operations will also be
investigated, and the potential impacts of nitrate on algal blooms and
associated transport of those metals in surface waters will be studied. The
broad environmental focus of the project will facilitate programs in STEM
education encompassing levels of education ranging from K-12 through mentoring
of undergraduate and graduate students as well as junior faculty. Significant
outreach and diversity components involve inclusion of faculty and students from
two tribal colleges, and a structural equation model will be developed that will
test the relationships between trust, community resilience, and demographic
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.