* 1757085
* SIAM Interdisciplinary Conferences in the Mathematical and Computational Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Suzanne Weekes, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 649,575.00

Under this grant, the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) will
organize and run a series of conferences and workshops in the mathematical and
computational sciences during the three-year period between September 2018 and
September 2021. These SIAM conferences form an important part of the research,
education and technology transfer infrastructure for applied and computational
mathematics. The funding of this grant will support travel of students and early
career professionals, facilitating the integration of education with research.
The funding will also support the travel of invited speakers to the conferences
and the dissemination of invited conference presentations to the wider community
through selective recording of talks and/or live streaming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIAM conferences and workshops are highly
interdisciplinary and foster the communication of the latest fundamental and
applied research and applications to mathematical and computational scientists,
physical and social scientists, and engineers from academia, industry and
government. SIAM conferences are designed to identify and disseminate knowledge
of emerging areas of research. A sampling of conferences to be held during the
award period include those on the following topics: Mathematics of Planet Earth
(September, 2018), International Conference on Data Mining (April, 2019),
Uncertainty Quantification (May, 2020), and Applied Algebraic Geometry (July,
2021).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.