* 1757558
* REU Site:  Immersive Research in Energy Generation, Storage/Conversion, and Power Transmission
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 330,150.00

The Tennessee Technological University (TTU) REU Site focuses on providing a
summer research experience to a diverse group of ten undergraduate students
yearly from a nationwide search. Participating students will perform cutting-
edge research in the areas of energy generation (solar, biomass, piezoelectric,
generation from salinity gradients, etc.), energy storage/conversion (lithium-
ion and lithium-air batteries and formic acid fuel cells) and power grid
integration (solar and electric vehicle to grid integration). The proposed
collective research topics embody challenges related to renewable energy
harvesting, storage and distribution that will impact the quality of life for
21st Century peoples and train future scientists and engineers for careers
critical to achieving energy independence of our Nation. The NSF-REU Site is
designed with four key broader impacts in mind: (1) Students will be exposed to
a wide range of skill-building activities crucial for their careers including
good project management practices (daily reporting and reflection), and research
problem solving. (2) The program will train top national research talent in key
emerging areas of energy, critical for maintaining national preeminence. (3)
Participants will learn the importance of outreach by participating in a service
learning activity to improve awareness of energy technologies among high-school
students and community members. (4) Participation of under-represented groups in
engineering research will be increased, thereby contributing to building a more
nationally diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tennessee Technological
University (TTU) REU Site focuses on introducing cutting-edge energy
technologies to aspiring engineers and scientists. Sustainable energy generation
and storage strategies are becoming increasingly important as the world's
conventional supplies of fossil resources dwindle. Ongoing research advancements
in the energy sector are needed if our nation is to obtain energy independence
and maintain preeminence in technology and economic leadership. These factors
generate a need for trained personnel in energy related research areas. The REU
students will perform research on topics related to energy harvesting, (solar
energy, biomass pyrolysis, piezoelectric transducers, electricity from salinity
gradients) grid integration (solar power generation and transmission, electric
vehicle grid integration) and cost-effective storage (lithium-ion and lithium-
air rechargeable batteries and direct formic acid fuel cells). A dedicated group
of faculty at TTU is working in close collaboration in related energy areas. Our
goal is to introduce the interns to immersive research through an "Intelligent
Research" course and "Professional Development" workshops along with the
proposed research topics. The PI team will also offer lessons on topics
pertaining to effective research, attributes of a good researcher, interpreting
data and information effectively, efficient recordkeeping, developing reporting
and writing skills (diary keeping), effective dissemination of results,
qualities of an excellent presenter, ethical decision making and professional
growth and development. Field trips to ORNL and industries will also be arranged
to expose the students to energy related career opportunities and
collaborations. The REU Site will promote and encourage strong participation of
women, minorities, veterans and institutions with limited research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.