* 1757478
* SBIR Phase II:  An Affordable Metal Additive Manufacturing Machine
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Matthew Petros, 3DEO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,399,999.00

This SBIR Phase II Project aims to tackle the two greatest barriers to
technology adoption associated with metal additive manufacturing (AM) - cost and
quantities. Current metal AM platforms use expensive core components and
consumable materials in high-priced machines that produce 99.9% dense parts. The
proposed project calls into question the performance requirements that most
American manufacturers have for industrial grade stainless steel parts. While
these manufacturers require high performance, they cannot currently afford to
take advantage of AM benefits due to the high capital expenditure, maintenance,
and operating costs associated with current commercial technologies. This
proposal re-examines the material performance, machine cost and reliability
requirements necessary for a novel metal AM system to satisfy most American
manufacturers' needs. In developing a low-cost AM alternative, the goal of the
proposal is to allow an estimated over 50,000 American manufacturers to
capitalize on the benefits of AM and simultaneously compete in an ultra-
competitive, highly globalized manufacturing industry. In addition, procurement
for low to medium volume order quantities (1000 - 20,000 pieces) is incredibly
challenging with respect to high cost and long lead times. The proposed
invention of a low-cost machine allows for never seen scalability in metal AM,
allowing for smaller manufacturers to scale by taking advantage of meaningful
order quantities and compete with the resources of large conglomerates. This
research has broad implications in many industries and could be fundamentally
enabling for the growth and prosperity of American
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project re-examines
the need for high technology, high cost core components in currently available
commercial metallic AM machines. Through an innovative deconstruction of the
inkjet print head-based, binder jetting process, a method for producing metal
end-use parts has been created. The 3DEO process is based on a novel combination
of two low-tech and low cost, established technologies. The creation of a robust
prototype with this novel method is a highly challenging, multi-faceted project
involving key advances in materials science trough the development of a novel
binder system compatible with the new process as well as a fundamental
evaluation and improvement of material properties of the as-built parts. In
addition, completely re-designed sintering cycles and a lengthy evaluation of
shrinkage characteristics will be core challenges to overcome to achieve the
tight tolerances manufacturing partners require. As such, these challenges will
require tight cross-disciplinary collaboration for a meaningful outcome. The
goal of the proposed research is to fabricate powder metallurgy parts of
adequate structural integrity to satisfy industrial end-use
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.