* 1757220
* RII Track-1 Mississippi EPSCoR: Center for Emergent Molecular Optoelectronics (CEMOs)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* David Shaw, Mississippi State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors (OSCs) are
a class of materials that combine the electronic properties of semiconductors
with the chemical and mechanical properties of organic compounds, such as
polymers. OSCs have unique characteristics and offer fundamentally new
approaches to harvest energy, making them increasingly interesting for a range
of emerging technology applications, including sustainable energy, electronics
and biomedicine. However, limitations in the ability to predict, synthesize and
control OSCs and to understand the complexities of matter across a range of
scales hamper their broad application. This project aims to overcome these
barriers by generating the knowledge needed to extend the utility of OSCs into
the infrared region (IR) and control electronic correlations in organic and
hybrid systems. The research includes the development of new materials and
systems that have unique electronic, and optical properties for present and
future science and engineering challenges such as sustainable energy,
electronics, and biomedicine. Applications include solar cell devices, hybrid
electronics, bioimaging and biosensing. A new interdisciplinary material
research Center for Emerging Molecular Optoelectronics (CEMOs) will be formed.
Through this Center, the project will share resources and leverage partnerships
among Mississippi institutions of higher learning, national laboratories, and
industry as well as establish national and international collaborations to
strengthen the research capacity and to build and train an inclusive workforce
in optoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes of capturing energy from IR light
and controlling electronic correlations in organic and hybrid systems has
profound implications for next generation energy technologies and for developing
materials with novel optoelectronic functionalities. CEMOs will develop
theoretical and experimental tools, materials, and techniques to overcome
fundamental limitations of OSCs. Theoretical models will be developed to
establish design rules for guiding experiments, materials development,
predicting properties, and tailoring morphology to understand complex
contributions affecting optical and electrical processes. Systematic and
iterative research approaches in theory and experiments will provide
understanding of how photophysical, electronic, structural, and morphological
properties relate to elementary excitations, dynamic processes, and electronic
correlations within complex materials systems. The project team will synthesize
new materials capable of optical to electrical signal transduction of longer
wavelength light and develop new engineering routes to meet technologically
challenging IR applications, including biomedicine and biosensing. The Center's
education, outreach, and workforce development efforts will serve to support the
development of a qualified STEM workforce in Mississippi, including new faculty
hires and student engagement that will increase diversity at all levels. CEMOs
will facilitate the development of research capabilities, infrastructure, and
education opportunities in the areas of energy, advanced manufacturing, and
health in alignment with the state's Science and Technology
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.