* 1757942
* REU Site: Snapshots of Chemistry -- Visualization of Processes at the Molecular Level
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kyung Jung, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,470.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Southern California is located in Los Angeles, CA. The site supports the
training of 10 students over 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2021. Professor
Kyung Jung leads this site which is supported by the Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate. The site offers original
research projects on a wide array of chemistry related topics. Student
participants are paired with one of 32 research-active faculty members to pursue
unique projects, collect and analyze data, and organize results for reports and
presentations. Prior to the start of the program, students participate in a
newly designed, preparative pre-summer REU program. Students develop skills
necessary for professional chemistry careers by engaging in long-term mentoring
relationships and taking part in faculty-led seminars and discussions on topics
like responsible conduct in research, choosing a graduate school, and careers in
chemistry. Students also build a cohesive community of peers, mentors, and
graduate student advisors through participation in social activities. This
program is committed to expanding access to research experiences among
underserved and minority students from Southern California community colleges
and primarily undergraduate institutions, first-generation college students,
veterans, and people with disabilities. The program helps students become role
models for their peers and attract other students to science programs. This
synergy contributes to human resource development by improving the national
pipeline into advanced education and career success in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program provides students with intensive hands-on
experience in a wide array of chemistry sub-disciplines, including organic
synthesis, reaction catalysis, mechanistic chemistry, biochemistry and
biophysics, materials chemistry, theoretical chemistry and reaction dynamics,
and ultra-fast spectroscopy. Examples of projects include the conversion of
solar energy in chemical bonds, molecular synthesis, and visualizing molecular
interactions between drugs and biological targets. Each participant conducts
independent research in a participating faculty group and is trained closely by
a faculty advisor and assisted by a graduate student mentor. This model empowers
students to conduct individual research projects in their choice of research
area. Students are encouraged to disseminate their work through publication in
peer-reviewed journals or presentations at scientific conferences. To ensure a
quality program, this site is evaluated annually in collaboration with the USC
STEM Education Research Group and is refined
accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.