* 1757900
* REU Site: Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education-Emerging Interface Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2022
* USD 369,530.00

SPIRE-EIT (Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education -
Emerging Interface Technologies) at Iowa State University is a 10-week
interdisciplinary summer experience for 10 undergraduates that integrates
research and education in emerging interface technologies. Since the site's
inception in 2006, students' commitment to Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields has been demonstrated, as well as producing research
publications. Students are provided with classroom training and gain hands-on
experience using cutting-edge instruments, equipment, computers and
cyberinfrastructure. Classes in computer programming and graphics, interface
design, human-computer interaction, research skills, team skills, and ethics
occupy approximately one third of the students' time. In an unusual structure
that is focused on building a community of practice, students conduct
interdisciplinary research projects in groups of two or three, with all students
co-located in Iowa State's Virtual Reality Applications Center (VRAC). Each
group interacts with VRAC graduate students under the supervision of VRAC
faculty. The research projects are presented at an end-of-the summer campus-wide
research symposium in the form of posters, demos, and a five-page research
paper. Frequently the students present their research at research conferences
later during the school year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major trends are driving
research in Emerging Interface Technologies (EIT): a dramatic increase of
interface technologies themselves, and the ubiquitous permeation of technology
into our everyday lives. Correspondingly, this research focuses on new
interfaces that enhance people's perception, understanding of complexity, and
work performance. The SPIRE exposes students to three broad areas of EIT:
information visualization, virtual/augmented reality, human-agent interaction.
In particular, previous projects have focused on improving cockpit sensor
displays for pilots, the optimal use of emotional cues by intelligent agents
during crisis situations in the International Space Station, use of virtual
reality for improved drone navigation, use of augmented reality for reducing
errors in factory assembly lines, reducing cyber sickness, improved user
interfaces for faster traffic incident management, design tradeoffs of wearable
biosensors and use of wireless electroencephalography (EEG) caps with people who
have Parkinson's disease. More information about this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site can be found at the SPIRE-EIT web site:
http://www.vrac.iastate.edu/hci/reu/ .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.