* 1757223
* Workshops on Network Economics
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Jackson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Networks are crucial in understanding economic outcomes. Multiple key economic
questions require a network analysis. Whether an individual purchases one
commodity or another may depend on from whom he seeks advice about prices and
product qualities. The care given to a patient in a hospital and how much it
costs can depend on the network connections of the hospital and of the
physician. Understanding how networks form, how they are used and their
structure in diverse situations is important to almost all aspects of the social
sciences. To understand the fundamental properties of networked societies and
economies, those that may hold in diverse situations, it is crucial to develop a
deeper understanding of network theory from multiple perspectives. This award
funds a series of conferences that will advance research in this area. The
workshops will also disseminate work in progress, enable promising research to
find a critical audience and valuable feedback, and will provide new researchers
to the area and graduate students a source of exposure to some of the cutting-
edge, new and path-breaking research on networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
conference in the series will have a theme but all papers submitted relevant to
the general focus of the conference series will be considered. Key economic
issues of interest include networked markets, contagion and diffusion,
homophily, segregation and discrimination, networks in economic development, and
inequality. Cooperative and non-cooperative game theoretic approaches as well as
decision-theoretic approaches will be relevant. There are also related
theoretical and econometric issues of developing new models and statistical
techniques for estimating networked interactions, which may also be treated.
&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of networked models there will be presentations of
research a wide variety of applied fields in economics. Organizers will invite
speakers doing related research from other disciplines, including computer
science, sociology, and statistical physics in order to encourage
interdisciplinary work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.