* 1757313
* Chalcophile Element Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Roberta Rudnick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2021
* USD 138,655.00

The geochemical behavior of the economically important chalcophile (sulfur-
loving) elements is relatively poorly understood due to historical difficulties
in analyzing these elements at the low concentrations in which they occur in
common rocks. Recent advances in analytical methods now provides the ability to
analyze these elements at relatively high precision at very low (e.g., nanogram
per gram) concentration levels. This team aims to use the concentrations of
nominally chalcophile elements (specifically Cu, Ga, Ge, As, Mo, Ag, Cd, In, Sn,
Sb, W, Tl, Pb, and Bi) to address three fundamental questions in Earth science:
a) how has the continental crust formed and evolved over time?, b) how much
oxygen was in the atmosphere following the "Great Oxidation Event" (GOE) that
occurred at 2.3-2.4 billion years ago?, and c) what is Earth's volatile element
inventory?

Researchers will investigate these questions through three complementary
projects. The first seeks to understand why molybdenum is systematically
depleted in granites relative to rare earth elements by analyzing its
concentrations in rocks (eclogites) that represent the residues of ancient
subducted oceanic crust, and by determining the behavior of Mo during magmatic
differentiation that produces granites. Through these studies, they will
evaluate whether the upper crustal Mo depletion is due to its retention in
subducted slabs, its retention in lower continental crustal cumulates, or its
partitioning into a magmatic vapor phase and precipitation in molybdenum sulfide
(molybdenite) in hydrothermal veins. The results will shed light on the main
processes responsible for generation of the upper continental crust (UCC) and
will place constraints on total amount of molybdenite in the UCC, allowing for
more robust calculation of pO2 in the ancient atmosphere. The second project
seeks to determine the cause of the change in the molybdenum isotope composition
of the upper continental crust over geologic history, as observed in glacial
deposits (diamictites). The team will analyze Mo isotopes in several modern
weathering profiles to determine whether the onset of weathering in the presence
of oxygen can explain the diamictite data. If they find that Mo isotopes
fractionate during weathering in today's oxygenated atmosphere, it may allow
them to use the diamictite data to place constraints on the amount of
atmospheric oxygen that was present in the past. Finally, they will determine
the distribution of the full suite of chalcophile elements within rocks of the
upper mantle that are now exposed in the Pyrenees Mountains. Unlike similar
rocks that are rapidly transported to Earth's surface in magmas, these mantle
outcrops have retained sulfides, and thus will allow researchers to determine
how these elements behave during mantle melting, and also allow for an
independent estimate of Earth's abundance of moderately to highly volatile
chalcophile elements such as As, Cd, Ga, In, Sn and Tl. Determining the volatile
element abundances of Earth provides insights into how our planet formed.