* 1757663
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Applied Mathematics and Computational Modeling in the Greater Phoenix Area
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Wenbo Tang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 544,998.00

The REU program "Applied Mathematics and Computational Modeling in the Greater
Phoenix Area" is aimed at providing summer research experiences to
mathematically talented undergraduate students from 2-year institutions and
4-year liberal arts colleges who wouldn't otherwise participate in practical,
cutting-edge research in applied mathematics and computational modeling. The
program consists of two integral components --- a two-week preparatory module
for students from the Maricopa County Community College District, followed by an
eight-week research experience for all participants. The preparatory module will
expose students to mathematical topics that are not covered in a typical
community college curriculum, including a mix of interesting "real world"
problems and an introduction to numerical computations, which the students will
then use during the research period. Following the two-week course module,
students will work in small groups of 3-4 on problems suggested by mentors, in
areas of interesting overlap across research groups. Participating students will
learn applied mathematical concepts and numerical tools that model space- and
time-dependent dynamical processes. They will also be exposed to enrichment
activities including relevant research seminars and workshops on STEM
opportunities and career services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
REU program is to expand research opportunities for place-bound community
college and liberal arts college students; engage community college students to
matriculate into Baccalaureate programs; guide students in scholarship and
graduate school applications; and establish a supporting network to assist
students throughout their undergraduate programs. To realize these goals, the
curriculum is designed to provide opportunities to undergraduate mathematics and
science majors to work as part of a team on an interdisciplinary problem; read
journal articles to gain some background on a new subject quickly; analyze open-
ended problems using computer simulation as a discovery tool; and present a talk
on their work at the end of the program and (optionally) at an appropriate
research conference. Students are also encouraged to continue collaboration with
mentors remotely, leading to publications in archival journals. The summer
research will address problems related to weather prediction, atmospheric
dynamics, aviation hazard analyses and forecasting; image processing and Fourier
analysis; network dynamics and topology; and mathematical models of cancer
(especially brain and prostate cancer). Students will be supervised by
experienced faculty in their respective fields. By reaching out to community
colleges, the program will tap into diverse talents from underrepresented
minority groups and increase their research participation in mathematics and
STEM fields. Special efforts will be made to recruit students who are first-
generation college students as well as students who are female and/or members of
underrepresented groups in the mathematical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.