* 1757786
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Advanced Infrastructural Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2018,12/31/2022
* VIJAYA GOPU, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 357,012.00

The American Society of Civil Engineers 2017 Infrastructure Report Card gave a
poor grade of D+ on the current condition of the US infrastructure.
Deteriorating infrastructure is greatly impeding the nation's ability to compete
in the thriving global economy, and significant upgrading is necessary to ensure
our country remains globally competitive. Upgrading the nation's infrastructure
requires advancement in infrastructure materials and technologies and well-
trained engineers with expertise in advanced infrastructure materials. To
fulfill this need, the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette will provide undergraduate students with
hands-on research and training opportunities in advanced infrastructure
materials to encourage students to pursue careers and graduate degrees in this
field. The REU site aims at supporting workforce development of materials
engineers and promoting diversity in the engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten undergraduate researchers, mainly comprised
of underrepresented minority and female students, will be hosted at the REU Site
every summer for three years. Each year, the undergraduate researchers will
participate in a 10-week hands-on interdisciplinary research program and work
under the supervision of faculty advisors on a variety of research projects
related to advanced infrastructure materials. The research projects range from
fundamental materials research to innovative structural systems composed of
advanced materials. An educational field trip, workshops and seminars (on Grand
Challenges of US Infrastructure, Research Methods and Research Ethics, Technical
Writing and Presentation Skills, Graduate School Life and Application Process,
and Careers in STEM) will be organized to: 1) train students in research and
technical communication skills; 2) cultivate their interest in pursuing advanced
degrees and career in engineering field; 3) give them a direct insight into the
challenges our infrastructure is facing; and 4) offer them a unique experience
of southern Louisiana infrastructure problems, culture and landscape. A diverse
group of highly educated researchers and engineers with expertise in advanced
infrastructural materials will be created through this REU Site, contributing
towards enhancement of the US infrastructure and a more diverse engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.