* 1757708
* REU Site: Imaging and Molecular Approaches to Biological Problems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Joel Schildbach, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 364,720.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. Participating students will pursue research projects that involve the
use of imaging or other molecular techniques to answer important biological
questions. Participating faculty and labs are drawn from the Departments of
Biology, Biophysics and Chemistry, and the Carnegie Institution Department of
Embryology. In addition to lab research, students will engage in activities
designed to improve scientific communication, to introduce concepts in
responsible conduct of research, to provide practice for the GRE and to prepare
participants for successful application to graduate programs. Applications are
submitted through the program web page and comprise brief essays, transcripts
and letters of recommendation. Students with limited research experience or
limited research opportunities are especially encouraged to
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, including two-year
colleges, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is
conducted and communicated, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Students will participate in a community of summer
researchers composed of undergraduates drawn from across the country who are
engaging in inquiry in one of many disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://www.bio.jhu.edu/BioREU, or by contacting the PI
(Joel Schildbach at joel@jhu.edu) or the co-PI (Michael McCaffery at
jmccaffery@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.