* 1757785
* REU Site: Psychology Research Experience Program
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Tim Rogers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 288,941.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program and is also
supported by SBE's National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
(NCSES). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and integrates research
and education. The explicit motivation for this REU program is to address the
well-documented achievement gap whereby members of underrepresented populations,
racial and ethnic minorities, low-income, and first-generation college students:
(1) apply to PhD programs in psychology and neuroscience and (2) successfully
complete their doctoral training, in proportions far lower than their
representation in the overall population. The Psychology Research Experience
Program (PREP) at the Department of Psychology of the University of Wisconsin,
Madison provides intensive mentoring and experience in scientific research and
in professional development to undergraduates who have expressed and
demonstrated an interest in a career in scientific psychology. The intellectual
focus for PREP is integrating principles and methods of data science into the
study of psychology and neuroscience. This focus reflects in all branches of
science relating to behavior, including data mining and meta analysis, large-
scale collection of data, and the increasing appreciation that individual data
sets can constitute, "big data" which methods from machine learning and other
branches of engineering can be applied. PREP's combination of a mentored
research experience, training in the tools of data science, and professional
development and networking, is designed to equip its participating students with
the skills that are necessary for a successful career in STEM. Thus, it will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PREP features a balance of mentored laboratory
research and a curriculum of scientific instruction, professional development,
and networking opportunities. Each PREP student is paired with a professor whose
research falls into one or more of these domains of psychology research:
Biological, Clinical, Cognition and Cognitive Neuroscience, Developmental, and
Social. Tiered mentorship includes graduate student or postdoctoral fellow from
the host lab, as well as by a graduate student in the Department of Computer
Science or the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. These PREP
research mentors, themselves, participate in a weekly mentor training workshop.
In addition to its primary goal of broadening participation in STEM-related
careers, PREP contributes quantitative and qualitative survey research to the
Student Assessment of their Learning Gains (SALG) instrument to improve teaching
and mentoring in the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.