* 1757393
* REU Site: Launching Aerospace's Underrepresented Students into the Next Chapter - Unmanned Aerial Systems (LAUNCH-UAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Ward, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,618.00

The goal of this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site is to
promote greater participation of underrepresented minority (URM) students (e.g.,
African-Americans, Hispanics, and women) in aerospace engineering research on
unmanned-aerial systems (UAS). To achieve this goal, the Department of Aerospace
Engineering at Iowa State University offers the REU site, entitled Launching
Aerospace's Underrepresented Students into the Next Chapter-Unmanned Aerial
Systems (LAUNCH-UAS). There are four objectives for this site: (1) provide
students with cutting-edge summer research experience in UAS, (2) expose
students to aerospace research projects and engineers, (3) develop students'
research and professional skills to prepare them for graduate programs, and (4)
provide students with opportunities to build a community of mentors for graduate
programs and beyond. The LAUNCH-UAS site will bring together URM students and a
broad range of members of the aerospace engineering community to break down
barriers for URM students to participate in the aerospace field. Potential
benefits to society as a result of this site include: developing well prepared,
motivated URM students who want to pursue aerospace engineering graduate
programs and enter the workforce; educating aerospace engineers who are
knowledgeable about opportunities within aerospace academia and industry and
will eventually serve as inspiring mentors to future generations of URM
engineers; and sharing key components and lesson learned from the LAUNCH-UAS
site to the broader U.S. colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
a 10-week summer LAUNCH-UAS site, URM students will have an opportunity to
conduct research on operation and autonomy aspects of long-endurance UAS.
Students will participate in one of multiple independent research projects
relating to UAS, such as developing onboard hardware that continuously monitors
essential UAS components for safe and autonomous operation; model and simulate
low-altitude traffic management systems for autonomous UAS; model and simulate
the operation of UAS and examine their ethical, legal, societal, and
environmental implications; develop an inductive charging capability for
supplying power to UAS while in operation; design, build, and experiment with
onboard spray systems for UAS and characterize the spray droplets; develop low-
power anti-/de-icing techniques and examine various icephobic coatings for safer
long-term autonomous UAS flights; and create an educational module that
increases engineers' awareness of ethical issues surrounding the operation of
UAS. In addition to conducting independent research on UAS, students will
participate in a number of LAUCH-UAS site components that include professional
development workshops, field trips and lab tours, research luncheon seminars,
and social activities. There is also a series of assignments intended to give
students opportunities to prepare presentations and documents typical of those
that they would be expected to complete as independent researchers and as
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.