* 1757078
* REU Site: Research Opportunities in Biological and Chemical Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2023
* George ODoherty, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 09/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Northeastern
University is located in Boston, MA. The program is led by Professors George
O'Doherty and Oyindasola Oyelaran. It is funded by the Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. The site supports 10
students for 10 weeks in the summers of 2019-2021. The objective of the program
is to provide opportunities for undergraduate students who have a strong
interest in chemistry research and a desire to explore this interest further.
Students conduct immersive laboratory research under the guidance and mentorship
of experienced scientists in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology.
Participants in the program are first-generation college students and students
from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in the physical sciences. A
program goal is to contribute to building a more diverse scientific community.
By participating in this program, students not only gain experience in chemical
research but also learn valuable professional skills. They broaden their
exposure to options for their next step, whether that is entering graduate
school or pursuing a career in chemistry or related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this REU site is catalysis, broadly defined.
The site provides opportunities for students to learn about novel insights and
methods of analysis used to understand the chemistry of life as well as to
develop innovative, sustainable chemistry. and tackle fundamental problems that
span organic, biological, computational, inorganic, and analytical chemistry.
Along with the research, a deeper understanding of these topics is incentivized
through short talks, seminars with discussions, and a final oral presentation,
coordinated so that all REU site students are exposed to the various scientific
questions explored at the site. In addition to the research experience, the
students participate in a series of informational and training workshops geared
to increase awareness of opportunities in graduate school and careers in
chemistry and related fields, and hone skills needed to thrive as a scientist.
Through the common theme of catalysis an environment is established where
students are engaged in each other?s projects and participate in the critical
thinking process that underlies scientific
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.