* 1757922
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Renewable and Environmental Collaborative - IREC
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Frank Bowman, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to the University
of North Dakota, located in Grand Forks, ND, supports the training of 10
undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. The
principal investigators are Frank Bowman and Guodong Du. The site is jointly
funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences of the
Directorate for Geosciences. This REU site focuses on interdisciplinary research
at the intersection of chemistry, chemical engineering, and atmospheric
sciences. Participants are jointly mentored by a team of interdisciplinary
faculty, providing students unique exposure to a variety of scientific
approaches and research challenges. In addition to 10 weeks of intensive
research, student participants also receive training in science communication
and research conduct, participate in community outreach, and learn about ethics
in research. Particular emphasis is placed on recruiting Native American and
first generation students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects target
renewable and environmental science and engineering, including projects on the
development of biodegradable polymers from renewable sources, measurement and
modeling of atmospheric processes, and the production of fertilizer from coal
and biomass waste streams. Students receive professional development training,
particularly in science communication, which teaches participants how to convey
science to a general audience. The participants utilize this training in
outreach activities for elementary age children, encouraging both the children
and the REU participants to pursue science and science-related careers. Emphasis
is placed on recruiting first generation and unrepresented minority students,
targeting students from primarily undergraduate institutions and Native American
tribal colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.