* 1757837
* REU Site: Frontiers in Biomedical Imaging
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jennifer Amos, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The REU site Frontiers in Biomedical Imaging at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) provides a state-of-the-art, interdisciplinary research
environment in biomedical imaging to inspire and train undergraduates from
under-represented demographics in engineering to encourage their transition to
graduate degree programs. Throughout education, images are used to clearly
convey complex ideas and to stimulate curiosity and interest. Likewise,
investigations in the biological sciences and in medicine invariably require
clear pictures of cells, tissues, and organs to discover mechanisms of life and
to detect and understand the complex pathological processes of disease.
Therefore, imaging is the centerpiece for this REU Site, serving as a bridge
between education, engineering, the biological sciences, and medicine. Students
gain an advanced skillset in state-of-the-art imaging technologies and
interdisciplinary research that they can carry with them to graduate school.
They are exposed to the breadth of imaging techniques and medical applications
while simultaneously focusing on a specific project at the forefront of biology
and medical science. This program applies literature-supported mentorship and
training strategies to directly address pipeline leaks for the transition of
under-represented groups to graduate degree programs in engineering or related
programs. The program also provides enrichment of technical skills,
professionalism, and career-readiness. The program is assessed and refined in
real-time to continually improve the student experience and value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site is dedicated to inspiring and training
undergraduates in STEM fields through a summer experience in biomedical imaging
research. The goal is to create a coherent interdisciplinary program centered on
the visualization of biology and human tissues at all scales, and for students
to develop a network of role models, mentors, and peers to support and encourage
their transition to graduate school. Undergraduate sophomores and juniors in a
variety of STEM disciplines will be recruited with special efforts directed
toward females and under-represented minorities at minority-serving institutions
and small colleges with limited research opportunities. Students begin this
10-week summer program with a 3-day "Bioimaging Bootcamp" to provide
foundational knowledge in biology, imaging, and microscopy through lectures,
demonstrations, lab activities, and tours, together with social introductions.
Students then engage in intensive research projects in imaging and biological
visualization, closely mentored by a faculty member and graduate student. All
research projects, ranging from imaging single molecules using fluorescence
microscopy to MRI-based imaging of the brain in living mammals, have three
essential elements: (1) imaging and/or microscopy, (2) a hypothesis-driven
analysis of biological samples, and (3) an analytical or computational
component. Students also have unique clinical medical imaging immersion
experiences, share experiences with their cohort through biweekly social
activities, attend research seminars and professional development sessions, and
interact with participants in other REUs on campus to expand their network.
Summer achievements culminate in poster and oral presentations at a campus
undergraduate research symposium that draws undergraduate researchers from
throughout the Midwest, as well as the submission of an abstract to the
Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual Meeting, where they reconvene in
the Fall for continued education, networking, and career-enriching
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.