* 1757629
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Chemistry at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Paul Spiegel, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 289,033.00

This REU Site award to Western Washington University (WWU), located in
Bellingham, WA, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2018-2020. This site is supported by the NSF Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, in partnership with the
Department of Defense. This program in WWU's Department of Chemistry provides
research projects and professional development for students from community
colleges and small four-year universities with limited research opportunities.
Among the recruited participants, an emphasis is placed on underrepresented
minorities from community colleges. Under the guidance of a faculty mentor, the
students perform research in the areas of biochemistry, synthetic chemistry, or
materials chemistry. In addition to providing an authentic research experience
for these students, this program facilitates student transitions from community
colleges to four-year universities, thus increasing the likelihood of these
students obtaining an advanced degree in the sciences. The research training and
workshops for REU participants provides them with training towards a career in
chemistry, or a related science, and contributes to increasing the diversity of
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student participants choose a
research project from one of three main areas of chemistry: biochemistry
(structure, function and engineering of proteins and nucleic acids), synthetic
chemistry (organic and organometallic method development, natural product
synthesis, small molecule activation, biomaterials), or materials chemistry
(nanomaterials, solar concentrators, heterogeneous catalysis, computational
methods). This program also provides workshops that improve students'
perspectives on how to conduct research, communicate scientifically, and
initiate their career in chemistry. In addition to numerous formal and informal
activities for the entire group of REU participants, divisional groups
(biochemistry, synthetic chemistry, and materials chemistry) are used to provide
additional training that is specific to the research area, including workshops
and combined group meetings. Many projects are also collaborative between
multiple investigators at WWU, allowing the REU students to interact with more
faculty members and get exposure to a broader scope of research topics. The
culmination of the summer program is a symposium in which REU participants give
poster presentations on their research projects in addition to keynote speakers
from each of the three research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.