* 1757198
* Information, Attention, and Coordination in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* George-Marios Angeletos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 277,000.00

Research demonstrates that individuals often do not behave in the way assumed in
economic models. This award funds research that incorporates more realistic
assumptions about individual and household behavior into macroeconomic modeling.
Dr. Angeletos and his team will conduct several projects to understand the
empirical, quantitative and policy relevance of this alternative approach to
understanding macroeconomic outcomes. The research has transformative potential.
The new model of economy-wide market efficiency assumes that individuals are
boundedly rational (that is, they are sometimes inattentive or have limited
cognitive abilities). The result promises to be new theories about the causes of
business cycle fluctuations. These new results would be extremely useful for
policy makers in many contexts, including the conduct of fiscal and monetary
policy. The result would be a direct contribution to performance and
competitiveness of the U.S. economy.

The researcher will examine how frictions in information, attention, and
cognition affect belief formation, coordination, and the overall outcomes that
can be achieved in large economies. Specific contributions include: (1) A
parsimonious structural interpretation of salient features of macroeconomic
data. (2) A new formalization of the Keynesian multiplier widely used in
macroeconomics that does not depend on unrealistic assumptions about nominal
rigidity and policy constraints. This formalization may help to explain why
aggregate demand shocks can trigger a recession. (3) A theory of why general
equilibrium mechanisms may be less potent, or more slow-moving, than is usually
presumed in macroeconomics. This theory can also explain the economy may respond
to shocks and policy shifts as if the agents were discounting the future
heavily. The new theory will be evaluated against empirical evidence. (4) New
insights into the effects of monetary and fiscal policy during liquidity tramps,
including a resolution to the forward-guidance puzzle and a rationale for front-
loading fiscal stimuli. (5) Re-examining fiscal multipliers and Ricardian
equivalence, along with a new approach to the equilibrium determinacy of the
Neo-Keynesian model and the role of Taylor rules. (6) An investigation of the
conditions under which the two fundamental welfare theorems do or do not extend
to economies in which the agents are rationally inattentive or cognitively
constrained. (7) Adaptation of lessons from the Ramsey policy paradigm and
public finance to such economies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.