* 1757840
* REU Site: Summer REU Program in Marine Science at the University of Delaware
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Joanna York, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2023
* USD 451,354.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of
Delaware's College of Earth, Ocean and Environment in Lewes, DE will be renewed
for three years. The program will bring ten undergraduates to the Lewes campus
each summer, and interns will conduct semi-independent research projects during
the 10-week program. At the end of the summer, interns present their results
during a mini-symposium and write up their work as a scientific paper. Weekly
seminars by University of Delaware faculty will provide interns with a broad
overview of marine sciences. Professional development workshops include career
paths in the sciences, science communication, and graduate school funding.
Interns will participate in several field trips including a day trip aboard the
R/V Joanne Daiber, which introduces them to a variety of research and
oceanographic techniques, a field trip to Cape Henlopen State Park, for hands-on
introduction to coastal geology, and a marsh walk, which introduces them to the
inhabitants and the ecological role of these systems. Students will be encourage
to continue their research after the program, either by being a co-author on a
scientific publication, pursuing a senior thesis or attending a scientific
conference. The program also includes a partnership with the Delaware Technical
Community College. Most of the funding provided supports participant costs for
thirty undergraduates, including student stipends, housing and transportation to
and from their home to participate in the program. This REU program contributes
to the national goals of training the next generation of scientists and
developing the nation's scientifically-trained workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Delaware will continue to manage the REU
program located on their Lewes, DE campus, which will provide students with
direct access to faculty research mentors, the extensive research facilities on
campus and the coastal environment. The College of Earth, Ocean and
Environmental Sciences includes the Departments of Geological Sciences and
Geography and the School of Marine Science and Policy, offering students the
opportunity for interdisciplinary research topics. Faculty mentors' expertise
spans the range of marine science and professional development activities will
introduce students to skills required for successful careers. The program will
support the extensive technical training for thirty undergraduates, preparing
these students to enter the workforce or to pursue additional graduate
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.