* 1757051
* Collaborative Research:  Railroads and the Growth of American Manufacturing:  Evidence from Complete Counts of the Census of Manufacturing in 1850, 1860, 1870, and 1880
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Martin Rotemberg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 154,539.00

Manufacturing in the United States rose to global economic prominence in the
19th century along with the spread of the national railroad network. This
research examines the impacts of railroad network expansion on manufacturing
productivity growth, using data from the United States Census of Manufacturers.
The United States Census of Manufacturers collected detailed information on
every manufacturing establishment in the country in 1850, 1860, 1870, and 1880.
The investigators are collecting these establishment-level data and assembling
digital images of the handwritten Census manuscript pages. The investigators are
then entering these data to be made publicly available for use by others and for
their own research on the development of American manufacturing.

The preliminary analysis from this research, using county-by-industry
tabulations of the Census of Manufacturers data, suggests that an expanding
railroad network led to substantial economic gains by increasing manufacturing
activity in productive areas that were less accessible by natural waterways.
These preliminary estimates suggest a central role for transportation
infrastructure in supporting economic growth. The investigators extend this
analysis to draw in important ways on the new establishment-level data from the
Census of Manufacturers, allowing for impacts of expanded access to markets on
firm markups. This research further estimates the impacts of improved access to
markets on firm technical efficiency, as innovation incentives may increase
along with the extent of the market. The investigators also explore the
efficiency of allocation of resources across firms in this period, in contrast
to the modern United States and modern developing countries, and estimate
whether the efficiency of allocation of resources across firms improved with
increases in market connectedness.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.