* 1757253
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Limited Consideration and Positive Spillovers in Advertising
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Erkut Yusuf Ozbay, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2023
* USD 15,504.00

Recent studies have identified positive spillovers in advertising; a process
where advertising for one product increases consumption of another product. The
proposed research project will use laboratory experiments to study a new model
of advertising with positive spillovers that is designed to understand whether
such spillovers are beneficial. This model improves on existing work by bridging
the gap between three separate and different bodies of literature in the
economics of advertising, the effects of limited attention, and of network
analysis. The aim of the experiments is to better understand: (1) conditions
that make advertising socially wasteful or useful and (2) whether a well-
informed policy maker can reduce socially wasteful advertising or take advantage
of socially beneficial advertising. The research results will provide a guide to
US businesses on how best to invest their advertising resources. The results
will also provide important inputs into the promotion of different government
policies that may be related to each other. This award will fund a graduate
dissertation research, hence contribute to the development of US research
capital and global leadership in economics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of experiments designed
to test the validity and empirical implications of a novel model of advertising.
The proposed experiments will be conducted in two stages: An Online Survey which
will be used to elicit a perceived product network on a set of charitable
organizations and a laboratory experiment in which the effects of advertising
will be measured through incentivized choice in response to experimentally
varied advertising stimuli. These projects will be completed sequentially, with
the results of the online survey informing the parameterization of the
laboratory experimental treatments. The study will answer two questions: (i) to
what extent can the model of advertising with product networks explain responses
to advertising campaigns by charitable organizations? (ii) how can charitable
organizations, facing similar product networks, optimally plan advertising
campaigns in the presence of spillovers? The results of the research project can
help charitable organizations, businesses, and governments plan and execute
efficient advertising campaigns in the presence of network effects. These
successful advertising campaigns will lead to better business performance, hence
increase economic growth in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.