* 1757761
* REU Site: Security of Smart Things
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/28/2022
* USD 327,174.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
Florida International University. This REU Site will host a diverse group of
students from universities across the nation who will spend their summer working
on research related to the security and privacy of smart things. Smart devices
are found in our homes and daily environment in many places such as appliances,
phones, cameras, and cars as well as many other common applications. Since these
devices can communicate and process data, they are vulnerable to various
networking and software attacks such as malware, unauthorized access,
impersonation, data modification, and denial of service. The research is led by
an experienced faculty team that plans to offer a balance of theory,
applications, and practical skills as well as mentoring and professional
development opportunities for the students. The students will learn how to
design, implement, and assess research projects in areas that are becoming
crucial for the safety and privacy of all citizens. The site will focus on
recruiting under-represented minorities, particularly drawing on the surrounding
universities with large Hispanic populations. This site is co-funded by the CISE
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will introduce practical innovations and mechanisms for maintaining the
privacy and security of smart devices such as wearable technologies, appliances,
and mobile devices as well as smart homes and cities that deploy these devices.
This will be achieved through the use of state-of-the art facilities run by
faculty members with significant expertise in the security of smart things. The
goals of the project include providing a quality research experience for
undergraduates, increasing participation of female and under-represented
minorities in computing fields, preparing students to pursue graduate studies in
cyber security fields, and building a community of security of smart things
researchers. By the end of the program, the students should acquire skills that
will lead to rewarding professional careers that are vital for preserving our
national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.