* 1757395
* REU Site: Next-generation health monitoring systems with flexible electronics, novel algorithms and secure communication.
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Geethapriya Thamilarasu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 366,563.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, Next-generation health
monitoring systems with flexible electronics, novel algorithms and secure
communication, at the University of Washington Bothell (UWB) will engage a
diverse group of undergraduate students in interdisciplinary and collaborative
research supervised by faculty members who have different but complementary
specializations in biomedical engineering, signal processing and data security.
One of the main objectives of this REU site is to increase the participation of
women, underrepresented minorities, and first-generation students in
undergraduate research in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. The
overarching theme of these research projects is advancing the technologies for
the development of reliable, low-cost and comfortable health monitoring devices
having features such as delivering real-time data over the internet for
distanced care and cloud processing. Recent advances in multidisciplinary
research have brought together innovations in technologies, resulting in great
strides in healthcare device development that has enhanced care efficiency,
quality and efficacy in hospital services. The research projects will provide
opportunities for the students to develop their research skills by exposing them
to interdisciplinary, collaborative, cutting-edge, and accessible research. Each
group of students will work on a specific project while collaborating with the
other groups to solve a bigger problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site
program will engage 10 participants per year for a rewarding 10-week summer
research experience with dedicated and enthusiastic faculty members who have
designed interdisciplinary and collaborative research projects. The primary
objective of the REU Site program's projects is to develop reliable and
comfortable health monitoring devices with real-time communication capability
for remote data access to allow distance-care of patients. The development of
these devices requires collaborative research work in the areas of medical
devices, signal processing and data security. It is expected that a group of two
students will work on each project. The projects are accessible to undergraduate
students and, at the same time, are contemporary research problems with
potentially novel solutions that can lead to publications. In addition, the
program will emphasize the training of students in the fundamentals of
conducting research. In line with this goal, weekly professional development
seminars will be conducted on subjects such as abstract writing, research ethics
and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.