* 1757188
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Competing Campuses: College Majors, Tuition and Admissions
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Sarah Turner, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,100.00

American universities differ greatly in the majors they offer. This means that
students' preference for a major may determine their choices of university. A
university, seeking qualified applicants will select tuition levels and major
offerings given its resources, student demand, and competition from other
universities. The proposed research will study student application and
enrollment decisions and university choices of tuition, majors offered, and
admissions, focusing on how university competition for students and its
financial conditions affect admissions and enrolments. The research will combine
several large data sets and modern methods to study how choices made by students
and universities interact to determine university enrolments. The result of this
research will provide a tool for making higher education decisions by students
and universities policies on majors to offer. The success of current policies to
promote and encouraged STEM education in the U.S. depends on providing these
majors by universities; this research therefore provides a guide on how best to
develop U.S. STEM workforce. This research project develops and estimate an
equilibrium model of the US higher education market. The PIs specify a utility
function for high school seniors and an objective function for universities. The
student utility function is estimated using a GMM estimator that instrument for
endogenous university characteristics. The PIs then estimate the parameters of
the university's objective function assuming universities play a Nash game, in
which they jointly set prices and majors offered considering the actions of
other universities. The estimation of the university objective will follow
previous work in Industrial Organization that uses partial identification to
address multiple equilibria that arise in simultaneous games. The results of
this research project will provide an input into the development U.S. STEM
education workforce, hence US's global technological leadership and economic
growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.