* 1757499
* REU Site: Research Internships in Ocean Sciences (RIOS)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Josh Kohut, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2020
* USD 250,643.00

Research training for the next generation of marine scientists and
oceanographers is an important focus for the Division of Ocean Sciences.
Tomorrow's oceanographers require technological, interdisciplinary training that
few undergraduates have experienced. Research Internships in Ocean Science
(RIOS), the REU site hosted by the Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences at
Rutgers University, is designed around mentors drawn from an internationally
recognized faculty, high caliber research facilities, access to multiple coastal
sites, a commitment to undergraduate hands-on research experiences, and strong
programs in marine science and outreach. Through independent projects and team
research experiences, students focus on process-oriented concepts and techniques
applicable in any marine ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers REU Site
will provide a total of twenty-four undergraduates with internships over the
two-year period. The goal of RIOS is to enable students interested in ocean
sciences to participate in meaningful, interactive research directed by an
enthusiastic, experienced group of mentors. Group activities and independent
research are embedded within ongoing programs, many of which are focused on the
New Jersey continental shelf and adjacent estuaries. At the beginning of each
summer internship, a four-day orientation introduces students to ongoing
research, focusing on the Raritan River-Raritan Bay and the Mullica River-Great
Bay systems. The two estuaries provide a sharp contrast in their human impacts
on coastal ecosystems. During the first week, students also consult with
mentors, and attend workshops on how to formulate a research question and write
a proposal. Students then begin research projects either at the main campus in
New Brunswick, NJ or at the Rutgers University Marine Field Station (RUMFS) in
Tuckerton, NJ. Students make oral progress reports of their research in a mid-
program workshop, receive instruction on how to write up and analyze their data,
and how to prepare a poster for the final poster
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct independent research
projects with the guidance of research mentors and will participate in a variety
of professional development activities, including workshops on scientific
ethics, scientific writing, the graduate school experience and career options,
as well as field trips and outreach events. The program conducts a national
search for applicants and seeks to engage students who are from schools with
limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports student
stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. This project supports the
national goals of developing the next generation of scientists and the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.