* 1757908
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Unmanned Systems Foundations and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Brittany Duncan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 440,649.00

The "Unmanned Systems Foundation and Application" Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Nebraska offers an intensive and
comprehensive research experience to ten undergraduate students per year in the
context of unmanned systems, a rapidly growing field of scientific and
technological research. A team of faculty experts from the Nebraska Intelligent
MoBile Unmanned Systems Lab (NIMBUS Lab) provides individual mentoring for ten
weeks to instill the foundations of research methodology and to conduct hands-on
research activities on a variety of unmanned systems applications. The
participants engage in professional development activities to better prepare
them for Science, Technology, Engineering or Mathematics (STEM) careers.
Students from computer science, computer engineering, mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, and other related majors are considered. Particular
attention is given to students from underrepresented groups and from
institutions in the Midwest that lack research opportunities, in order to
support broader educational goals and diversity in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each REU participant's research project focuses
on unmanned systems with topics including: attitude control of nanosatellites,
behavior studies of robots in complex environments around humans, characterizing
and developing vehicles for atmospheric profiling, and asset management during
wildfires with unmanned aerial vehicles. Projects build on ongoing faculty
research, but are crafted for participants to gain experience in all aspects of
research, from conducting a literature review and prototyping, to understanding
the broad potential impact of the technology being investigated. Participant
development will be quantified by closely assessing their growth through the REU
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.