* 1757885
* REU Site: BME Community of Undergraduate Research Scholars for Cancer (BME CUReS Cancer)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Mia Markey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 397,808.00

The BME Community of Undergraduate Research Scholars for Cancer (BME CUReS
Cancer) REU Site at the University of Texas (UT) at Austin will provide
opportunities for a diverse group of talented undergraduates traditionally
underrepresented in engineering to make contributions towards the fundamental
understanding of the physical principles of cancer development, prevention, and
treatment during a ten-week summer research experience. An aim of this research
experience is that the Scholars will be inspired to go on in their careers to
function in multi-disciplinary teams of researchers from disparate fields in
engineering, medicine, biological science, physical science, and healthcare
fields to advance human health. The Site's partnership with the UT Medical
School and Texas 4000, a non-profit organization that cultivates student leaders
and engages communities in the fight against cancer, will help to increase
public awareness of cancer research, in particular how physical science and
engineering positively impact healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is a
disease of complexity and engineering principles in particular are developed to
study, model, and solve complex problems. The scientific theme of the BME CUReS
Cancer Site is leveraging Biomedical Engineering to Open a New Frontier in
Oncology. BME CUReS Cancer Scholars will be matched with a project of
appropriate scope from 35 different laboratories representing a wide range of
research topics pertinent to cancer research, such as biomaterials, drug
delivery, optical imaging, medical imaging, and artificial intelligence in
medicine. These topics were selected in response to the barriers to achieving
progress in cancer research that have been identified by the National Cancer
Institute. It is now broadly recognized that understanding how the range of
physical laws and principles governing the behavior of all matter are operative
in cancer at every scale will be critical to understanding and controlling
cancer. Cancer is a disease of complexity and engineering principles in
particular are developed to study, model, and solve complex problems. Biomedical
Engineering is uniquely poised to make a significant intellectual contribution
to addressing these key challenges in cancer&lt;br/&gt;research using an
engineering approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.