* 1757720
* REU Site: Molecular and Synthetic Microbiology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 340,282.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia, located in Athens, Georgia,
will support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. This program will introduce undergraduates to areas of microbial
research and increase their awareness of careers in microbiology and graduate
school application process through multiple workshops. Students from groups that
are underrepresented in the scientific community, including deaf and hard-of-
hearing students and ethnic minorities, are encouraged to participate. Each REU
participant conducts an independent project with a faculty mentor residing in
one of several Departments (e.g., Microbiology, Marine Sciences). All provide
research topics that address the functions of microscopic organisms and use
interdisciplinary techniques that combine knowledge from diverse fields,
including Genetics, Biochemistry, and Bioinformatics. Projects may address broad
questions including the role of microbes in environmental or geochemical
processes, or in engineering microbes to synthesize industrially-relevant
compounds. These processes may be dissected at the molecular or genome sequence
levels. Student applications are submitted electronically, and students will be
selected by a committee of research faculty.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Additional
support will be provided to deaf or hard-of-hearing (D/HH) participants.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Participants will meet with faculty,
attend scientific seminars, tour local biotech industries, participate in
discussions of science ethics, and join regular laboratory group meetings.
Students will present their research results at the end of the summer in a
poster session.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://mib.uga.edu/reu-site-molecular-and-synthetic-microbiology, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Vincent J. Starai at vjstarai@uga.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Timothy Hoover at trhoover@uga.edu).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.