* 1757602
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Cutting-Edge Research though the Analysis of Global Data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Dallas Abbott, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2021
* USD 517,418.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at Columbia Univeristy's
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO), which is located in Palisades, NY, will
host fourteen undergraduate interns for a 10 week summer research experience
from 2018-2020. The title of the program is "Interdisciplinary Cutting-Edge
Research through the Analysis of Global Data", and the "global data" theme
focuses the experience on a data-driven and solutions-oriented approach to
scientific research. Students work in LDEO's lively interdisciplinary research
and education communities and are individually mentored by at least one of
LDEO's 180 PhD-level scientists. The goals of the program are for students to
learn through their own experience what research is like, so they can explore
research careers; for students to develop self-confidence in their independent
research and communication abilities and scientific identities, by their coming
to understand cutting-edge issues and contributing to their solution; and for
them to form lasting professional relationships with scientists. Research
projects are in all areas of the Earth, atmospheric, oceanic and environmental
sciences and follow the diverse disciplinary interests of the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional development efforts include the three day
Cutting Edge Workshop, held at the beginning of the program, which has the goal
of teaching students to rapidly assess the purpose, methodology and logic of a
scientific paper and to think critically about its importance. Students also
participate in Fire Safety Training, Lab Safety Training and Title IX training,
a Computing Orientation workshop, a weekly scientific lecture series, a Research
Ethics workshop, a scientific writing workshop and a career workshop. Students
will be housed in dormitories at Columbia University in New York City, but they
will work at LDEO, traveling to and from via bus each day. Students will also be
introduced to the capabilities of the LDEO computing environment, and especially
to data analysis, database access and the display of data (e.g. on maps). Most
of the funding provides support for student stipends, housing and student travel
to attend the program. The program conducts a national search for applicants and
seeks to engage students who are from schools with limited research
opportunities. This program supports the national goal of developing the next
generation of scientists and the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.