* 1757811
* REU Site: Accelerator Physics and Synchrotron Radiation Science
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Ivan Bazarov, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2023
* USD 410,904.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics at Cornel University. The site will support twelve undergraduate
students per year in research projects in accelerator physics and synchrotron
radiation science. The student participants have full access to the resources of
the Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education (CLASSE) and
the University, and will work closely with experienced researchers. Although the
research scope of this REU program is focused on understanding the fundamental
physics of beams and accelerators and the uses of the radiation they produce,
the techniques and technologies utilized are applicable to a much wider range of
scientific careers. In addition, each student is asked to participate in one of
the outreach programs at the Laboratory, teaching them to communicate the
scientific ideas with the public and exposing them to the outreach prospects at
their home institutions, through the Society of Physics Students (SPS) chapters
and other outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cornell Laboratory has an
international reputation for research, with a constellation of programs
including accelerator physics, synchrotron radiation research, and microwave
superconductivity. The students will work on a range of projects that advance
the Laboratory's scientific mission, further their education and training, and
heighten their interest in pursuing careers in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Students will also attend lectures on wide
topics in the accelerator physics and X-ray sciences; take part in talks and
hands-on activities that introduce various frontiers of physics research with
the larger group of REU groups on campus; and attend events addressing social
and ethical issues in scientific research and conduct. These joint activities
will provide an environment that fosters networking of the future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.