* 1757680
* REU Site: Cultivating Next Generation Software Engineering Researchers
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Mehdi Mirakhorli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2021
* USD 372,000.00

This project is for a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). It will provide 10 undergraduate
students with the opportunity to conduct research for 10 weeks with faculty
members in an increasingly growing field of software engineering. A nationwide
recruitment process will be used to select cohorts of undergraduate students.
The key goal is to target underrepresented groups (women, minorities, and
persons with disabilities), first generation college students, and students from
undergraduate institutions with limited research opportunities. In addition to
conducting research, the students will participate in other professional
development activities such as industry field trips, professional seminars,
invited speaker series, career guidance, and graduate school preparation. Thus,
the project will inspire the students to pursue advanced degree programs and
research career in computer science. Finally, software systems have become the
critical infrastructure of the society and are increasingly important to
national interests including health, energy, cybersecurity, and so on. The
project will prepare a large pool of individuals trained in the field of
software engineering to address the increasing national
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10 talented undergraduate students will work in
small teams on carefully planned research experiences. The project focuses on
three main themes, Developers' Productivity, Communication and Collaboration,
and Design and Creativity, and spans the entire software development life cycle.
The planned research projects will focus on (1) the development of novel
software engineering tools and techniques for assisting developers in daily
activities, enhancing productivity; (2) human and social aspects of software
development, particularly, the interaction among software development team
members and how those interactions improve teamwork; and (3) innovation in every
aspect of software engineering, including envisioning products, eliciting
requirements, analyzing requirements, and designing software systems that
satisfy specified requirements and quality attributes. The project will
encourage the students to disseminate their research findings through presenting
and publishing in peer-reviewed venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.