* 1757392
* Workshop on Diversifying and Deepening Engagement and Learning in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM): Bringing Together Dutch and U.S. Scholars
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Joseph Polman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2019
* USD 99,699.00

This workshop on Diversifying and Deepening Engagement and Learning in STEM will
bring together researchers from the United States and the Netherlands to
exchange ideas and foster collaboration. Internationally, there is broad
recognition that far too narrow a segment of the population is deeply engaged
with and knowledgeable about STEM. This narrow engagement negatively affects the
prospects of individuals across the globe. Diversifying the pool of children and
young adults deeply engaged with STEM, and providing them with well-supported
opportunities for deeper learning in STEM, will promote the progress of STEM by
positively impacting research and development. Diversity of thought,
perspective, experience and quality of preparation improve innovation and the
quality of STEM research. The workshop and its products will advance STEM
education by enhancing scholars' knowledge of relevant research on diversifying
and deepening engagement and learning, and by creating stronger ties among
researchers with common interests in and commitment to these issues. STEM
education efforts sparked by this workshop will advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare by improving individuals' quality of life and enabling
broader public participation in democratic processes that are informed by STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop involves a select group of influential
scholars from the U.S. and Netherlands whose work contributes to innovative
research and development on STEM education both within and beyond schools. The
workshop's theme refers to the key goal of diversifying the pool of young people
deeply engaged with STEM, including groups historically underrepresented
globally and in each nation, while also fostering deeper STEM learning.
Throughout the workshop, participants will examine two questions: (1) What are
the key social, cultural, and systemic contexts that facilitate and impede
broadening STEM participation and learning? (2) How might researchers better
understand them, and educators better address them? Comparative work across the
U.S. and Netherlands national contexts will allow for bidirectional illumination
of issues that might otherwise appear to be merely given or inevitable when
examined from a single national standpoint. Gathered scholars will explore the
challenges and opportunities for supporting and sustaining interest in,
identification with, and deep learning of STEM among young people, through
informal and formal learning opportunities. A key outcome of the workshop will
be a white paper made freely and widely available to the STEM education
community and the general public. The white paper will summarize existing
literature and the discussion, framings, and suggestions for further research.
The process of constructing and finalizing the white paper will focus the
attention of participants in the workshop, and result in greater clarity about
the body of theory and research that can inform educational action and future
research. In addition, interest groups that form during the workshop will
consider pursuing additional products that can inform the STEM education
community, such as a journal special issue, an edited volume, research and
practice briefs, or other collaborations.