* 1757968
* REU Site: Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Fabio Milner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 11/30/2022
* USD 294,954.00

The Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI) summer program trains
undergraduates through cutting-edge research and intensive mentoring experiences
in the applied mathematical sciences. This eight-week summer research program is
open to college juniors and seniors who are interested in learning quantitative
methods and carrying out research on intriguing applications of math to their
day-to-day lives. It encourages students from minority institutions and/or
students from underrepresented groups who come from economically disadvantaged
families as well as from local community colleges to apply. The summer program
begins with four weeks of concentrated coursework on topics specific to
mathematical and computational statistics, and theoretical biology at the
advanced undergraduate and graduate level. The daily coursework is paired with
coordinated computer labs and collaborative study sessions with graduate student
teaching assistants and faculty present. Students are trained in leading
computer software such as MATLAB, Mathematica, Maple, Netlogo, and R. During the
second half of the program the students are asked to take what they have learned
and apply it to group research projects of their choice with help from mentors.
These projects are written as technical reports and students give a research
presentation on their work/results at ASU during the final week of the program.
The students also create posters of their projects that they present first at
ASU and then again at the national SACNAS Conference and the Joint Mathematics
Meetings. In summary, the exciting MTBI environment generates innovative
research projects, leads to the achievement of significant scientific results
within a summer, and motivates undergraduate students to pursue higher
studies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the MTBI Summer Research
Experience for Undergraduates program are to encourage and facilitate the access
to the successful completion of graduate studies by mostly underrepresented
minority (URM) undergraduate students at the interface of mathematics and life
and social sciences. The MTBI summer program at ASU exposes undergraduates to
scientific research by introducing them to methods in applied mathematics,
training them on well-known modeling software and letting them address relevant
questions in theoretical biology. The program faculty is composed of first-rate
minority, non-minority and international researchers, both male and female to
teach, advise, and mentor MTBI students. All have active research programs. MTBI
not only supports an environment in which high quality undergraduate research is
recognized and expected but also provides opportunities for students to
collaborate on their research with excellent researchers from around the country
and world. The program expands the visibility of the research carried out at
MTBI by minorities via presentations of student research at national
conferences. Success is measured directly by the quality of the student reports,
and by the acceptance to and completion of graduate school by our
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.