* 1757994
* REU Site: Designing for Safety and Safety by Design
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Todd, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 445,626.00

We live in a world today where society, particularly the safety, well-being, and
livelihood of its citizens, depend on the complex interactions between the
natural and built environments. Safety is ensured by designing our aerospace,
civil, and marine structures to withstand operational, environmental, and
expected or unexpected extreme loads throughout their designed service
lifetimes, and now many such structures are being pushed to serve society well
past their design life. Although the structural health monitoring (SHM) field
has brought new technologies, algorithms, and methods to improve damage
detection, quantification, and assessment, what is missing is the ability to
translate detected damage data into actionable information for stakeholders and
owners to act on to ensure structural safety and performance, given relevant
constraints. Information obtained through this new paradigm of Designing for
Safety is crucial for informing design, repair, retrofit, and/or replacement of
other existing similar structures or for future, new designs, thereby feeding
back to attain the vision of Safety by Design. This research will directly
address the challenge of acquiring and interpreting appropriate data streams
(whether obtained through numerical modeling, experimental tests, and/or
operational measurements) to synthesize information and create actionable
knowledge that will enable accurate assessment and improvement of structural
design, health, and performance. To achieve this goal, this REU Site at the
University of California San Diego (UCSD) will recruit and train 12 diverse U.S.
scholars for eight weeks each summer, recruited from across the nation with
emphasis on broadening the participation of underrepresented minority, women,
and economically-disadvantaged students. These students will conduct research
alongside six professors and their graduate students. In addition to immersing
REU students in an intensive summer research program, a plethora of career
development, lab tours, graduate school application preparation, seminars, and
social activities are also planned to provide each U.S. scholar with a life-
changing, multidisciplinary, summer experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this NSF REU Site is to immerse students in a meaningful and
highly interdisciplinary research environment within the structural engineering
domain and to teach them that design does not end with construction. Instead,
designing for safety embodies: quantifying potential load conditions, damage
mechanics, and uncertainties; monitoring for anomalies during operations;
processing this information through cyber-modeling via digital surrogates; and
translating the information to actionable knowledge for improving current and
future system designs. First, from concept inception to defining performance
metrics to structural design, transformative research and education are needed
to devise methods for aggregating and fusing computational and experimental data
to inform the capabilities of different designs and the probabilities of
exceeding certain safety-states. Second, once deployed, SHM/prognosis is central
to achieving total structural state awareness through the integration of sensing
data from multiple sources ("Internet-of-Things"), cyber modeling, and
statistical pattern recognition. Finally, information acquired throughout design
and operations, when combined with innovative optimization methods and a multi-
scale, multi-physics, digital surrogate twin of the structure, is crucial for
realizing future structural designs that outperform its predecessors. Research
results generated through this project will bridge key knowledge gaps revealing
the interrelations between damage formation, propagation, detection, structural
modeling, model-updating, assessment, and design optimization. The planned
student activities will equip young U.S. scholars with multidisciplinary
technical skills and diverse perspectives so that they are uniquely poised to
tackle complex, interdisciplinary, and systems-level grand challenges throughout
their entire careers. The students' contributions to research and their summer
experiences will raise awareness and stimulate interests in pursuing future STEM
careers, which will stimulate a positive feedback loop so that novel solutions
for Designing for Safety and Safety by Design will arrive sooner rather than
later. UC San Diego is uniquely positioned to host this REU Site, since it is
the only institution in the U.S. with programs in SHM and
prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.