* 1757846
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Biomedical Translational Science and Technology Development
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 361,740.00

The rapid expansion of biomedical science has resulted in a short supply of
biomedical scientists and engineers at all career levels, presenting an
immediate need to educate and train more young people in the skills and
knowledge required for biomedical science and engineering. To meet this demand,
Binghamton University (BU-SUNY) will host a 10-week summer REU program to train
10 undergraduate students per year in translational biomedical science and
engineering. The program will offer undergraduates intensive multidisciplinary
hands-on research and professional development training in integrated biomedical
translational science and technology development. The program is anticipated to
develop a leadership pipeline helping students advance in either their graduate
studies or career and professional training in these fields. The teaming of
biomedical scientists with engineers has led to the development of this novel
and unique REU program. The fourteen participating faculty members combined have
trained nearly 684 REU students, leading to 80 peer-reviewed research articles
co-authored by undergraduates. BU's strong commitment to undergraduate education
and research will ensure the success of the proposed REU program. The broad and
cohesive research interests of faculty mentors involved in this program allow
for designing and implementing a vigorous summer REU program to offer T-shaped
professional training opportunities to undergraduates. Efforts will be made to
recruit students from underrepresented groups, such as women, minority students
and students from undergraduate institutions and community colleges where
undergraduate research training is limited. The outcome of the REU program will
be disseminated at national conferences and published in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will provide students with
opportunities to learn how engineering principles can be integrated with medical
and life sciences to translate biomedical discoveries into bedside technologies
for treating many diseases, such as diabetes and cancers. The program will
expose students to medical science, biology, biochemistry, pharmaceutical
sciences, neuroscience and cognitive science, as well as to tissue engineering,
materials sciences, nanofabrications, genome editing, RNA transcriptome
analysis, 3D bioprinting, cell manufacturing, and tissue biofabrication.
Interactive workshops covering topics related to biomedical engineering and
graduate studies and career development training will inform students of the
latest developments in the fields of biomedical science and engineering and
professional development opportunities in these fields. Social events related to
the REU program will allow students to interact with other REU students on
campus facilitating peer learning and collegiality. Field trips to industry
sites will introduce students to applications of biotechnology development. The
combination of research training, workshops, social events, and field trips will
provide students with a foundation in biomedical engineering research, which
they can apply to enriching their professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.