* 1757536
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Coastal Plain Science
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jose Colon-Gaud, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 437,210.00

This REU Site award to Georgia Southern University (GSU), located in Statesboro,
GA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. Housed at GSU's Institute for Coastal Plain Science, the unifying
theme involves the impacts of global climate change stressors on organisms and
ecosystems of the Atlantic Coastal Plain. The goal is to engage undergraduates
in research and professional development activities that promote an
understanding of the unique physical and biological resources occurring in this
geographic region as well as their sustainable use and management. Students will
participate in hands-on research guided by faculty mentors, as well as in
professional development workshops targeting general and conceptual knowledge in
the ecology and geology of the coastal plain, scientific communication skills
(oral and written), techniques for locating and evaluating primary literature,
and ethical practices in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students will be trained in the program. Recruitment is targeted at
1st and 2nd year (freshman/sophomore) students attending institutions in the
southeastern U.S. where research opportunities may be more limited, such as at
2-year colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions. Students from
underrepresented groups that comprise a large percentage of the population in
the region are especially encouraged to apply. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. The goal is to foster an environment for learning and professional
development that leads to opportunities in graduate studies and careers in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://cosm.georgiasouthern.edu/icps/REU/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. J. Checo
Colon-Gaud at jccolongaud@georgiasouthern.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Danny Gleason
at dgleason@georgiasouthern.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.