* 1757216
* REU Site:  Sensorimotor Neural Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Eric Chudler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 321,315.00

This REU Site award to the University of Washington, located in Seattle, WA,
will support the training of 30 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018- 2020. The scientific theme will focus on the confluence of biotechnology
and information technology. More specifically, research will focus on the
emerging domain of neural engineering. This research area encompasses the
development of concepts and devices used to assist, understand, and interact
with neural systems. Because neural engineering is an interdisciplinary topic,
students will be assigned to laboratories in several departments including
Bioengineering, Biology, Physiology and Biophysics, Psychology, Rehabilitation
Medicine, Computer Sciences and Engineering, Electrical Engineering and
Mechanical Engineering. In addition to laboratory work, students will
participate in a communications course and workshops to improve their
presentation and writing skills. All REU participants will complete a
Responsible Conduct of Research Training including discussions about the ethical
conduct of research (e.g., plagiarism, falsification of data, note keeping,
statistics, animal welfare, human subjects). A special workshop will be provided
about the definition of ethics and how ethical issues might arise in the field
of sensorimotor neural engineering. Talented undergraduates, especially those
from under-represented groups and who have completed their freshman and
sophomore years, are encouraged to apply. The selection of students is based on
the quality of the students' written materials in their application, letters of
recommendation and academic record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.csne-erc.org or by contacting the PI (Dr. Eric H. Chudler at
chudler@uw.edu). This award is supported by the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (DBI Division) and the Directorate for Engineering (EEC Division). It
is also supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.