* 1757506
* Collaborative REU Site: Examining the Intersection of Food, Housing and Healthcare
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Joseph Ewoodzie, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2022
* USD 222,660.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. This REU site is a
collaboration among three different academic institutions, Davidson College
(DC), Johnson C. Smith (JCSU), and University of North Carolina-Charlotte
(UNCC). The goal of the REU and the ongoing project is to provide training in
social science methods to undergraduates and to generate original research
exploring differential access to food, housing, and healthcare in underserved
neighborhoods northwest Charlotte. The project places students in research
settings alongside faculty members and key community players to define and
creatively address social problems. Students who take part in this REU will
enhance their research skills to identify the sources and mechanisms that
reproduce social inequities. This REU will focus on the methods of studying
differential access to food, housing, and healthcare as important indicators of
historically and socially rooted inequalities. The intellectual focus of the REU
will be to define access as both an outcome of historical and social processes
and as a contribution to ongoing and future disparities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect this REU will help students build scholarship by
learning how to plan and conduct research and share their results with academic
and public audiences, including through a planned edited volume that includes
student work. We will also work with students to show them how to engage with
policymakers and community partners through communication tools like memos and
policy briefs. Students will also have the opportunity to learn about how to
engage with issues of access through social entrepreneurship through work with
the Centers for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at all three academic
institutions. Students will be able to pursue interests in public humanities
through creative approaches to public outreach at the end of the summer. In all
these ways, faculty, student, and community partner teams will be able to share
valuable research about the value and immediate applicability of social science
research on access to food, housing, and healthcare to community organizations
and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.