* 1757717
* REU Site at Lamar University
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Kumer Das, Lamar University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 01/31/2022
* USD 263,980.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at Lamar University
provides 8 students a 10-week authentic research experience in the Department of
Mathematics during the summers of 2018-2020. Participants work in teams of four
under the supervision of the PIs. An experienced research mentor and a junior
faculty member lead each team. The REU site at LU aims to increase research
opportunities for students at institutions where undergraduate research
opportunities are limited or nonexistent. By recruiting underrepresented
minorities, veterans and community college students, students are empowered to
pursue degrees in STEM and to transition to advanced study or careers in STEM.
The benefits of participating in a structured research program extend beyond the
technical knowledge that students gain. Students increase writing and oral
communication skills and are exposed to professional development opportunities
in attending conferences to present their work. Furthermore, the faculty
advisors continue to serve as mentors for the students beyond the ten weeks of
the program. Each year, many students transfer to LU after having completed two-
year degrees at local community colleges. The REU site at LU creates an
opportunity for participants from local community colleges to meet other STEM
students who successfully made the transition to a four-year university.
Finally, pairing experienced research mentors with less experienced co-mentors
on each research project gives the co-mentors the tools necessary to establish
or expand undergraduate research programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual focus of this program is on interdisciplinary research at the
crossroads of mathematics, statistics and computer science. In many
applications, dimension reduction is imperative for efficient manipulation of
massive quantities of high-dimensional data. Dimension reduction using matrix
factorizations and graph theory can be used to ascertain the underlying
structure of the data and to find correlations among the data attributes.
Interest is increasing in the study of graph theory, singular value
decomposition (SVD) and nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) due to
applications in various research areas of mathematics and computer science. SVD
and NMF are both unsupervised learning tools currently used in big data
analytics. REU participants will gain exposure to the challenges and
opportunities associated with big data. Students are introduced to the three Vs
of big data: Volume, Variety, Velocity. Volume refers to the sheer quantity of
the data, Variety refers to the different types of data, and Velocity refers to
the speed of processing the data. Students are allotted the opportunity to
participate in (1) theoretical research, with students investigating properties
of graph theory, SVD and NMF to generate conjectures, prove theorems, and
investigate existing algorithms; and (2) programming related research, with
students performing experiments on matrix factorizations and graph theory and
writing algorithms to process large data sets.