* 1757233
* REU Site: Algebra, Combinatorics, and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Keller, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 269,696.00

The Department of Mathematics at Texas State University will host an 8 week
summer REU in the summers of 2019, 2020 and 2021, involving nine students per
year working in teams of three under the supervision of a faculty mentor. The
program will provide lodging, meals, transportation, as well as a stipend for
all students. The chosen participants will come from a selective pool of
applicants, and the program will directly involve them in research projects
guided by faculty mentors. Beyond successful research outcomes the objectives of
the program are to introduce students to aspects of mathematical research and
the broader mathematical community. At the same time the students will develop
mentoring relationships with faculty as they consider pursuing graduate degrees
and a career in mathematics. Students will be part of an active community at
Texas State; in addition to the REU there are a number of summer programs and
world-renowned mathematicians who visit campus, and participants will be
involved in various activities that bring students and faculty together. A
diverse body of participants is strongly desired and priority will be given to
applicants from groups that are underrepresented in the mathematical community.
This includes minority students, women, as well as those students coming from
institutions with limited resources to support independent research projects for
their undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects include a
diverse collection of topics based on the research interests of the faculty
mentors. Specific projects include commutative algebra arising from graphs and
matroids, algebraic and combinatorial aspects of higher dimensional tilings,
combinatorial problems arising from group theory, arithmetic properties of group
invariants, linear and permutational representations of groups, statistical
analysis on biological data, and survival analysis. Participants will spend some
of the time learning the necessary background while pursuing original research.
Students will be asked to present their findings in oral presentations, and will
be guided in summarizing their work in a mathematical research paper. In the
course of the program students will be trained in various skills including
literature review, using software such as GAP, Macaulay2, and R to make and
check examples, oral presentation skills, as well as written mathematical
communication using Latex. Communication with the participants will continue
after the program ends, and for instance students will be encouraged to present
their work at local, regional, and national conferences in the subsequent
academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.