* 1757128
* REU Site: Engineering for Healthcare
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Malisa Sarntinoranont, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 378,856.00

This REU Site: Engineering for Healthcare at the University of Florida (UF),
will involve a diverse cohort of students in convergent research and curricula
focused on critical engineering challenges in healthcare. In 2013, the
healthcare industry in the United States was 17.7% of gross domestic product;
this is expected to grow over the next decade or more. This proposal focuses on
the cross-disciplinary impact of engineering research on the healthcare field.
The research to be conducted by REU Participants falls into one of three
categories: (i) engineered and manufactured surfaces and devices for health
applications, (ii) engineering advances for medical treatment, and (iii)
modeling of healthcare relevant materials and processes. The University of
Florida is an ideal location for a NSF REU Site with this intellectual focus, as
strong partnerships currently exist between the UF Herbert Wertheim College of
Engineering, the Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, UF Health Shands
Hospital (along with related medical institutes such as the McKnight Brain
Institute), and the Veterinary School - all co-located on the same university
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU Participants will gain foundational skills
through training workshops on the scientific method, and via hands-on research
activities. REU Participants will gain an awareness of how traditional
engineering principles can be extended to address modern engineering problems in
the healthcare field and in society. REU participants will (i) engage in high-
impact research in partnership with engineering faculty and graduate student
mentors, (ii) attend workshops dedicated to research practices and
communications training, (iii) attend a seminar series where important high-
priority challenges in healthcare that require engineering solutions are
elucidated through partnerships with clinical faculty or healthcare
professionals, and (iv) disseminate their research results through both oral and
written communications. Via this REU Site, each cohort of students will gain
foundational skills through training workshops on the scientific method, and via
hands-on research activities. REU participants will gain an awareness of how
traditional engineering principles can be extended to address modern engineering
problems in the healthcare field and in society. Finally, REU participants will
improve their oral and written communication skills through symposium-style
presentations and written project reports. Because of this training, REU
Participants will be better prepared to succeed in their current undergraduate
curriculum and be better prepared to make a positive impact upon entering
industry or graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.