* 1757462
* REU Site: Injury Science Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2023
* USD 365,278.00

The Injury Science Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site at The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP), Center for Injury Research and
Prevention (CIRP), provides a personalized internship experience to a diverse
pool of talented interns with the aim of inspiring the pursuit of careers in
science, technology, and engineering. The ten week summer program engages
undergraduate students in foundational research experiences, one-on-one faculty
mentorship, workshops, meetings, and field trips at CIRP. The program serves to
provide women and underrepresented interns and those from STEM-limited programs
with inspiration to pursue advanced science or engineering degrees, increase
knowledge and interest in science and engineering, gain professional
development, develop the ability to solve real-world problems, and prepare to
optimize technology for safety solutions through user-centered, participatory
design and human factors research. This program is active at a time when the
country and world are on the brink of safety transformations enabled by
technology, making the imperative for our training all the more critical for our
country. Injuries and violence remain the leading causes of death and acquired
disability for children, youth and young adults in the United States and
worldwide, and remains the CIRP REU intellectual focus. This work supports the
UN and World Health Assembly resolution on child injury prevention that
highlighted an urgent, unfilled need for child-specific injury prevention
research and people trained to meet this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Injury Science REU Site goals for its interns include: 1) provide foundational
research experiences that inspire women and underrepresented interns and those
from STEM-limited programs to pursue advanced engineering degrees, 2) increase
knowledge and interest in engineering and science 3) increase knowledge and
interest in injury science/engineering 4) provide professional development 5)
develop ability to solve real-world problems, and 6) prepare to optimize
technology for safety solutions through user-centered, participatory design and
human factors research. The program's in-discipline mentorship is complemented
by an interdisciplinary exposure to give the interns the broad perspective in
human subjects research, ethics, human factors, user-centered design, community-
based participatory research, data science and entrepreneurship. Interns
participate in traditional discipline-specific, lab-based training (intellectual
foundation research) while also gaining the real-world exposure needed to deeply
understand injury problems in order to create widely adopted, impactful
solutions (translational research). They also learn industry/university
partnership methods by working alongside entrepreneurs, industry, government and
healthcare as well as with youth, families and their communities (broader
impacts research).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.