* 1757899
* REU Site:  Resilience and Response of Marine Organisms to Environmental Change
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Robert Podolsky, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 354,277.00

This REU Site award to the College of Charleston, located in Charleston, SC,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018- 2020. Research is conducted at Fort Johnson, located just across the
harbor from downtown Charleston. Fort Johnson is a marine science campus that
houses the College's Grice Marine Laboratory and research labs from four federal
and state partner institutions that contribute to the program. The program
focuses on how organisms, populations, communities and ecosystems respond to
natural or anthropogenic change in marine environments. Student projects involve
issues like environmental variability, climate change, coastal development,
species introductions and contaminants. In addition to being engaged in full-
time research in the lab or field, students will participate in seminars,
discussions, field trips and workshops to develop science communication and
professional skills. Students will be housed in the Grice Marine Laboratory
dormitory. Students from schools with limited marine research opportunities and
from underrepresented groups are especially encouraged to apply. Participants
are selected based on potential career benefits, on the diversity that each
student contributes to the intern group, and on evidence of strong potential for
academic and personal achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited opportunities in
marine research, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, how different scientific institutions formulate and
address research questions, how the graduate school application process is
carried out, what kinds of scientific careers are available, and how scientific
information is presented to public and professional audiences. Many will present
the results of their work through scientific conferences and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by
all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system, and
student career paths will be tracked after the program. More information about
the program is available by visiting http://reu.cofc.edu or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Robert Podolsky, reu@cofc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.