* 1757555
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary biological sciences research and community engaged learning experiences for undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Sarah Woodley, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 294,387.00

This REU Site award to Duquesne University, located in Pittsburgh, PA, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021.
This site will serve as a pilot for a training model with larger
interdisciplinary teams with a combination of four students and mentors. Each
student will be paired with a mentor based on research interests, and each pair
will join another pair to form a team from two near-neighbor disciplines (e.g.,
nanotechnology and neurogenetics). Students will gain an understanding of the
research question from two unique perspectives. Each student will focus on a
different aspect of the interdisciplinary project and will produce a unique
poster or oral presentation at the final symposium. These interdisciplinary
projects are in the areas of protein trafficking on pain sensation and behavior,
molecular basis of neuroinflammatory pain, comparative genomics and functional
analysis of lipid metabolism, and spatiotemporal dynamics of skin microbiota.
Program components include career and ethics/responsible conduct of research
training, journal clubs, and community-engagement where students share science
activities with middle school students at a summer camp, fostering
communication, professional and civic skills. Applicants from underrepresented
minorities and/or first-generation university students are especially encouraged
to apply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated the program will train a total
of 24 primarily underrepresented minority and first-generation college students
from schools with limited research opportunities. Students will learn how
interdisciplinary research is conducted and many will present the results of
their work at scientific conferences. They will receive mentoring related to
research and careers, build a supportive cohort with fellow undergraduate
trainees, and engage the public in their research by sharing science with
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available at http://www.duq.edu/academics/schools/natural-and-
environmental-sciences/undergraduate-research, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
O?Donnell, at odonne15@duq.edu) or Co-PI (Dr. Sarah Woodley at
woodleys@duq.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.