* 1757923
* REU Site: Computational and Mathematical Modeling of Complex Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Cristopher Moore, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/28/2023
* USD 332,821.00

The SFI Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program is a ten-week
residential research opportunity in which students develop innovative research
projects in collaboration with mentors. The program asks students to discard
traditional disciplinary boundaries, and learn computational modeling and data
analysis techniques that can apply across the physical, natural, and social
sciences. This allows students to ask big questions about real-world systems
using rigorous mathematical and computational methods. Projects range from
simulation to machine learning to proving theorems. The program supports the
goals of science education and diversity in science by emphasizing engagement
with students from non-elite institutions with limited research opportunities,
women, and under-represented minorities (URMs). Early career scientists act as
mentors in the program, gaining valuable experience as educators in mentoring.
Research performed by SFI REUs has directly advanced the progress of science,
and has focused on solving problems of direct relevance to society and the
national health, including vaccination strategies for whooping cough,
sustainability, economics of higher education, and social network analysis,
among other topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In every STEM field, computational and
mathematical modeling are rapidly becoming essential skills: translating a real-
world system into a quantitative model, designing and coding computational
experiments, analyzing these experiments statistically, and comparing their
results with data. Projects of this kind are an ideal opportunity for
undergraduate training that builds students' technical and analytical skills,
connects them with the wider scientific world, and links scientific thinking
with real-world contexts and applications. The SFI REU program is designed
around the strengths of being a leading transdisciplinary research center.
Undergraduates are recruited from multiple departments including computer
science, physics, mathematics, biology, and the social sciences, and paired with
mentors from many different scientific backgrounds. Recent projects include
epidemiology and public health, digital humanities and topic modeling, social
network structure, cell biology and proteomics, smart cities and urban data, and
statistical physics. Methods utilized range from simulation to data analysis to
theorem-proving, and in many cases have produced publishable work. Throughout
the summer, students are offered tutorials on the basics of data analysis,
algorithms, network theory, statistics, and programming in Python and C++.
Tutorials are also offered on science writing, presenting research, applying for
jobs in science and picking a graduate school or industry carrer, and dealing
with impostor syndrome and implicit bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.