* 1757479
* CAREER: Stochastic processes in statistical physics and optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jian Ding, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 334,459.00

Stochastic process plays a fundamental role in a number of physical disciplines.
The current proposal focuses on those processes that arise naturally in
statistical physics and combinatorial optimization. The common features of the
proposed problems are simple formulation, fundamental mathematical structure,
interesting underlying phenomena and non-trivial impacts on physical
disciplines. One main aspect of the proposal is on extreme values for Gaussian
processes. An example question is on the geometry of level sets for some spatial
processes, and in particular whether one could walk on a random surface while
staying on high mountains most of the time. Another main aspect is on phase
transitions of random constraint satisfaction problems, and an example question
is to decide whether there exists an assignment simultaneously satisfying a
collection of random boolean formulae. In addition, the PI intends to apply
probability in related areas such as statistical learning and biological
evolution. For example, the PI wishes to understand how features of individuals
influence the structure of social network and what could be learned about
individuals from the network structure. Finally, the PI intends to provide
research opportunities for both graduate students in probability theory, and to
develop topic courses that bring probability techniques to students in related
areas.

The main theme of this proposal is the development of new theory and
applications on a number of stochastic processes in statistical physics and
optimization. In the direction of Gaussian processes, the proposal focuses on a
number of aspects including the geometry of level sets for two-dimensional
Gaussian free fields, an improvement on majorizing measure theory, as well as
the connection between Gaussian free fields and random walks. For instance, we
intend to study the random geometry and random motion on the two-dimensional
Gaussian free field, which is connected to the Liouville quantum gravity. In the
direction of random CSPs and optimization problems, the proposal features the
intriguing phase transitions of the solution spaces predicted by statistical
physicists. Since most classical NP-complete problems are expressed as CSPs and
random CSPs are a rich source of computationally hard CSPs, the proposed study
of random CSPs are expected to shed light on underlying barriers to algorithmic
performance. Some of the study of random combinatorial optimization problems is
related to understanding the average complexity of certain widely-used
algorithms. Furthermore, the PI proposes to study certain probabilistic models
for social network such as random geometric graphs, as well as the NK-fitness
model in biological evolution with the aim of providing mathematical explanation
to some experimental findings.