* 1757574
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Opportunities in Biophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Michal Zochowski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,652.00

This award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Biophysics at the University of Michigan (UM). The site will support seven
students for ten weeks of summer research each year. The site will provide
incoming students with an interdisciplinary research experience at the
intersection of physics, chemistry, mathematics and the life sciences. The
Biophysics Program at UM is one of few standalone biophysics programs in the US,
created to foster multidisciplinary research and provide interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biophysics is a very
diverse field that spans and integrates experimental and theoretical work that
is customarily assigned to mathematical, physical, chemical, biological or
engineering sciences. Because of this wide scope of possible research
experiences within Biophysics, some students may not realize the intellectual
diversity of Biophysics. The site has developed an activity plan that focuses
primarily on the research experience, but at the same time provides students
with a condensed overview of sub-disciplines so that the student can experience
the breath of this interdisciplinary discipline. The core component of the
program consists of research experiences where the students will participate in
innovative scientific exploration with researchers and labs that match their
interest. This core will be augmented by weekly research seminars and workshops
to expose them to other relevant research topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.