* 1757249
* Assessment Practices of STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Hannah Sevian, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,100,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Noyce Program, Research
Track 4, this partnership between the University of Massachusetts Boston and
Boston Public Schools will characterize growth in the assessment practices of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teachers. The goal is
to understand how assessment practices may drive teacher effectiveness. This
research study will include participation of 58 elementary, middle, and high
school STEM teachers who previously participated in a Noyce-funded project and
who have persisted in teaching in Boston or other nearby high-need districts.
The project will compare differences in the assessment practices of these Noyce-
program teachers to 29 other K-12 STEM teachers from the same area, but who
participated in different training programs. The project aims to increase
knowledge about STEM teacher effectiveness by how teacher effectiveness may
relate to teachers measure their students' understanding. The project will
examine changes in how STEM teachers measure student learning over several
years, as the teachers gain more experience in the classroom. Outcomes from the
research will help us understand how STEM teachers measure student learning and
use that information to improve their teaching and to assign grades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the research study are to: (a) Increase
understanding of teachers' assessment practices, particularly for Noyce Scholars
in comparison to other STEM teachers who also persist in teaching in high-need
school districts; (b) Measure growth in the assessment practices of Noyce
Scholars in comparison to other STEM teachers over time; and (c) Better
understand the role of the conceptual, pedagogical, cultural and political
challenges teachers face as their assessment practices change. The research
employs both qualitative and quantitative methods, in an interaction analysis
framework, to study four research questions about K-12 STEM teachers who have
persisted in teaching in high-need districts: (1) What are the teachers' current
assessment practices? (2) How have their assessment practices changed from when
they began teaching in a high-need district? (3) How do salient retrospective
conceptual, pedagogical, cultural, and political challenges negotiated by the
teachers explain their current classroom formative assessment practices and
changes over time in their assessment practices? and (4) For teachers who have
persisted teaching in Boston Public Schools, how do assessment practices relate
to student performance outcomes on classroom assessments and to district and
State standardized mathematics and science exams? Across these questions, the
research team will examine differences between Boston and other districts, as
well as effects of other factors, including Noyce- vs. non-Noyce- prepared
teachers, length of time teaching in high-need districts, and school-level
influences such as school culture, accountability rating, stability of
leadership, and professional development opportunities. The project will
contribute to theory about teacher assessment practices and the degree to which
interaction analysis is useful in studying these practices. The project will
also contribute to educational policy implications for supporting teachers to
navigate pedagogical perspectives, curricular expectations, administrative
policies and procedures, and external pressures as they persist in STEM teaching
careers in high-need districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.