* 1757342
* Effects of Background Wind on the Eastward Propagation of Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Paul Roundy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 357,566.00

The Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO) is referred to organized large-scale
tropical convection system that slowly propagate eastward with an average time
scale of 40-60 days around the equator. As they do so, they influence global
weather patterns. One of the questions that remains to be understood fully is
why some of these events move faster or slower than others. This project aims to
explain part of the variability in the eastward propagating speed of MJO by
linking it to slowly evolving background winds. Through analysis of observed and
model data, this project will identify how these background winds alter the
movements of the regions of tropical rainfall and the associated global weather
patterns. A unique combination of statistics and the background momentum budget
analyses will help to isolate the roles of tropical intrusion of extratropical
disturbances in regulating the background wind system and thereby inter-event
variations of eastward propagating speeds of MJO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weather
models do not predict well how these tropical rainfall patterns evolve. The
improved understanding of how MJO interacts with the global weather would help
improve weather forecasting in the important period for decision, 2-5 weeks into
the future. Better understanding how these background wind patterns influence
MJO's propagation also help identify error sources of existing numerical weather
prediction models. Graduate students will be trained to perform research
activities and will present papers at conferences and submit results for peer
review.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.