* 1757211
* Exploration-exploitation tradeoff and opinion diversity in real-world groups
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Mirta Galesic, Santa Fe Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 365,000.00

Communities oscillate between exploring new solutions to problems and exploiting
existing ones, depending on the task at hand. As a consequence, the diversity of
opinions about possible solutions waxes and wanes over time. How these changes
in diversity of opinion affect group performance is an open question, with
extant studies finding both positive and negative effects. This project will
investigate whether these inconsistent findings can be explained by how
diversity interacts with task complexity and group threat. Higher diversity of
opinions about possible solutions can be adaptive when groups face complex
tasks, while lower diversity can help in collective solving of simple tasks. In
addition, groups that have more homogeneous views, and are therefore better
coordinated, often have an advantage in intergroup conflict. As a consequence,
when group threat leads to decreased diversity of opinions, it might have
negative effects on performance in complex tasks, but neutral or even positive
effects for simple tasks. Furthermore, groups can be expected to use strategies
to adaptively manipulate their level of diversity according to task complexity
and experienced threat. This project will therefore also investigate the
adaptive value of such strategies, including policing, ostracism, and
denigrating outgroups. Overall, understanding factors that promote or suppress
the diversity of opinions is immensely important today for national security
issues. Current communication technologies offer unprecedented opportunities for
interactions with many different people, and yet they also seem to facilitate
formation of relatively isolated communities of people with similar opinions.
Better theoretical and empirical understanding of factors that influence the
diversity of opinions in real-world communities, and that moderate the value of
diversity for finding good societal solutions, is necessary for maintaining and
promoting a healthy democratic dialogue. To promote further research in this
area, the project will also provide unique training opportunities for students
at the intersection of cognitive and social sciences, computational linguistics,
and network science, and include two interdisciplinary working groups discussing
promising directions for theoretical and methodological progress in
understanding diversity in modern societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study how
task complexity and group threat influence opinion diversity and the resulting
group performance, and to investigate mechanisms that real-world communities use
to manage their diversity in response to these factors, the project will first
integrate several previously disconnected literatures on exploration-
exploitation trade-offs, group behavior and decision making under threat, social
learning, altruistic punishment, ostracism, and stereotyping. The resulting
hypotheses will be tested using three different methodologies: computational
modeling, group experiments, and computational linguistics analyses of
discussions on online news sites involving thousands of users over prolonged
time periods. This will allow for robustness checks and mitigation of risks of
relying on only one method. These theoretical and methodological developments
will foster further scientific research of modern human
sociality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.