* 1757705
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Geospatial Approaches to Watershed Science
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Marc Linderman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2022
* USD 304,001.00

As students in environmental fields enter the workforce they will confront, at
some scale, many of the "grand challenges" that face humankind (e.g., access to
clean water, production of sufficient food, adaptation to change climate).
Solutions to such problems require a willingness to embrace alternative and
innovative approaches rooted in multiple disciplines, as well as an appreciation
for diverse perspectives. Students participating in this REU will engage in
research focused on the sustainable provision of clean water and food in a
Midwest agricultural watershed. The watershed has been the focus of intense
investigation over the past two decades that examines carbon, nutrient, and
sediment transport, crop productivity, agricultural economics, governance and
social priorities. Students will use team-based approaches to build on this
ongoing research to examine issues critical to societies across the nation.
Their research will be interdisciplinary, team-based and innovative. We
anticipate students participating in this REU will better appreciate team-based
approaches to science and analytical methods relevant to their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this REU site program is
to prepare students for complex problem-solving and interdisciplinary research.
Students from all fields, and particularly environmental fields, will face real-
world problems that are complex, ill-defined, multifaceted and ever changing.
Solutions to such problems require a willingness to embrace alternative and
innovative approaches rooted in multiple disciplines, as well as an appreciation
for diverse perspectives (National Academy of Engineering 2016). Students
participating in this REU will engage in research focused on the sustainable
provision of clean water and food in a Midwest agricultural watershed. This
watershed has been the focus of intense investigation over the past two decades.
The watershed, available infrastructure, and ongoing research provide an
exemplary case study through which students will engage in team-based approaches
to solving complex questions about natural and human systems that are coupled,
complex and adaptive. Interdisciplinary team based approaches to science will be
developed from hypothesis generation, through data collection, and onto data
analysis and interpretation. Throughout this process students will be exposed to
cutting edge geospatial technologies and analytical techniques to better prepare
them to apply analytical methods to a variety of topics and STEM related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.