* 1757348
* RII Track-1: Fire and Ice: Navigating Variability in Boreal Wildfire Regimes and Subarctic Coastal Ecosystems
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Brenda Konar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement (RII) Track-1 project will focus on two Alaskan ecosystems: (1) the
boreal forest, which covers 11% of the world's land mass and (2) the coastal
margins of the Gulf of Alaska, which covers an area of about 600,000 square
miles. The researchers will use remote sensing, field work, laboratory
experiments, and modeling methods to study boreal forest fires and coastal
marine ecosystems. The boreal fire research team will identify drivers of fire
weather, map active fire behavior, and evaluate the impacts of wild fire on
ecosystem services in affected communities. This project will lead to the
development of improved fire spread models and tools for fire risk evaluation,
web-based fire forecasts, and will inform fire management. The coastal margins
research team will study nearshore coastal ecosystems and evaluate the responses
of fish and other marine species to varying glacial environments. The results of
both the boreal fire and coastal margins research will benefit natural resource
management in Alaska and more generally in regions with wild fires and changing
hydrology. The project participants will engage in broadly disseminating the
findings of the research to resource managers and Alaskan communities in
addition to their efforts to train and mentor students and researchers at all
educational levels at K-12 schools and universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on understanding climate-driven changes to 1) fire risk and behavior in
Alaska's boreal forest, and 2) glacial and non glacial material flux on the
coastal margins of the Gulf of Alaska. This project, will provide comprehensive
data streams as well as scenarios, models, tools, and visualizations for use in
responding to short-term, climate-driven ecological change. The boreal fires
research thrust will identify large-scale climate drivers relevant to fire
weather, and use hyperspectral imaging and remote sensing of active wildfires to
generate improved maps of fire fuels and active fire behavior. The coastal
margins research thrust will determine how glacial melt and increased
precipitation are altering material flux across the coastal margin and
subsequently influencing nearshore biological communities. Both research thrusts
include a human dimensions component that uses social science research to link
the project findings to subsistence communities and human populations. The
research is combined with the activities of an innovative Diversity, Education,
and Workforce Development plan that uses education research to study the
effectiveness of diversity recruitment efforts, interventions for helping
students overcome stereotype threat, and case studies that explore impact of
science identity pathways on student performance within STEM disciplines. The
project will advance fundamental knowledge in two vulnerable, understudied and
rapidly changing ecosystems and generate findings that will have significant
societal and economical relevance to Alaskan communities and natural resource
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.