* 1757136
* DRMS: Inequalities, Institutions and Sustainability: An Experimental Study of Local Efforts to Govern the Commons
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Krister Andersson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 555,149.00

One of the longstanding challenges of community-based approaches to managing
natural resources is that such approaches often lead to increases in social
exclusion and economic inequality. The devolution of property rights over
natural resources is an increasingly popular policy response to environmental
degradation, especially in developing nations. One example of this trend is that
local communities now collectively own and manage an increasing share (currently
more than 15 percent) of the world's remaining forests. Several scholars have
reported that local communities that own and manage their forests collectively
often perform better than governments, at least when it comes to aggregate
environmental conditions. Some scholars, however, are voicing concerns that when
local resource users self-govern shared resources it often produces increased
inequality: the risk that the management ends up benefiting mostly the
relatively rich or privileged members of natural resource user groups, hence
further marginalizing poorer members. This risk is a serious threat to the
sustainability of community-based approaches, especially as there is mounting
evidence that common-pool resources used by groups with relatively high degrees
of economic inequality tend to have more degraded resource conditions. This
research project investigates the conditions under which community-based
governance approaches produce such inequalities, and the institutional
arrangements that resource users may design and enforce to foster more equitable
governance outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two types of
decision making in natural resource governance processes. First, the research
produces a deeper understanding of how local governance inequalities affect the
decisions of disadvantaged households to participate in the group's governance
activities, and the subsequent effects of those decisions on resource
sustainability. Second, by examining the effects of different institutional
arrangements on who benefits from resource management activities, the research
produces new knowledge about approaches to address the negative effects of
inequality in forest user groups. Specifically, the researchers examine
community forest management groups in Nepal and India and focus on three
questions: how do inequalities influence collective action? How does inequality
influence the distribution of benefits and sustainability? What interventions
reduce inequality? The four hypotheses are: interventions to decrease inequality
de facto can increase participation in decision making; will motivate greater
time investments in resource management; will increase benefits of the commons
going to disadvantaged households, and will achieve improved environmental
outcomes. The team evaluates the hypotheses through four randomized controlled
trials each of which uses three inequality reducing interventions. The villages
are selected using matched-pair cluster-randomization with an N of 360 villages
which makes for 60 villages per experimental condition per country. There is
also an ethnographic case study in eight villages. The interventions are:
creation of a subcommittee for low-caste and tribal groups, a subcommittee plus
training for high-caste and male citizens on the value of inclusiveness, and
both of these plus a subcommittee for women. Because Nepal has committee
membership quotas for women but not by caste the treatments are slightly
modified. Pre- and post-treatment household surveys measure both participation
in the planning group activities and resource use, and are be supplemented with
satellite imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.