* 1757813
* REU Site: Research Institute in Sociology and Social Inequality
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Alexander Hernandez, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 315,116.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. This REU site project immerses
students in an 8-week summer research experience focused on Sociology and Social
Inequality. The project actively recruits undergraduates to conduct research
with faculty at Texas A&amp;M University. Activities for each REU participant
include: a course with practical, hands-on instruction in social science theory,
methods, and practices; learning about graduate educational opportunities and
careers in science; completing a research project with a faculty mentor; writing
a research paper; and presenting their research findings at a professional
academic conference the following school year. This program: (1) increases the
social science research opportunities available to undergraduates from
underrepresented groups; (2) increases the scientific literacy of participants
to prepare a contemporary workforce trained in research skills; and (3) prepares
students for careers with a research focus through education and intensive
mentoring. The intended impact is to increase students' understanding of social
science research and increase the number of students pursuing graduate education
and professional careers in social science research. This project involves
participants in new and rigorous research projects focused on social inequality,
with projects that span the breadth and depth of our doctoral program. The
project provides students with hands-on experience in research, intensive
mentoring, and independent research skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
participate in research that focuses on evaluating the nature and extent of
inequality in the United States today, with a special emphasis on understanding
how to conceptualize, operationalize, and measure concepts central to
understanding social inequality. Each student is paired with a faculty mentor
and research project before they start the summer institute. Examples of
research projects include testing proposed changes to the survey measurement of
race and ethnicity, investigating how status inequalities might be decreased or
even eliminated in small group interactions using experimental methods, and
investigating the impact of parental incarceration on youth and young adult
outcomes. These example projects demonstrate the breadth of the program.
Students will be matched to research projects based on their substantive
research interests as well as the kinds of skills they are most interested in
developing, from interview design, to conducting experiments, to the analysis of
complex survey data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.