* 1757354
* REU Site:  A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Kimberly Anderson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 437,814.00

The overall objective of this REU Site at the University of Kentucky (UK) is to
provide a novel multidisciplinary research and education experience for rising
sophomore, junior and senior undergraduates in the area of Engineered Bioactive
Interfaces and Devices. Research in Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices
focuses on the novel design of architectures that interact with biological
systems and promote a desired response. These advanced architectures have
numerous applications including tissue engineering, sensing systems, and drug
delivery. Students will be recruited from various undergraduate disciplines
including engineering, biology, chemistry, physics and mathematics. There are
numerous regional colleges and universities surrounding the University of
Kentucky that have no graduate programs in these areas. Recruitment at these
institutions will encourage students that may not otherwise pursue an advanced
degree. In addition, recruitment for the program will focus on national
institutions that do not have graduate programs. Special efforts will be made to
attract women and minorities to this program by recruiting at minority
institutions and publicizing the program at national meetings of minority and
women organizations such as the Society of Women Engineers and the National
Society of Black Engineers. Students accepted into the program will work closely
with faculty and graduate students who are currently engaged in collaborative,
cross-disciplinary research. The proposed REU program builds on these successful
collaborations and integrates them with other educational components, such as
seminars, workshops, and other technical and social activities. The students
will be exposed to the excitement of interdisciplinary research and by the end
of the program will have an excellent knowledge of what is involved in graduate
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for this REU Site's cross-disciplinary
interaction between investigators working in biological systems and those
creating novel engineered synthetic architectures has long been recognized.
Successful development of these systems will depend on expertise not only in
developing novel synthetic architectures through nanotechnology, self-assembly
and hybrid systems but also on the interactions of these interfaces with
biological systems such as cells and proteins. As part of the 10-week summer REU
program, the undergraduate students will have the opportunity to learn about
three cross-disciplinary research themes that form the foundation of the
research in this area. These include: 1) Novel Bioactive Architectures, 2)
Cell/Protein Interactions at Interfaces, and 3) Integration into Devices. The
students will work closely with faculty and graduate students who are currently
engaged in collaborative, cross-disciplinary research across these three themes
further supporting a highly multidisciplinary team research approach. This REU
Program will not only provide the students with true interdisciplinary mentoring
and research training but will also stimulate the students' interests in Ph.D.
careers in science and engineering through seminars, field trips and
interactions with both graduate students and faculty, and will develop the
students' independence and confidence through participation in research and
presentations both in house and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.