* 1757016
* REU Site: CollaborativE Multidisciplinary Investigations Through Undergraduate Research Experiences (CEMITURE)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ria Ramoutar, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 280,056.00

This REU Site award to Georgia Southern University (GSU), located in Statesboro,
GA, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. It is supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research
of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. Hosted by the Chemistry
and Biochemistry Department at GSU, this program focuses on collaborative and
multidisciplinary research projects that span the fields of analytical,
materials, organic, biochemical, and computational chemistry. Participants work
directly with faculty mentors on their respective research projects, gain the
knowledge and tools for progression in STEM, build a community of professionals
with peers and faculty, and grow in their perspective on the role of STEM in
society. In addition to ten weeks of intensive research, students take part in
educational, social, and professional development activities that support their
sustained growth as scientists, including training in scientific communication
and workshops on career preparation, leadership, and
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects entail the design and
characterization of magnetic materials; catalyst development; quantum chemical
analyses for the detection of extrasolar planets; synthesis and investigation of
novel organic sensors and molecular switches; development of analytical and
biochemical techniques for toxicological assessment of common cosmetic
ingredients; and novel approaches to cancer therapy. Research experiences are
complemented by professional development activities that foster students'
ability to effectively convey science to a variety of audiences, and provide the
exposure, knowledge and tools to successfully navigate different stages of a
STEM career. This includes hands-on training with instrumentation and resources
commonly used by STEM professionals. Emphasis is placed on recruiting students
from institutions with limited research opportunities, particularly women,
minorities, and students from rural and underserved areas of the southeastern
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.