* 1757371
* RII-Track 1: New Hampshire Center for Multiscale Modeling and Manufacturing of Biomaterials (NH Bio-Made)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ian Baker, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Hampshire Center for
Multiscale Modeling and Manufacturing of Biomaterials (NH Bio-Made) promises to
create new knowledge and drive technological innovation, and train workforce in
the areas of biotechnology and advanced manufacturing. The project's activities
are organized around an integrated design approach that connects computational
modeling, advanced manufacturing, and measurement of materials properties, all
oriented toward developing new materials for biomedical applications such as
orthopedic bearings and tissue engineering scaffolds. The integrated approach is
intended to encourage close collaboration across disciplines to drive
biomaterials development. The project will also include major investments in New
Hampshire's research capacity. NH Bio-Made will establish a shared Biomaterials
Core Facility to provide access to state-of the-art instrumentation and
cyberinfrastructure for researchers statewide, and will support the hiring of
eleven new faculty researchers at institutions across the state. The project's
research activities will be integrated with an ambitious workforce development
agenda aimed at providing diverse students with the specific biomaterials and
manufacturing skills needed to enable their career success. These efforts will
emphasize training for students in high schools, community colleges, and at
institutions of higher learning in NH and will be directed toward careers in the
biotechnology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NH Bio-Made's goal is to advance the design and
manufacture of hierarchical, heterogeneous biomaterials and enable the knowledge
to predict and control their composition, structure, properties, and function.
To accomplish this, the project will develop computational tools that span
materials spatial scales from atomic to the macroscale. It will combine bottom-
up self-assembly with top-down 3D printing to create biomaterials with designed
structure at the nanoscale. These activities will employ a systems-level
approach that drives hierarchical, heterogeneous biomaterial design for highly
specific and verifiable functionalities. Research activities will be organized
into four major thrusts, each working towards the development of specific
categories of biomaterials: 1) composites for orthopedic bearings; 2) sheet
metal for trauma fixation; 3) tissue engineering scaffolds; and 4) porous,
conductive biosensors. These efforts will be supported by the Biomaterials Core
Facility that will provide researchers across the state with shared access to
high-performance computing infrastructure, advanced manufacturing equipment, and
materials characterization instrumentation. The expectation is that the NH Bio-
Made will advance understanding of new the design and manufacture of advanced
materials while accelerating the state's competitiveness in the growing and
important biotechnology industry. To ensure broad benefits from these research
and infrastructure investments, the project will also provide training for
students preparing to enter the biomaterials and advanced manufacturing
workforce. These efforts will include both work-based learning opportunities for
high school and community college students moving into the workforce and
programs to facilitate the transition for students choosing to continue their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.