* 1757529
* REU Site program Explore it! Building the Next Generation of Sustainable Forest Bioproduct Researchers.
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Douglas Gardner, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 532,891.00

This REU Site Program, "Explore it! Building the Next Generation of Sustainable
Forest Bioproduct Researchers" at the University of Maine, Forest Bioproducts
Research Institute (FBRI) aims for participants to develop and utilize new
knowledge to address forest bioproduct issues impacting society in an ethical
manner. The REU Site recruits underrepresented undergraduate students through
extensive use of existing linkages with primarily minority serving institutions.
Results are disseminated via campus and international presentations, and through
journal articles and symposia. REU students work alongside middle-school
teachers creating curricular modules to teach STEM principles to middle school
children employing the concept of sustainable forest bioproducts as a vehicle.
Participants present to, and interact with FBRI faculty, thereby broadening both
the faculty member's and their personal experiences. Society benefits as the
participants: disseminate their findings, impact middle school education, obtain
a broader understanding of research ethics, and enroll in graduate school to
advance their careers. The international scientific community benefits as the
REU participants present their findings to our Chilean colleagues, while
learning of the parallel research performed at the University of
Concepcion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a continuation of a previously
funded REU Site and provides 10 undergraduates with a ten-week summer research
experience, leveraging the focus areas of the University of Maine's Forest
Bioproducts Research Institute (FBRI). Focus on sustainable forest bioproducts
is highly topical and is of great global importance in the area of sustainable
bioproduct alternatives. Students conduct research advancing their general
knowledge of the field and one of the thematic elements, such as: i)
sustainability and LCA, ii) feedstock extraction/modification, iii), process
control and sensing, iv) nanomaterial production and utilization, and v) new
product development. REU funding provides stipends and professional development
activities for 30 undergraduates over 3 years. Additional non-NSF REU funded
students will also participate, including 6 Chilean students on a mutual
exchange with 6 U.S. students, thereby broadening the impact of the program.
Students are mentored by one of 12 faculty members, all of whom are senior
personnel in the FBRI, or the University of Concepcion-UDT, Chile. The REU
program concludes with a forest products industry field trip to Chile and a
research conference where participants present their work to Chilean faculty and
students. A unique set of evaluation and assessment tools are employed that
allow tracking of student performance, thus offering feedback to students and
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.