* 1757856
* REU Site: Integrated Studies in a Rapidly Warming Fishery Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Graham Sherwood, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 227,418.00

The Gulf of Maine, and the northwest Atlantic in general, has warmed at four
times the global average rate over the last 34 years, and since 2004, the Gulf
of Maine has warmed at a rate faster than 99% of the world's oceans. The
observed warming has been shown to have marked impacts on species distribution,
fisheries productivity and the economic viability of fisheries. The Gulf of
Maine fishery ecosystem presents an ideal system for students to explore coupled
natural and human system dynamics. The Gulf of Maine Research Institute will
host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that will bring six
students to Portland, ME each summer for three years. The program will conduct a
national search for applicants and seek to engage students who are from schools
with limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports
student stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. This project
supports the national goals of developing the next generation of scientists and
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eighteen REU students at GMRI
will explore the structure and function of the Gulf of Maine fishery ecosystem
(plankton to seafood), how it is changing over time (trends and prediction), how
it responds to perturbations (e.g., climate and fishing), and how changes may
affect local economies. They will develop independent, hypothesis-driven
research projects and will be exposed to multiple scientific approaches,
including classic experimental ecology, observational science, and statistical
and dynamical modeling. The primary objective of the program is to train the
next generation of scientists capable of describing, quantifying and
communicating the interconnections between environmental and human influences on
marine ecosystems. Students will receive training and professional development,
including safety training, ethics training, and data management, analysis and
scientific communications workshops. Activities include a journal club, regular
seminars and a final student symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.