* 1757618
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Emily Weiss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2023
* USD 323,393.00

Nanotechnology is one of the fastest-growing research areas and is widely
recognized as having the potential to revolutionize fields as wide-ranging as
energy, medicine, environmental science, and biotechnology. It is also an area
that integrates disciplines, generating a highly creative environment that
breaks down traditional academic silos. At Northwestern University,
nanotechnology is recognized as one of the pillars of excellence, due in large
part to the International Institute for Nanotechnology (IIN). This Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
at Northwestern University, hosted by the IIN, will provide diverse cohorts of
undergraduates with meaningful, goal-oriented, laboratory research experiences
for a 9-week period over the summer. The foundation of scientific and
technological progress is an educated and motivated scientific workforce.
Research is a valuable experience in critical thinking and skill development for
undergraduates, and summer research experiences - that are not fragmented by
classwork and extracurricular obligations - are especially valuable for exposing
undergraduates to realistic day-to-day operations of a research lab, and for
allowing them to engage deeply in a single challenging research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the summer IIN will host a unique program
in an intellectually stimulating environment that provides research
opportunities in Chemistry, Biology, Medicine, Physics, and several Engineering
disciplines, all connected through their focus on nanoscience and
nanotechnology. This REU program strongly emphasizes the recruitment of
undergraduates from institutions where academic-year research opportunities
and/or resources to conduct scientific research are scarce, in order to increase
the representation of all ethnicities, genders, and socioeconomic groups in the
STEM workforce. Each student will be mentored by a faculty member and a graduate
student team within a framework that moves from guided supervision to
independent work as abilities allow. The students will problem solve and
contribute to the development of new tools, materials, and methods while
exploring nanoscale and atomic-scale systems, phenomena, and devices. The cohort
will be strengthened by weekly meetings/seminars, field trips, social
activities, and shared on-campus housing. The program will include an
interactive public speaking workshop, one-on-one technical writing sessions, and
access and training on state-of-the-art instrumentation. Participants will
present their findings at a Closing Symposium and in a written technical
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.