* 1757626
* REU Site: Place-Based Research and Training in Biology and Environmental Science on the Colorado Plateau
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Theodore Martinez, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 176,186.00

This REU Site award to Northern Arizona University, located in Flagstaff,
Arizona, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers
of 2018- 2019. The research theme is place-based and utilizes the unique ecology
and cultural diversity of the Colorado Plateau and Four Corners region.
Recruitment targets students from tribal colleges and community colleges, with
special emphasis on Native American and Hispanic students. Students will have
research projects that are relevant to the local ecology and cultures (e.g.,
research questions involving climate change, fish populations, mate recognition
among ecologically similar species). The primary goal of the program is to
enhance the scientific and critical thinking skills of students and encourage
continued studies in the sciences. Each student will conduct all phases of
scientific research, including scientific literature review, experimentation,
data analysis and interpretation, and paper and poster presentations of their
results. The program includes seminars on career options, developing research
skills, responsible conduct in research, Native American and western science
perspectives, and cohort-building activities. Mentors have extensive experience
mentoring undergraduates in research. Students will be selected from the
applicant pool by PIs Holeski and Martinez.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 16 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be
selected primarily from tribal and community colleges and other institutions
where students may not have considered continuing on to four-year or graduate
degrees in the sciences. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting https://nau.edu/Merriam-
Powell/Research-Experience, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Holeski at
liza.holeski@nau.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Martinez at
ted.martinez@nau.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.