* 1757748
* REU Site:  Molecular and Biochemical Analysis of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* James Forney, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 248,700.00

This REU Site award to Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, will
provide research training for eight students for ten weeks during the summers of
2018- 2020. The program provides advanced training in the analysis of protein
function. It facilitates detailed understanding of experimental laboratory
research, insights into protein biochemistry and appreciation for the broader
context of research. Projects mentored by faculty in the Department of
Biochemistry include analysis of enzyme mechanisms, post-translational protein
modifications, proteomics, and protein-nucleic acid interactions studied in a
wide range of biological contexts including cell cycle control, epigenetic gene
regulation and plant development. A three-day orientation will introduce key
concepts in protein biochemistry and experimental design. The remainder of the
program will emphasize full-time research supplemented with weekly sessions on
ethical conduct in research, professional communication and the graduate school
application process. Students will present their results at a departmental
symposium and a university-wide poster session. The program will recruit life
science and chemistry undergraduates with at least four semesters of college who
have an interest in research. Selection of participants will be based on
academic performance, demonstrated interest in research, and the potential for
outstanding research careers in the life sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program with additional emphasis
on recruiting students from groups that are underrepresented in the life
sciences. Students will learn how research is conducted, improve their
scientific communication skills and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Additional assessments on student poster presentations will be
performed. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths and will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.ag.purdue.edu/biochem/Pages/REU.aspx, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
James Forney at forney@purdue.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.