* 1757522
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Sustainable Energy (U-RISE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Wencong Su, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,905.00

This REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Sustainable Energy (U-RISE) at the
University of Michigan Dearborn, is designed to educate a new generation of
engineers and scientists by conducting research in sustainable energy-based
electric power systems. Student participants work in teams on research projects
with a special emphasis on sustainable energy-related technology and engineering
that aim to promote economic efficiency; improve social welfare; reduce energy
cost; support plug-and-play of distributed sustainable energy; and improve the
capability, adaptability, scalability, resiliency, safety, security, and
usability that our nation's power grid infrastructure can provide. The program
places an emphasis on exposing undergraduates to cutting-edge sustainable energy
technology by letting them solve real-world engineering problems together with
University of Michigan-Dearborn faculty, graduate students, and local industry
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated research and educational plan will
have significant broader impacts: (1) The University of Michigan Dearborn will
host thirty REU students, drawn from diverse backgrounds and experience, who
will directly and immediately benefit by participating in a combination of
analytic, computational, and experimental projects. (2) The research findings of
these projects will contribute to our nation's current and future plans for
reconstructing the legacy power grid and accommodating the high participation of
sustainable energy sources. (3) This REU site will address the nationwide
problem of the underrepresentation of women and minorities in STEM and more
specifically in the field of sustainable energy. (4) This REU site will offer
research experiences to those who may not normally have such an opportunity,
particularly women, underrepresented minorities, participants from non-
engineering-college institutions with limited research opportunities, and high-
performing low-income students. Having a more diverse engineering and science
professoriate will significantly benefit society, not only in Southeast Michigan
but nationally, by promoting a more equitable participation of minorities in the
engineering and scientific disciplines. (5) This REU will leverage long-term
educational and research partnerships with regional and national institutions;
and (6) The lessons learned from this REU program will be disseminated in
diverse media to reach broader audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.