* 1757858
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 373,997.00

The young and talented minds passing through our colleges and universities today
will determine our technological future. To maintain America's previously-held
strategic position of command in Science and Engineering, American students need
greater encouragement to pursue advanced studies in
Science/Technology/Engineering/Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. This Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site aims to encourage more American
undergraduates in Computer Science to pursue graduate studies, and to assist
them in realizing their full potential as researchers. The investigators believe
that the best way to achieve these aims is to immerse capable undergraduates
within a successful, active research group for a sufficient duration. This
exposes them to the intellectual excitement that is involved in research
activity, encourages them to think creatively and independently, and helps them
to develop the skills necessary to work on research projects. This project
represents renewal of the REU site in Computer Vision, which has operated
successfully for the past thirty years. It is important to continue educating
the next generation of computing researchers, including a special emphasis on
engaging underrepresented members in computing fields and those students
attending institutions that do not have substantial research opportunities.
Dissemination of the best practices to other institutions remains our site's
deep commitment and is achieved by publication in educational venues, and
involvement in the REU community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has ten
undergraduate researchers per year, for three years. Each year, undergraduate
researchers participate in a ten week, full-time Summer program, with optional
follow-on part-time participation during the subsequent Fall and Spring. The key
elements of our approach are (1) a full Summer experience for the undergraduate
researchers, providing sufficient time to follow a substantial project through
to completion, (2) to present each undergraduate researcher with several
possible project topics, so that they can feel they have chosen a project which
is most interesting to them, (3) to immerse the undergraduate researchers in the
general research environment essentially as if they were graduate students, by
having them meet with their faculty advisor regularly to discuss their project,
participate in the weekly research group meetings, attend research
presentations, PhD defenses and PhD proposal presentation and meet with visiting
distinguished researchers, (4) to offer undergraduate researchers an optional
follow-through over the year by working with the undergraduate researchers to
write a (publishable) technical report on their project, (5) to expose them to
the benefits of graduate school through a half-day workshop on Why grad school,
How to apply to grad school and fellowships, How to prepare for the standardized
entrance exams, (6) to take them for field trips to local technology companies
involved in real world applications of computer vision, and (7) to offer them
mentoring at social events: group lunches, banquet, picnic, parties, etc. This
site has been successful in contributing to educating generations of
researchers. It is important to continue educating the next generation of
computing researchers, including a special emphasis on engaging underrepresented
members in computing fields. Another important emphasis is to provide intensive
research experiences for those students attending institutions that do not have
substantial research opportunities. Additionally, dissemination of the best
practices to other interested institutions remains our site's deep commitment
and is achieved by publication in educational venues, and involvement in the REU
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.