* 1757401
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research in Engineering (SURE) - Robotics
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Leyla Conrad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2023
* USD 287,979.00

This three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Summer
Undergraduate Research in Engineering (SURE)-Robotics, at Georgia Institute of
Technology, will expose participating students to interdisciplinary robotics
research, and as a direct consequence, interest them in opportunities available
through graduate study. Due to the universal appeal and the compelling real-
world applications that robotics has in society, this program is designed to
have direct appeal in attracting minority and female undergraduate students into
research. Robotics, as a discipline, is inherently interdisciplinary, combining
all aspects of engineering necessary for designing and deploying integrated
systems and solutions. As students are exposed to robotics, they begin to see
connections among these disciplines and begin to understand how their in-class
book knowledge translates into real-world systems that can assist society in
positive ways. The push of robotics, as it moves from traditional industrial
settings, into public spaces and homes across the world opens up extensive new
research opportunities in important economic areas such as healthcare,
education, and entertainment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Annually, Georgia Tech will
host eight REU students in an immersive 10-week robotics summer research
experience. The program will recruit participants locally and nationwide from
institutions that provide no or limited research opportunities. Since it is
expected that this theme will be highly advantageous for recruiting, retaining,
and motivating students who are currently underrepresented in engineering
disciplines, particular emphasis will be placed on recruitment of minority and
female students. Students who are paired with both a faculty advisor and a
graduate student mentor, will undertake meaningful robotics research projects,
visit local industrial labs, attend weekly seminars on emerging research in the
robotics field, and participate in weekly academic enrichment and skill
development workshops. Students will conclude the program with research
presentations to their peers, faculty, and graduate student mentors. Through
this immersive research experience, robotics REU students will share in meeting
the challenges of this promising new robotics domain and fully reap the rewards
of being trained in this interdisciplinary field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.