* 1757843
* REU Site:  A Chemistry REU on Molecular Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CheMIE)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Cory Holland, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 314,876.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas State
University, located in San Marcos, TX, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. This site, supported by the Divisions
of Chemistry and Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Science
Directorate, offers research projects in the areas of chemistry, biochemistry,
and material science. In addition to student research projects, participants in
the REU program attend a course designed to expose them to the entrepreneurial
and commercialization aspects of technology. The course allows them to explore
how basic research contributes to molecular innovation, entrepreneurship, and
economic development in molecular sciences. This unique combination of research
and commercialization training provides student participants with a broad
understanding of academic and industrial research. The REU program also focuses
on the development of emerging scientific professionals through an extensive
professional development course that includes seminars, workshops, and panel
discussions with topics including scientific communication, ethics in scientific
research, and graduate school and career preparation. Participants in the REU
are recruited largely from regional primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs)
and provides extensive research experience for participants that would otherwise
not be able to participate in undergraduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants contribute to research projects that
include hybrid metal organic framework materials, fluorescent nanomaterials for
biomedical applications, analysis and application studies of biohybrid organic
chromophores, and electrophilic carbene studies. Some of the other research
projects involve conducting polymer nanocomposite studies, organic halide
synthesis, N-substituted alkyne synthesis, and structural and functional studies
of RNA binding proteins. The site's distinctive combination of basic research
training and an understanding of technology commercialization promotes a novel
scientific training environment for participants that contributes to their
professional success in academic and industrial
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.