* 1757699
* REU Site: Basic and Environmental Soil Science Training (BESST)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Joshua Heitman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2024
* USD 402,674.00

Soils are critically important to society for their roles in agriculture and
environmental processes, including those that regulate climate and provide clean
water. Yet, the number of scientists trained with specific soils expertise is
rapidly declining. The Basic and Environmental Soil Science Training (BESST)
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site will provide mentored, soils-
focused research opportunities for undergraduate students recruited from a range
of STEM backgrounds. The overarching goal for this REU Site is to develop a
critically needed pipeline for the next generation of geoscience researchers,
equipped to address wide-ranging research problems in soils. The program will
train a diverse group of students to engage in addressing important societal and
ecological issues throughout their careers. The program seeks to develop a new
paradigm for soil science, extending student recruitment and training beyond
traditional foundations in agriculture, and transforming soil science into an
integral part of the geoscience research community. Student research
opportunities will highlight relationships between human activities and
terrestrial environments, which are central topics in modern soil science that
are broadly applicable to many other sub-disciplines of the Earth and
environmental sciences. With this unique offering and targeted recruitment of
underrepresented groups in the geosciences, the program will attract a diverse
pool of student researchers and facilitate their pursuit of research careers
with specific emphases on the potential for academic, industry, and non-profit
career paths in soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BESST REU Site utilizes a
diverse, multi-disciplinary team of scientists to deliver individualized student
research experiences in state-of-the art soil science topics, synergized through
unifying themes and team training opportunities. Specific objectives for the
BESST REU are to: i) recruit outstanding students without extensive previous
experience in soil science, with an emphasis on those from under-represented
groups; ii) train these students by providing a substantive research experience
and exposure to broad opportunities in basic and environmental soil science,
with an emphasis on socially relevant areas of food, water, and energy; and iii)
develop a pool of future professionals empowered to advance understanding of
soils in the geoscience community. Ten students will be trained each year for
three consecutive years. Program activities will be supported by a university
with well-developed infrastructure for undergraduate student research, and
hosted by a department with a long-standing tradition of international
excellence in soil science. Student recruitment will be pursued through
departmental and university collaboration with undergraduate-serving
institutions, HBCUs, and national undergraduate research organizations. The
program will be assessed by external experts to ensure that the BESST REU is
rigorously evaluated and pedagogic impact maximized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.