* 1757659
* REU Site: Research Experience in Cyber-Security for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Kendall Nygard, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/28/2022
* USD 369,999.00

This research experience for undergraduates (REU) site has a focus on security
of cyber-physical systems such as self-driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicle
systems, robots, smart electrical grid systems and internet of things devices
that are among the most important devices to secure due to their real-world
interaction with humans, other equipment and the environment. These devices are
also critical to manufacturing efficiency and national competitiveness. This
program provides student participants an opportunity to gain experience in
developing and analyzing cyber-security-related software for such cyber-physical
systems. Through this experience, students learn about the process of and
techniques for conducting research in cybersecurity, cyber-physical systems and
the computing disciplines in general. They also come to better understand their
own capabilities and interest in pursuing research careers, refining and
potentially changing their career and educational goals.  The project, thus,
promotes the progress of science by allowing students to evaluate the pursuit of
careers in research through immersive participation in a real-world research
environment, and it advances national security and welfare through its focus on
the area of cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The projects focusing on
topics such as self-driving cars and robots excite student participants and
provide the opportunity for hands on work with hardware, allowing students to
see the effect of decisions they have made regarding software design and
security. Sample projects involve 1) the design of secure coordination systems,
intrusion, and malicious data detection, 2) issue prevention and detection, 3)
data trustworthiness, 4) sensor data trust assessment, and 5) supervisory
control and data acquisition system security, and reliability analytics. Through
these, students gain exposure to multiple sub-disciplines related to these
projects, allowing them to experience in multiple related areas. They also gain
an appreciation for the importance of each sub-discipline as well as the
opportunity to work on a large project from start to finish in conjunction with
their cadre-mates. Participating students complete research projects, including
software development, results analysis and technical write-ups.  They are
mentored by North Dakota State University faculty through cadre-group, scheduled
one-on-one and ad-hoc meetings.  They gain appreciation of the importance of
quality assurance processes, particularly for ensuring software security and the
safety of cyber-physical systems, and they learn about the software lifecycle
and proper software development practices.  The projects are designed so that
students, despite working on their own research goal and serving as the "lead
scientist" on this goal, rely on other students for their
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.