* 1757043
* REU SITE:  Plant Genomics @ Michigan State University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Robert Last, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 334,174.00

This REU Site award to Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018 - 2020. REU
participants will engage in faculty mentored research focused on genomics of
plants and photosynthetic microbes that will be suitable for students interested
in genomics, molecular genetics, biochemistry, chemistry, and computational
biology. Participants will be selected from a pool of rising sophomore, junior,
and senior applicants with an emphasis on individuals from primarily
undergraduate institutions and institutions serving under-represented groups in
the sciences. This REU will provide insight into graduate school. Participants
will be immersed within an active research group and will interact with faculty,
postdoctoral associates, and graduate students to acquire research skills and an
in depth understanding of their project. The program includes seminars and
workshops describing MSU research programs, graduate school opportunities and
preparation, scientific career paths, scientific ethics and research misconduct,
and presentation skills. Participants will prepare posters and give talks
describing their research at annual MSU research symposia. Activities will be
structured to increase each participant's ability to think critically and
conduct biological research with the goal of maximizing their future impact on
STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Collectively
the experiences gained during this REU program are intended to provide
participants with the experience and confidence to pursue graduate school and
scientific careers in the biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) will be used to determine the effectiveness
of the training program. Students will be tracked after the program to determine
their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent
via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://plantgenomics.natsci.msu.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Cornelius Barry at barrycs@msu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Robert Last at
lastr@msu.edu). This program is supported by DBI and IOS
Divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.