* 1757053
* I-Corps: Cellular Materials for Maximum Lightweighting and Structural Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Robert McMeeking, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-corps project can affect many
industries and applications where lightweight structures and materials are
advantageous. Cellular materials, such as honeycombs, foams, and lattice
materials, are some of the lightest, stiffest, and strongest available at
moderate to low density. There is an ever present demand for lighter, stiffer
and stronger materials in industries such as aerospace, automotive, defense,
civil engineering, sports equipment. Lighter materials are demanded by users to
experience enhanced performance, and they are sought by producers to gain a
competitive edge. This project aims to find commercial applications for an
ultra-lightweight cellular materials geometry-a type of 3D honeycomb-that
achieves theoretical upper limits for structural efficiency and stiffness. This
unique geometry is the first of its kind, and can facilitate structures with
extreme stiffness, high strength, and maximum lightweight performance. The main
focus is to identify opportunities in unmanned aerial vehicles for defense and
commercial use.

This I-Corps project assesses the commercial viability of a 3D honeycomb-like
material geometry, and the Intellectual Merit encompasses establishing the
commercial utility of the accompanying design, analysis and experimental scheme,
which enables the creation of lightweight optimized structures with maximum
stiffness and very high strength. This design is composed of two highly
anisotropic subgeometries whose contributions can be tailored locally, through
simple design parameters, to produce functionally graded and highly optimized
structures. The symmetries and alignments of material are unique in 3D space.
The relatively simple geometry can be fabricated through origami like sheet
folding, allowing access to a multitude of material systems and very low density
structures. This design was generated using a semi-automated finite element
modeling algorithm, which allowed for a wide variety of designs to be
considered.