* 1757548
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Edward Gillan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, will provide
undergraduate students from resource limited institutions, as well as women and
minorities, research opportunities in nanoscience and nanotechnology. This
program will be carried out at the University of Iowa, run for 10 weeks during
the summer session, and be administered through the Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology Institute at the University of Iowa (NNI@UI). Participants will
be recruited from institutions with limited undergraduate research
opportunities, and underrepresented minorities and women will be recruited by
coordinating with on-going diversity efforts at the University of Iowa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants will be provided with a stimulating
research experience focused on (1) giving students the opportunity to work on a
cutting-edge research project focused on nanoscience and nanotechnology under
faculty mentorship, (2) helping undergraduate students develop strong research
and communications skills through seminars on laboratory safety and scientific
ethics, a technical communication workshop, and participation in a university-
wide summer undergraduate research symposium, (3) training undergraduate
students in the interdisciplinary area of nanoscience and nanotechnology, a
field of demonstrated scientific importance, (4) encouraging student
participation from institutions with limited research opportunities and from
underrepresented groups (including women in engineering) through vigorous
recruiting efforts, and (5) encouraging REU participants to pursue graduate
studies by informing them of opportunities for graduate study and application
procedures. Faculty mentors from Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Chemistry, and Pharmacy will
guide these students in their research. Given the importance of nanoscience and
nanotechnology, it is imperative to provide undergraduates with early exposure
to research in this interdisciplinary field and to enhance their interest in
science and engineering for graduate studies and as a career
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this REU Site is provided by the National
Science Foundation, Directorate for Engineering, Division of Engineering
Education and Centers and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Science,
Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.