* 1757644
* REU Site: Program for Access to Training in Health Informatics (PATHI)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Bradley Malin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 369,223.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates - Program for Access to Training in
Health Informatics (REU-PATHI) will provide 10 undergraduate students with the
opportunity to conduct meaningful health informatics research for a period of 10
weeks in the summer. As a field, health informatics connects science,
engineering, social sciences, and multiple other fields towards addressing
critical health-related research topics. The REU-PATHI site seeks to broaden
participation in health informatics and open new opportunities in this rapidly
expanding field. At least 50% of REU-PATHI students will come from groups that
are underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
and Computing fields, including women, members of minority groups, first
generation college students, and students attending institutions with limited
access to research experiences. Students will be matched with faculty mentors in
the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Department of Biomedical Informatics,
who will work with students to develop knowledge, skills, and experience in
health informatics research. The undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to work in one of three health informatics focus areas: 1)
Computing, focusing on computationally-intensive topics such as natural language
processing, data science, predictive analytics, and data privacy; 2) Precision
Health, focusing on topics such as genome-wide and phenome-wide association
studies, genomics, and proteomics, and 3) Human-Technology Interaction, applying
concepts from human-computer interaction, human factors engineering, and
sociotechnical systems to topics such as studying workflow in complex clinical
environments and patient safety. Regardless of specific research area, all REU-
PATHI students will participate in twice-weekly seminars presented by faculty,
computer programming workshops, and other professional development activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the REU-PATHI Site are to engage
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds in meaningful scientific
research projects at the nexus of computer science, basic sciences, engineering,
social sciences, and health, and to prepare them to become the next generation
of researchers identifying, designing, developing, deploying, and studying
innovative technology-based solutions for important health-related problems.
Health Informatics is one of the fastest growing fields today. However, there
are significant challenges in orienting and training diverse undergraduate
students to the many career pathways available in this high-impact scientific
research field. REU-PATHI addresses this urgent problem by 1) training
undergraduate students to conduct cutting-edge health informatics research; 2)
introducing students to pathways in health informatics graduate education and
research; 3) involving graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and faculty in
mentoring undergraduate students; 4) providing opportunities for REU students to
disseminate their research to peers, graduate students, faculty, and the field;
and 5) linking high school students in our larger internship program to
undergraduate peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.