* 1757530
* REU Site:  Ecological and Evolutionary Dynamics in a Changing World
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Katherine Gross, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 447,251.00

This REU Site award to the W.K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) of Michigan
State University (MSU), in rural Hickory Corners, MI, will support training for
10 students over 11 weeks during the summers of 2018 - 2020. The program focuses
on the ecological and evolutionary processes that drive responses in plant,
animal and microbial systems to global change. REU students work in KBS faculty
labs that have affiliated positions in departments of Integrative Biology, Plant
Biology, Plant Soil and Microbial Sciences, Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
Animal Science, Entomology and Forestry at MSU. Students will collaborate with
their mentor(s) to design a research project that takes advantage of the diverse
habitats and long term experiments at KBS to test hypotheses about how climate
change impacts both managed and natural systems. Students will participate in a
professional development program that addresses issues such as scientific best
practices, preparation for graduate school and employment in STEM fields, and
effective ways for communicating science. Recruitment targets increasing
participation of military veterans, students from under-represented groups, or
students from institutions with limited research opportunities in ecology and
evolutionary biology. The on-line application is reviewed by program
coordinators who forward appropriate candidates to mentors who interview
applicants whose interests best match their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is anticipated a total of 30 students will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research questions are developed and tested, and will present the
results of their work at a public symposium. Students will live at KBS, and will
interact daily with resident faculty, graduate students and postdocs, who
conduct research on a broad range of ecological and evolutionary topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine effectiveness of the training
program. Students are tracked after the program and expected to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by contacting the PI (Dr. Katherine Gross at kgross@kbs.msu.edu), or the co-PI
(Dr. Danielle Zoellner at zoellne8@msu.edu) or at our website (http://www.kbs.ms
u.edu/index.php/education/ugrad/reu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.