* 1757112
* Collaborative Research: Evictions: Causes, Consequences, and Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Nick Mader, Chapin Hall Center for Children
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 172,114.00

This research studies the mechanisms through which eviction and housing
instability affect low-income families. Eviction is a frequent source of housing
instability among the urban poor, and recent research suggests that it is a key
factor limiting the upward mobility of American families. Yet existing evidence
on the consequences of eviction is based on comparisons of evicted tenants to
similar non-evicted tenants, making it difficult to isolate eviction as a root
cause of urban poverty rather than a symptom of other causes such as job loss or
deteriorating health. This research contributes to the existing body of evidence
by evaluating the causal effects of eviction on three sets of outcomes:
household relocation, financial health, and children's educational outcomes. The
investigators use linked administrative data on eviction court cases, outcome
data after the court ruling, and a quasi-experimental design. In addition to
estimating the causal impact of eviction, this research provides new descriptive
evidence on the common pathways into eviction, information on the population
facing eviction, and the types of financial stresses that precede an appearance
in eviction court.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the causes
and consequences of residential eviction for low-income American families. The
investigators assemble a novel dataset on over 700,000 eviction court cases from
Cook County, IL, and link these cases to several administrative datasets, which
allows them to measure: (1) household relocation, including neighborhood choice,
household composition, and homelessness; (2) financial health, including
employment, earnings, public assistance receipt, and access to credit; and (3)
children's educational outcomes, including school switching, disenrollment,
absenteeism, academic achievement, and behavioral incidents. This research uses
a quasi-experimental research design to identify the causal impact of eviction
on these outcomes. For identification, the investigators leverage the random
assignment of judges to eviction cases, along with variation in leniency across
judges. This research uses linked credit data and administrative data to study
the population appearing in housing court, the evolution of financial strain in
the run-up to eviction, and whether the consequences of eviction differ by the
sources of financial distress, contrasting negative shocks from more gradual
declines in financial health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.