* 1757828
* REU Site: Software Safety and Reliability: Research and Application
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 369,994.00

As software safety and reliability are vital for safe and reliable operation of
many systems and in reduction of catastrophic accidents, this Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Texas at Dallas
provides cutting-edge research opportunities on these important topics to
students, especially those from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups or
universities with limited resources. After gaining skills in critical thinking,
oral and written communication, problem solving, and research methods, students
will be encouraged and well prepared for graduate education and research careers
in science and technology. Their interactions with mentors and other
participants will provide avenues to share ideas and results. Research
connections will be established with students' home institutions to continue
collaboration among multiple institutions in different geographical regions. REU
website will publicize research articles, videos and slides of lectures and
project presentations, and announcements for effective community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this research is software safety
and reliability, with a focus on evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of
existing methodologies and current practices for safety assurance and
reliability prediction. Issues to be studied include how the introduction of
software safety and reliability requirements may affect the software lifecycle,
and studying how software processes, methods and tool support should be
adjusted. Further exploration will emphasize how safe software systems can be
unreliable; how reliable software systems can be unsafe; and how to make
software systems both safe and reliable. Our findings will be compiled to
provide a comprehensive picture of how software safety and reliability can be
achieved effectively and efficiently. An important aspect of this site is a
close collaboration with industry. REU students will take field trips to
industry sponsors, allowing them to speak directly with practitioners to better
understand how software safety and reliability is applied to real-life
applications. Workshops on technical writing and oral presentation will be held
to improve students' proficiency in preparing and delivering technical reports.
Seminars on ethics and professional responsibility will also be given to ensure
REU students behave properly and respectfully.