* 1757140
* Demand Analysis with Many Prices: Methods and Application
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Whitney Newey, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 183,662.00

This research develops machine learning methods to estimate economic welfare
from big data. Scanner data, as collected in grocery and other retail stores,
provides big data that can be used to estimate economic welfare. The
investigator develops new double machine learning estimators of economic welfare
based on big data. These estimators combine novel machine learning of certain
economic weights with machine learning estimators of demand functions to do
double machine learning estimation of welfare. These estimators are also
generalized and applied to many other problems. In addition, this research uses
the fact that scanner data follows individuals over time. Hence, individual
demand functions are estimated and averaged to construct improved welfare
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop and
apply economic demand analysis for large data sets that include many prices,
such as scanner data. A common feature of scanner data is that cross price
effects tend to be small, often an order of magnitude smaller than own price
effects. This feature suggests that machine learning methods that allow for
approximate sparsity, where most cross price effects are small, might be useful
in practice. This research develops double machine learning estimators of exact
consumer surplus and other welfare effects. The investigator uses novel machine
learning of objects in Riesz representations that are not conditional
expectations. This research produces a general method of double machine learning
for generalized method of moments with first step series estimators. Scanner
data is often panel data, where individuals or households are followed over
time. The investigator further derives identification results for demand in
panel data with general heterogeneity, and analyzes regularized fixed effect
panel data estimators of average effects that can be applied to demand
estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.