* 1757953
* REU Site: Enriching the Undergraduate Research Experience for Native American Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Megan Paciaroni, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 388,486.00

This three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to Fort
Lewis College (FLC) in Durango, CO will support research experiences for Native
Americans undergraduate students focused around energy, propulsion and the
environment. Native American scholars face unique and serious obstacles along
the path to the Ph.D. One increasing challenge to converting Native American
students from undergraduate scholars to academics and researchers is the
difficulty of gaining admissions into prestigious graduate programs. This REU
program aims to increase the skill portfolio of Native American students with
research experiences along with intensive mentoring. Participants will be
involved in relevant research at Fort Lewis College under the mentorship of FLC
faculty; they will later transfer to a traditional R1 REU summer program. These
experiences, in addition to the relationships formed at the R1 institutions,
will increase the competitiveness of their graduate school application. As a
public primarily undergraduate institution with a successful history of
externally funded undergraduate research, FLC is uniquely qualified for this
program. The college has a robust undergraduate research program with a high
quality faculty deeply invested in student success. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
designated research projects are focused around energy which is one of the more
critical factors in both the global economy and ecology. The proposed research
aims to further understanding of critical energy and propulsion processes by
development of laser diagnostics in combustion, providing critical experimental
data to modelers, develop innovative techniques to monitor nuclear reactors and
investigate new forms of propulsion, molecular energy transfer and liquid phase
molecular dynamics. The broader impacts of this REU program are twofold.
Firstly, participation of underrepresented groups in scientific research is
directly increased. The program is designed to ultimately increase the number of
PhDs awarded to Native Americans. Native American students will be provided the
opportunity to perform undergraduate research while bringing theory into
reality. FLC is a Native American-Serving, Non-Tribal institution with an
historic mission to educate the nation's Native Americans within a liberal arts
framework. FLC ranks 4th in the nation in percent of full-time Native American
undergraduates but first in baccalaureate STEM degrees awarded to Native
Americans. Secondly, data generated will be disseminated to the wider research
community. This will lead to a lasting impact on the body of scientific
knowledge specifically in the area of energy, propulsion and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.