* 1757936
* REU Site: Creative Approaches to Materials Design and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Heather Hunt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2022
* USD 323,253.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The future of materials research demands
achieving predictable material responses, from materials creation to
application, at increasingly reduced length scales. This requires a workforce
whose interdisciplinary academic and research training extends from materials
design, to manufacturing, and to characterization. Such a global challenge
necessitates workforce training beyond the rigid, traditional approaches of
materials science and engineering educational programs, into truly creative
spaces where innovation is allowed to occur. While many universities have
enthusiastically adopted curricular improvements focused on innovation /
entrepreneurship, the most fundamental and foundational elements of creativity,
creative thinking and creative expression, have been bypassed. Given that the
creative process is critical for an innovative workforce, it is important to
consider how creativity is nurtured and promoted in not only classroom
experiences, but also in research and mentoring experiences. This REU Site,
centered on materials design and processing, is designed to address the urgent
need for innovation in materials research in the U.S. by interweaving a proven
creativity training program into the framework of the traditional research and
professional development activities. The project will establish evidence-based
creativity trainings that can be used in the engineering classroom and in
research training experiences, the results of which will be disseminated widely.
This REU Site will fill a critical gap in workforce development in materials
design and manufacture, and address a national need for researchers who can
solve complex, interconnected problems by training researchers to think
creatively from an early stage. Lastly, while creativity is the foundation of
innovation, diverse perspectives on problem solving are also necessary to
efficiently and effectively addressing global challenges in materials research.
This project will increase the number of underrepresented students participating
in research and moving towards advanced degrees and research careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The future of materials
research demands achieving predictable material responses, from materials
creation to application, at increasingly reduced length scales, requiring a
workforce whose interdisciplinary academic and research training extends from
materials design, to manufacturing, and to characterization. Moreover, such a
workforce must also be trained to be innovators capable of thinking of creative
approaches to materials design and processing. To address these needs, this REU
Site program is centered on creative approaches to materials design and
processing. This program is unique in that it includes proven, theatre-based
creativity training interwoven into the framework of the research training and
professional development activities. This REU Site will enable undergraduates to
expand upon their traditional training to explore new avenues in 21st century
materials innovation. Beyond creativity, innovation in materials design and
processing requires a fundamental understanding of the interrelationships among
structure, composition, processing, and properties. This is particularly
critical for advanced functional materials, which are often micro- or nano-
structured, and built through either self-assembly or complex fabrication
processes, due to their unique and complex structure-function relationships, and
their potential use in applications critical to human health and security. The
REU Site focuses on understanding and predicting these relationships for micro-
and nano-structured materials across a wide spectrum of applications, including
sensors, batteries, reactors, and implantable devices. Students in this program
will learn cutting-edge materials research approaches that include atomistic
simulation, coarse-grain modeling, and a suite of materials design / fabrication
/ characterization techniques. This research will not only advance the science
in each unique area, but will provide students with unique, measurable skills in
computational modeling, materials science design, processing, characterization,
and creative thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.