* 1757246
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Social Comparisons in Peer Effects
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Charles Sprenger, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,000.00

Understanding the sources of social conformity is important because it is a very
common phenomenon that affects social and economic outcomes. Economic models of
conforming to social norms assume that people conform either because of material
incentives or to avoid punishment. This research project will use economic
theory and laboratory experiments to study why people conform to social norms
when there are no material incentives to do so or punishment for deviating from
those norms. The theory is based on the idea that individuals want to judge
themselves in a positive way but lack a direct way of evaluating themselves. As
a result, individuals look at the actions of their peers to form the positive
image of themselves, allowing them to form a better image of themselves.
Comparing one?s behavior to their peer?s lead to a better understanding of
social conformity that does not require material incentives or punishment. The
researchers will then conduct laboratory experiments to test this theory. The
results of this research project will provide an input into the formulation of
policies to enhance social cohesion. The project will support a doctoral
dissertation research and therefore contributes to growth of US's economic
research capital and global leadership in economics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic theories of social conformity based on sanctions,
social signaling, or adherence to social norms cannot explain why there is
conformity among those whose actions are not likely to be seen by others, nor do
they address the environment in which peer effects may be strong. This research
project seeks to deepen understanding of why social conformity arises in the
absence of material incentives with a unified theory and two experiments. The
theory posits that individuals have an intrinsic desire to judge and evaluate
themselves positively. Lacking objective means of self-evaluation, individuals
rely on social comparisons to better understand what their choices reveal about
themselves. By deriving behavioral conformity from self-image, the model
establishes a scope for peer effects without observable incentives or the
pressures of social stigma. Two experiments are then conducted to test the
predictions of this model. The first experiment tests whether individuals follow
a pattern of peer effects that is uniquely consistent with self-image
evaluation. The second experiment tests whether a noisier signal mitigates peer
effects by garbling the information peer-behavior provides. The effects of
social interaction on individual decisions is quite broad and a better
understanding of how self-evaluation through social comparisons drives social
conformity will provide explanation of empirical observations of this phenomenon
as well as provide policy makers with information as to when peer effects are
likely to be strong. The results of this research project have many broader
impacts, not only from application to fields of economics, but also in areas of
public policy, business, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.