* 1757888
* REU Site: Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer Research Program
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,682.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Mississippi, is located in Oxford, MS. The principal investigators are Nathan
Hammer and Gregory Tschumper. The site supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This site, supported by the Division
of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate, offers
original research projects in experimental and theoretical physical chemistry.
These research projects foster communication and collaboration between members
of physical and computational chemistry groups, which increases literacy in high
performance computing and its applicability to chemistry. In addition to
participating in research, students develop a deeper knowledge in physical
chemistry through faculty led lectures on topics like quantum chemistry,
molecular spectroscopy, and medicinal chemistry. Students engage in a summer-
long schedule of organized professional development and social activities with
Ole Miss undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and staff. These
activities prepare students for chemistry careers and help to build a network of
peers and faculty. To broaden participation and develop a diverse chemistry
workforce, this site recruits students from the Southern U.S., particularly
those from underrepresented groups in chemistry and from institutions with
limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants
perform original research in the laboratories of faculty members and using the
Mississippi Center for Supercomputing Research (MCSR). Centered around
experimental and theoretical physical chemistry, the research projects include
synthetic design of light-harvesting, photoemissive, and catalytic materials;
characterizing the photophysical properties of newly-developed materials; the
spectroscopic study and computational modeling of important biologically
relevant interactions; and the synthesis and computational modeling of newly-
developed materials with important energy or drug development applications.
Senior personnel mentor students in original research, present lectures on
physical chemistry-related topics, administer mini-courses, and organize social
activities. Students in the program gain practical experience in the physical
sciences while applying knowledge in chemistry to real world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.