* 1757147
* Collaborative Research: The Dynamics of the Capital and Labor Allocation in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Pablo Ottonello, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 268,246.00

This research project measures how capital, labor, and other inputs are
allocated across manufacturing firms and establishments by size, age, and other
characteristics. They will use data from the Department of Treasury and the U.S.
Census Bureau to calculate statistics that describe how these resources have
been allocated across U.S. manufacturing firms, and how that allocation has
changed over time. The new measurements will be publicly available and will be
used in models of the U.S. economy. The team also plans to use a business cycle
accounting procedure to assess whether (and to what degree) changes in resource
allocation help to create business cycle fluctuations. Finally, they will
identify a set of economic frictions that are important for understanding
business cycles. A large class of macroeconomic models starts with the behavior
of individual firms, aggregates firms into industries, and then builds up to the
production side of the entire US economy. The result of this project will be
widely incorporated into these macroeconomic models. As a result we will better
understand how government economic policies affect different industries and
firms in different ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team seeks to understand the
role of frictions to resource allocation in shaping business cycle fluctuations.
They will provide a publicly available set of reduced-form statistics that
describe the dynamics of the allocation using high-quality Census micro data.
Second, they will develop a semi-structural distributional business cycle
accounting procedure to assess the contribution of changes in the allocation to
aggregate fluctuations. Third, they will use the results of this procedure to
identify the set of structural frictions that are quantitatively relevant for
understanding aggregate fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.