* 1757991
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Earth and Environmental Sciences (SURFEES)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Christopher Kim, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2023
* USD 405,267.00

This summer REU-Site program in the Schmid College of Science and Technology at
Chapman University will annually provide 10-11 students selected exclusively
from 2-year community colleges (focusing specifically on under-represented
minorities, women, and low-income students) with the opportunity to engage in
research on interdisciplinary earth and environmental topics ranging from
mineral-surface interactions to wetland ecosystems to extreme global weather
events. Engaging under-served students in this REU-Site program is expected to
create a more diverse population of science-literate citizens to address current
and future scientific challenges. Measurable outcomes include the number of
community college students remaining committed to STEM majors by transferring to
and graduating as science majors from 4-year institutions, REU students'
increased understanding of the research process, research ethics, and the value
of research contributions to local and global communities, and the number of
REU-Site participants who enter graduate programs or careers in the sciences.
Chapman University campus resources and local community organizations will
provide professional development workshops, give presentations at a weekly
speaker symposium on scientific careers and internships, and prepare
participants with the skills needed to be effective and ethical science
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern California is a highly developed
urbanized area with considerable natural resources, resulting in a wide range of
earth and environmental challenges and problems. Addressing these complex issues
requires an interdisciplinary and educated workforce of scientists. Through
participation in cutting-edge research with faculty mentors working at the
forefront of their respective disciplines, students will engage in complex
scientific studies on topics including the transformation pathways of
pollutants, environmental impacts on intertidal ecosystems, effects of climate
change on extreme weather-related events, and carbon sequestration in wetlands.
These interactions will both provide valuable interdisciplinary research
experiences to a typically underserved student population and drive the
principal investigators' scholarly research forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.