* 1757777
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary CubeSat Research and STEM Education Platform at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTChattSat)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Donald Reising, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2023
* USD 359,783.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site: An Interdisciplinary
CubeSat Research and STEM Education Platform at the University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga (UTChattSat) is focused on addressing challenges faced by the use of
commercial electronics in space systems. The REU Site will provide 10
undergraduate students per summer the opportunity to work closely with faculty
mentors and graduate students in state-of-the-art laboratories in the key areas
of power, communications, electronics, and electromechanical systems designed
for operation in space environments. The use of small satellite systems by
government and commercial organizations for science discovery, commercial
endeavors, and securing the national defense is rapidly increasing. This REU
Site will provide a diverse group of students an opportunity to conduct research
on important emerging problems related to the space sciences as well as unique
professional development opportunities, preparing students for future careers as
engineers in the field of space systems, an area of critical need for the
workforce of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CubeSat small satellite
standard platform will be used for the purposes of (1) enabling undergraduate
students to conduct research of important emerging problems related to the space
sciences and (2) encouraging continued study and practice in STEM fields. This
theme provides undergraduate students with an opportunity to be directly
involved in ongoing research in technically relevant fields under the
supervision of research mentors and provides students the opportunity to
contribute to an interdisciplinary effort of researching reliable small
satellite systems. The program will enhance students' foundations of science,
mathematics, and engineering and introduce students to practical engineering
under the tight design constraints imposed by small satellite spacecraft.
Immediate impacts of the research activities include: (1) an enhanced
understanding of the dominant mechanisms in the radiation and reliability
responses of disruptive semiconductor technologies, (2) mitigation techniques
for radiation-resilient space systems, and (3) development of guidelines for the
design of low-cost, quick turn science payloads. Student recruitment and
selection will target under-represented groups from higher education
institutions that offer few research opportunities. The leadership team brings a
diverse group of participating faculty that are committed to sharing research
results with new generations of students, K-12 teachers, and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.