* 1757394
* CAREER: Embracing Randomness and Uncertainty in Inventory Problems: Algorithms and Insights
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/21/2017,09/30/2021
* David Goldberg, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 247,081.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will develop
algorithmic and modeling tools and methodologies for inventory control problems.
The problem of managing inventory when demand is stochastic is one of the core
problems of Operations Research. Such models have many applications critical to
the American economy, including: supply chains, healthcare, energy, cloud
computing, military operations, and advanced manufacturing. It is common wisdom
that the more noise, uncertainty, and high-dimensionality that one introduces
into such a model, the more difficult that model becomes to solve. This award
supports the development of algorithmic and modeling frameworks which break this
fundamental barrier by embracing randomness and uncertainty as an algorithmic
and modeling tool, turning the associated hardness into an advantage. The award
will also advance the state of pedagogy, by integrating undergraduate
engineering students' experiences in senior design projects into their
introductory Operations Research and Industrial Engineering courses, enabling
students to connect their coursework directly to interesting real-world
applications pertaining to actual inventories and related models. The award will
also lead to the development of new Ph.D. courses, and the integration of
students at all levels into the supported research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award will support research into two fundamental families of inventory models.
Lost sales inventory models with positive lead times are appropriate for many
applications, but have resisted solution due to the curse of dimensionality.
This has led to the use of incorrect models in many applications, for example
the use of models with backlogged demand when lost sales models are more
appropriate. If successful, the supported research will create an algorithmic
framework and supporting methodologies aimed at developing efficiently
implementable heuristics which provably perform nearly optimally as more
randomness is introduced into the problem, for example through longer lead
times, and generalize the approach to related models. The second modeling
framework to be considered is that of (distributionally) robust inventory
control, in which one takes model misspecification into consideration when
performing the relevant optimizations. The supported research will develop a
modeling framework and solution methodology for analyzing such models in the
presence of demand forecasting and dependencies, by considering settings in
which one has limited information regarding the conditional distribution and
moments of demand over time. The research will also create a theory explaining
how different approaches to modeling uncertainty in the joint distribution of
demand over time lead to qualitatively different inventory control policies, and
explore these questions in related models.