* 1757875
* REU Site:   Place-based Conservation Science in Hawaiian Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 369,666.00

This REU Site award to University of Hawaii at Hilo, located in Hilo, HI, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. The REU program places primary emphasis on tropical ecological
research in degraded ecosystems. Interns will participate in professional
development, field trips, and outreach, attend the State's annual conservation
science conference, and prepare an oral presentation and final paper. This work
is expected to spark the research careers for the next generation of
environmental problem-solvers through intensive writing training, solution-
oriented research topics, and a supportive program structure. The program
concentrates on the health and restoration of degraded ecosystems by
investigating the spatial spread of degradation as well as ecosystem functioning
of resilient communities. The primary focus will be on attracting students with
a passion for the environment and nurturing the confidence, skill set and
ability to effect positive change and pursue a viable career in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
underrepresented minority students (Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander in
particular), first-generation college students, and students with little to no
research experience, will work with a diverse team of faculty mentors on
projects focused on the ecology of degraded landscapes. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and present the results of their work at an internal
symposium as well as at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program as well as multiple internal methods. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://hilo.hawaii.edu/uhintern, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Ostertag at
ostertag@hawaii.edu), co-PI (Dr. Puniwai-Ganoot at npuniwai@hawaii.edu), or
project coordinators (Linnea Heu and Rita Miller at
uhintern@hawaii.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.