* 1757307
* Multidisciplinary Conference on Election Auditing: Cambridge, Massachusetts - December 2018
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Ronald Rivest, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 43,615.00

This full-day public conference explores the intersections of scientific,
policy, and legal issues related to post-election auditing. Advances in
statistical auditing techniques show promise in providing assurance that votes
were counted as cast, and that results of elections have been correctly
declared. Standard auditing practices provide models for election officials to
assure that the business practices associated with running elections have been
conducted according to law and regulation. However, gaps remain in techniques
needed to assure that certain election-specific processes have been properly
conducted; assigning residences to the correct voting districts is one of these.
The purpose of this conference is to explore the range of existing election
auditing procedures, assess where new scholarship could expand the range of
auditing techniques, and discover the legal, administrative, and social
roadblocks that exist in the widespread adoption of innovative auditing
practices in the area of elections. This conference will provide a forum for
disparate professionals -engineers, mathematicians, social scientists, legal
scholars, and election officials- to explore these issues together. A conference
proceeding will be published, to ensure the widest dissemination of the
scholarship discussed at the conference.

This full-day public conference explores the intersections of scientific,
policy, and legal issues related to post-election auditing. The adoption of new
auditing techniques, such as risk-limiting audits, has reached a critical
juncture, as states have come to adopt new techniques and as scholars in the
field recognize new challenges. Among those challenges are how to adopt rigorous
auditing techniques based on rigorous statistical principles to the practical
settings of American elections, and how to extend statistical auditing
techniques into the variety of proportional representation schemes that states
and localities have recently adopted. In addition, recent controversies have
revealed the value of developing rigorous auditing techniques in areas other
than vote-counting, such as the assignments of residences to voting districts,
where traditional ways of defining districts (e.g., through "metes and bounds")
interface uneasily with the explosion of GIS capabilities. The conference will
provide the opportunity for scientific and engineering scholars in the field to
interact with election practitioners, which should provide a major boost in
setting the research agenda among scholars working to develop innovative, yet
practical, election auditing techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.