* 1757711
* REU Site: Regional Atmospheric Chemistry:  Measurement, Modeling and Big Data in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Shelley Pressley, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2024
* USD 653,051.00

This grant will support the renewal of an REU site at Washington State
University that will educate early researchers in atmospheric chemistry, air
quality and climate change. Understanding complex atmospheric chemical processes
requires simultaneous measurements from numerous instruments, and sophisticated
numerical models to bring the data together into a coherent scientific product.
New to this REU site is the addition of 'Data Carpentry' components of training.
Well established training sessions teach researchers best practices for data-
driven research, which is essential for today's researchers employing large
datasets (i.e. high frequency time series, remote sensing products, or complex
modeling inputs/outputs). This REU site will recruit ten students each summer,
over the next 5 years, targeting underrepresented communities in the Pacific
Northwest as well as local community colleges. Workshops during the 9.5-week
program, will train students in atmospheric chemistry, measurement and modeling
techniques, data interpretation, and scientific communication. In parallel with
these workshops, students will be trained on the specific research tools
required for their individual research projects with faculty and graduate
student mentors. The students will showcase their research during a final campus
wide poster session for all summer researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
site will allow participants to explore research on topics such as research foci
include: 1) biogenic emissions and secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation
from forested sites, 2) impacts from natural and prescribed forest and
agricultural fires, 3)nitrogen and carbon cycling from agricultural and natural
ecosystems, 4) Smart Cities, 5) air quality forecasting and the impacts of
climate change on future air quality, and 6) in situ and remote sensing of urban
and regional atmospheric chemistry. The overarching goals of this REU site are
to 1) help students develop technical expertise, 2) engage students in authentic
research, 3) help students understand the broader context of their research, 4)
recruit a diverse cohort of students, 5) facilitate formation of productive and
meaningful social interactions with faculty, graduate students, and fellow REU
participants, 6) develop positive views about STEM by participants, 7) develop
written and oral communication skills, and 8) provide opportunities for graduate
school and professional development of participants. The program elements and
activities of the REU site are mapped to the 8 goals demonstrating how each
program element contributes to the overarching goals. Additionally, the
evaluation plan is well designed to specifically evaluate the progress on the
site goals. This site will also explore participation by students that are
place-bound, which if successful will open up a new model for broader
participation in REU opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.