* 1757373
* Marine Technology Mentoring and Internship Program on Oceanographic Research Vessels
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Deidre Sullivan, Monterey Peninsula College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2023
* USD 413,531.00

The Marine Advanced Technology Center (MATE) at the Monterey Peninsula College
will continue to manage a program that places interns in at-sea technical
positions in collaboration with the University National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS) and the United States Coast Guard (USCG). The program will
provide 12-14 undergraduate students with two to twelve-week internships and one
student with a six-month internship each year for the next three years
(2018-2021). MATE interns work with marine technicians and scientists onboard
research vessels and these experiences provide them with the opportunity to
develop their technical, scientific, seamanship and interpersonal skills. Ships
that are part of the UNOLS and the USCG fleets will serve as internship hosts.
UNOLS and USCG are committed to providing berthing space and meals on their
vessels during a research cruise and marine technicians who act as mentors.
These internships provide students with the opportunity to develop their
technical, scientific, seamanship, and interpersonal skills, and give ocean-
related employers access to qualified technical professionals who can fill their
workforce needs. While the program is open to all U.S. undergraduates,
recruitment efforts are focused on community college students enrolled in marine
technology programs and university students interested in marine technical
careers. This training effort is important for the continued operation of the
U.S. academic research fleet and for the marine industries that benefit by
hiring the highly skilled technicians who graduate from the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a focus on recruiting students from community
colleges who are interested in careers as marine technicians, MATE internship
program fills a unique need in the continuum of support for undergraduate
students in marine sciences. This program provides an excellent bridge between
students who need training and experience and academic and industrial employers
who need technical support. The MATE internship program will provide a total of
forty-five undergraduates with internships over the three-year period. Most of
the funding provided supports student stipends and travel to meet the research
vessels where they will be working. The MATE internship program supports
national goals by developing the next generation of technically skilled
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skills and experience gained through all MATE
internships vary depending on the research vessel, cruise goals and tasks the
mentors need to accomplish during the cruise. Typical experiences include: 1)
cruise preparation and coordination; 2) operation and maintenance of specific
oceanographic equipment [e.g. Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD), Acoustic
Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP), fluorometer, transmissometer, temperature and
salinity sampling, nutrient sampling, sonar and echosounders, current profilers,
corers and nets, underwater cameras, AUVs, ROVs]; 3) trouble shooting
instruments and equipment; 4) chemical analyses; 5) operation and maintenance of
computer hardware and software; 6) programming software for data retrieval,
analysis, and archiving; 7) seamanship, marine operations, and safety
procedures; 8) navigation skills; 9) application of basic oceanographic and
meteorological knowledge to sampling design and execution; 10) teamwork and
other interpersonal skills; 11) experience working in a marine and scientific
environment; and 12) communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.