* 1757423
* REU Site: A Distributed REU in the Mathematical Biosciences
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Grzegorz Rempala, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 349,130.00

This project supports the multi-institution REU program in the mathematical
biosciences, facilitated by the Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI). The
objectives of the program are: (1) to introduce a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students to the field of mathematical biology, broadly interpreted
to include areas such as biostatistics, bioinformatics, and computational
biology, in addition to biologically-inspired mathematical modeling; (2) to
encourage students to pursue graduate study in the mathematical biosciences; and
(3) to increase the number of students who enter the workforce with training in
this field. The infrastructure provided by the MBI gives the necessary resources
to accomplish these goals by providing both an authentic research experience as
well as exposure to the field of mathematical biology broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants will work on projects in areas such as
molecular evolution, neuronal oscillatory patterning, cancer genetics, epidemics
and vaccination strategies, and animal movement. Participants will work
individually or in pairs under the guidance of expert mentors to make specific
research contributions in these areas, often leading to a peer-reviewed
publication and conference presentations. The REU program will incorporate
various professional and research-skills development activities throughout the
summer to help ensure the participants' success in completing their summer
project and to prepare them for graduate study or entering the workforce. The
Distributed REU Program in the Mathematical Biosciences will have the following
broader impacts. First, the program will increase the number of trained students
who ultimately enter the workforce in the area of mathematical biology. Second,
online materials developed as part of the program will be archived and made
available on the MBI website for free use by others. In particular, MBI will
record the lecture sessions in the one-week bootcamp session, the weekly
seminars during the REU segment, and the oral presentations at the Capstone
Conference. Finally, dissemination of research findings of the participants in
the REU program will contribute to a cohesive and vertically integrated national
research community in the mathematical biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.