* 1757324
* RII Track-1: Linking Genome to Phenome to Predict Adaptive Responses of Organisms to Changing Landscapes
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Ronald Hardy, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and animals live in a
fragile balance that can be upset by human land use decisions. This project aims
to help landowners, state park planners, city planners, and Native American
tribes in Idaho make informed decisions on land use that will minimize the
effects on native wildlife. To do this, researchers from several colleges and
universities across the state will create tools that will use data from a wide
variety of sources including advanced genetics, ecological and geographical
databases, and survey results from landowners and Native American tribes. These
tools will provide options for land use that will encourage the most effective
use of land while minimizing the impacts on native plant and animal species.
Through this program, Idaho will engage the public, train the next generation of
scientists, and develop exciting new tools that will provide new methods for
scientifically informed land use decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII)
Track-1 project from Idaho will study two keystone species (redband trout and
sagebrush) in ecosystems of the American West. The project will use existing
environmental legacy data to inform agent-based models (ABM) to predict adaptive
capacity of these two species. The project team will determine the links between
genomes and phenomes via experiments using temperature as the key variable to
identify genomic responses of the adaptive capacity of these species and
iteratively link them through the ABM to further inform our understanding of
genetic capacity. Finally, the project participants will map species' genomes by
environmental outcomes across additional impacts including biotic, abiotic, and
various anthropogenic effects and local knowledge through methodologies
originating from the social and economic sciences to inform the ABM model. The
model will be used to predict the outcomes of various land use scenarios, and
will be presented to stakeholder advisory groups who will discuss and make
decisions based on the results from simulations. Decisions made by the
stakeholder groups will further inform the model. It is expected that this
iterative feedback model will be a transformative tool for land use decisions in
Idaho and beyond. Additionally, strong workforce development plans will engage
faculty, postdocs, graduate, and undergraduate students of the three research
universities in Idaho, as well as 2- and 4-year Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions (PUIs) in a Vertically Integrated Project approach that encourages
all academic levels of the institution to work together. The inclusion of
different types of higher educational institutions across Idaho will address and
answer the state?s need for a well-trained workforce in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.