* 1757872
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in the Mathematical Sciences and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Led by principal investigators the Mathematics Department at Texas A&amp;M will
host a group of 12 talented undergraduates for research training during 8 weeks
each summer. The REU faculty will specifically seek strong students who have
been isolated from research opportunities at their home institution, be it from
prior hardships or lack of resources. Students will have the opportunity to
learn cutting-edge mathematical ideas from scratch, and contribute to solving
hard problems underlying many real-world problems from biochemistry,
engineering, cryptology, and quantum computing. Students will receive free
housing, reimbursement for travel, and a stipend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thematically, the REU program will have three research
streams per summer. These are chosen on a rotating basis from four choices: (1)
Algebraic Methods in Mathematical Biology, (2) Algorithmic Algebraic Geometry,
(3) Number Theory, and (4) Quantum Computing. The first stream involves neural
codes and biochemical reaction networks. The second stream focuses on
A-discriminants, tropical approximation of algebraic sets, and applications to
optimization. The third stream investigates questions on zeros of modular forms,
L-functions, and class number bounds. The fourth stream focuses on topological
approaches to quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.