* 1757795
* University of Maryland Eastern Shore REU in Marine and Estuarine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Margaret Sexton, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 340,226.00

This REU Site award to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, located in
Princess Anne, MD, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2018- 2020. The scientific focus of the REU program is on marine
and estuarine science, particularly the ecology of coastal rivers, lagoons and
estuaries in Maryland. Students will have opportunities to work in various
research areas such as the population dynamics of fish and macroinvertebrates,
marine microbiology and parasitology, molecular biology and genetics, marine
botany, environmental chemistry, and ecotoxicology. Students will participate in
workshops and seminars to teach them how to design field and laboratory research
projects, collect and analyze data, and effectively present their results
orally, in poster form, and in writing. They will receive training on
ethics/responsible conduct of research, and complete surveys to enable us to
assess the program. Students will also go on field trips to familiarize
themselves with the environment as well as the conservation and restoration
projects in the Delmarva Peninsula. Recruitment will target rising sophomores
and rising juniors, particularly those belonging to underrepresented minority
groups. Completed on-line application forms will be reviewed, and students are
selected based on their cumulative GPA (&gt; 2.7 on a 4.0 maximum scale),
interest in marine and environmental science, and strength of their letters of
recommendation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 24
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://www.umes.edu/reu,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Paulinus Chigbu at pchigbu@umes.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Margaret Sexton at masexton@umes.edu). This Site is supported by the
Divisions of Biological Infrastructure in the Biological Sciences Directorate
and the Oceanic Sciences in the Geosciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.