* 1757685
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Burt Tilley, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,606.00

The Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) REU in Industrial Mathematics and
Statistics provides a distinctive educational experience for students in the
mathematical sciences by introducing them to the ways in which mathematicians
and statisticians use math in the "real world". Students work in teams on
research problems of industrial and mathematical significance that come directly
from industry and that are of immediate interest to the companies involved in
the program. Students work closely with company representatives to define the
problem and to develop solutions. They work closely with faculty advisors to
maintain a clear focus on the mathematics and statistics at the core of the
project. This summer research provides challenges not faced in traditional
undergraduate programs and helps to develop skills usually not addressed in
academic programs. It also provides a glimpse of some of the many career
possibilities that are open to students with a strong mathematical
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU supports 9 undergraduate students for
9 weeks during the summer on 2 to 3 different industrial projects. Students
develop a project goals statement in the first week, in collaboration with a
faculty advisor and a company liaison. Over the next seven weeks, students
conduct the actual research while presenting their progress to both an academic
audience at WPI and a corporate audience at the sponsoring company. In the final
week, students give their final oral presentations at WPI and the company and
submit a written report. Professional development activities presenting
mathematical career options in academia and industry complement the program. The
selection process focuses on students with a strong academic background but with
limited opportunities for research in mathematics at their home institutions.
One selection emphasis is an openness to pursue a range of research directions
which an industrial problem may require. Successful research teams have been
multifaceted and diverse, and therefore members of underrepresented groups in
the mathematical sciences are especially encouraged to apply.