* 1757787
* REU Site: Intelligent and Scalable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Brian Davison, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 371,959.00

The Intelligent and Scalable Systems Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site provides an inspirational and successful research experience for 10
undergraduate students over a 10 week period at Lehigh University. Over the
summer, participants learn how to harness the incredible potential of machine
learning, and the unprecedented power of modern parallel compute resources, to
invent new systems and algorithms that are infused with intelligence and hence
capable of solving pressing societal problems. The proposed REU Site employs a
multifaceted recruiting strategy, with a focus on encouraging women,
underrepresented, and minority students to participate; a special focus will be
placed on recruiting from institutions that lack undergraduate research
opportunities. Students will also benefit from a program of seminars and
tutorials designed to ensure that they are ready to collaborate, knowledgeable
about the key concepts and technologies in modern intelligent and scalable
systems, and inspired to pursue both further education and life-long careers in
Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this ten-week summer
research experience is to increase the number and diversity of students pursuing
graduate degrees in computer science, around the timely theme of intelligent and
scalable systems. This REU Site will facilitate research into fundamental topics
in both machine learning and scalable computer systems, such as new algorithms
for machine learning, new approaches to privacy preservation, and new techniques
for increasing the performance of parallel programs. It will also support
application-focused research, with an emphasis on creating solutions to hard
problems in both research and society. Through seminars and faculty-supervised
collaborative projects, participants will learn about the research process, hone
their software development skills, improve their comfort with technical
communication, become knowledgeable about graduate school and its application
process, and ultimately develop greater confidence in their ability to succeed
in a Science/Technology/Engineering/Math career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.