* 1757793
* REU Site: Intelligent Energetic Systems Engineering (INTENSE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* David Grow, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,182.00

The Intelligent Energetic Systems Engineering (INTENSE) REU at New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology (NMIMT, New Mexico Tech) will engage
undergraduate students in unique research related to robotics, smart materials,
explosives, high-speed fluid dynamics, and shock physics. There is a distinct
need for more US citizens with research experience to fill science and
engineering positions across the country, particularly for the Department of
Defense (DOD), Department of Energy (DOE), and National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) complexes and associated industrial bases. Students
involved in this REU will complete individual research and design projects
directly related to federally-funded research being performed at NMIMT; building
skills, knowledge, and exposure to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines relevant to these national hiring needs. The
research projects will investigate the interdisciplinary engineering and science
of intelligent and energetic systems, including specific projects to explore
human-robot interactions and feedback, and the complex chemical-thermo-fluid-
dynamics of reacting energetic material systems. Participants will be exposed to
cutting edge research facilities at NMIMT and at prominent national facilities
through tours of Sandia National Laboratories and Kirtland Air Force Base Space
Vehicles and Directed Energy Directorates. Students will be recruited primarily
from Southwestern US institutions with limited undergraduate research
opportunities. INTENSE REU will have focused recruitment of under-represented
populations of Hispanic, Native American, and Veteran minorities, supporting
NMIMT?s Hispanic Serving Institution status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INTENSE
REU objectives and impacts are to increase interest in STEM research and
graduate studies, increase technical knowledge of Intelligent and Energetic
Systems, increase research skills, increase exposure to STEM career
opportunities, engage students in long-term STEM mentoring relationships, and
enhance STEM opportunities for minority and under-represented populations. Each
summer, eight students will participate in a nine-week program conducting
research in laboratories with faculty and graduate student mentors, exploring
intelligent and energetic systems. Energetic systems topics including
explosives, propulsion, shock physics, and high-rate impacts are taught at
extremely few universities nationally, with NMIMT being a recognized national
leader in the field. INTENSE REU participants will be exposed to unique research
involving intelligent and energetic systems that is being performed through a
range of federal funding mechanisms, including support from federally funded
research and development centers (FFRDCs). Participants will broaden their
engineering ?toolbox? through hands-on research and a series of group Toolbox
Development Activities covering topics including: library resources, experiment
planning, data analysis, and technical communication. Students will connect with
each other and their faculty and graduate-student mentors through weekly social
lunch gatherings and by presenting a three-minute speech and technical poster in
an end-of-summer technical conference held at NMIMT. Mentor training for faculty
and graduate students will improve relationships, increase research
effectiveness, and provide long-term connections with REU students. Targeted
student recruitment will result in under-represented minority students with no
access to research at their undergraduate institutions to be exposed to STEM
research of national interest, and thus expanding the diversity of the national
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.