* 1757105
* Unemployment Insurance Schemes in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Francois Gerard, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2021
* USD 226,800.00

This proposed research project will study the most efficient form of
unemployment support using a large data set on the employment history of over
400,000 workers. This employment data will be combined with expenditure and
unemployment compensation data for the study. The researchers will categorize
different types of unemployment compensation (unemployment insurance, lump sum
payments, and no insurance) and use sophisticated methods to analyze how the
type of unemployment compensation unemployed workers receive affects affect
their consumption over time. The researchers will then develop a theory that
combines the insights of both economics and psychology to explain the observed
differences in consumption patterns of unemployed workers receiving different
types of unemployment compensation. The researchers will then use the results to
discuss policy recommendations. The results of this research will provide
valuable inputs into unemployment compensation policies in both developed and
developing worlds. The results will also be used as an input to develop policies
to improve the functioning of labor markets, hence enhance economic growth both
in the US and around the world. Finally, the results of this research project
can be used by individuals to plan their consumption during periods of
unemployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The debate about the optimal
choice between (combinations of) unemployment insurance (UI) and lump sum
payment at the time of layoff focuses on the tradeoff between the disincentive
from the former to the inability to smoothen consumption because of the
uncertainty of unemployment duration in the case of the latter. There is very
little empirical and theoretical investigation of this tradeoff, especially in
developing countries that are struggling to develop their unemployment
compensation systems. The proposed research project will use theory and large
data sets to investigate how the type of unemployment compensation scheme
affects the consumption trajectories of laid off workers. The project follows a
strand in the economics literature that documents consumption profiles around
economic shocks. The PIs will build a new high-frequency longitudinal microdata
of formal employment and expenditure for more than 400,000 individuals and
exploit this dataset and a rich empirical setting with multiple sources of
variation in unemployment insurance schemes across workers to document new
empirical findings. The project will then estimate structural models of
behaviors that explain these consumption patterns and evaluate their ability to
explain the empirical observations. The project will then use the estimated
models to discuss policy implications for unemployment compensation schemes,
particularly for developing countries. The results of this research project will
provide critical inputs into the formulation of unemployment compensations
schemes and other labor market policies, improve the functioning of labor
markets and in the process, increase economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.