* 1757706
* REU Site: An Undergraduate Research Incubator Site at Furman University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mary Daub, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 339,939.00

The REU site award to Furman University in Greenville, SC supports the training
of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. In the program,
funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor Karen L. Buchmueller and colleagues host an REU site that
involves three visiting teams, each consisting of a faculty mentor and two to
three students who come to Furman University each summer to conduct research.
The program also includes two Furman University teams, each consisting of a
faculty mentor and one student. The summer program begins with a research boot
camp, providing mini-courses in laboratory safety, scientific ethics, career
advising and hands-on experience with departmental instrumentation. The summer
research program culminates in an oral symposium and an outreach program at a
local summer camp for disadvantaged children. The entire summer is designed to
facilitate the development of future scientists, through direct engagement with
real scientific problems in the lab and the development of meaningful
relationships with faculty and students participating in the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furman
University provides a unique summer REU program that incorporates visiting teams
of students and faculty from small colleges, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), and technical colleges. The REU site provides research and
educational opportunities that act as stepping stones in the development of the
undergraduate student as a scientist. The program recruits students in the first
two years of their college careers and students from under-represented groups.
Visiting students are supported by REU ambassadors (former REU students) and a
faculty member from their home institution. The REU site also serves as an
incubator, a place where visiting faculty build research programs that have the
potential to amplify the REU program beyond the bounds of Furman University. The
goal is to cultivate future scientists, both directly within the program and
through the development of sustainable research programs at our partner
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.