* 1757973
* REU Site:   Synthetic Biology (SynBREU)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Michael Jewett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 301,214.00

This REU Site award to Northwestern University, located in Evanston, IL, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-
2020. The focus of the program is to provide mentored research experiences to
train the next generation of students in the field of Synthetic Biology. Faculty
from the Departments of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, Molecular Biosciences, Engineering Sciences and Applied
Mathematics, Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, and Physics will serve as
mentors. After a one-week bootcamp to teach all necessary basic lab techniques,
the participating students will carry out an independent synthetic biology
research project. Concurrently, students will participate in a carefully
designed curriculum to develop skills necessary for success in their future STEM
careers, including communication, networking, ethics, and entrepreneurship. This
information will be conveyed via seminars, workshops, informal weekly lunches
with faculty, social events with other university researchers, and field trips
to area companies and museums. At the end of the program, students will present
posters describing their projects and results at a research symposium. A stipend
will be provided, along with housing, meals, and a travel allowance.
Applications will be accepted online, and reviewed by a faculty committee to
select participants. Students from underrepresented or underpriviledged groups
are encouraged to apply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
24 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Continued
mentoring will be available to those wishing to pursue additional activities in
synthetic biology or related science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Additional standard and tailored assessments will be used to
refine activities continuously to meet program goals. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://synbreu.northwestern.edu , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Tullman-Ercek at
ercek@northwestern.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jewett at m-jewett@northwestern.edu).
This award is supported by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (DBI and MCB
Divisions) and the Directorate for Engineering (EEC
Division).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.