* 1758007
* REU Site at UC Berkeley:  Integrated Biology from Molecules to Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Tyrone Hayes, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 609,285.00

This REU Site award to the University of California Berkeley (UCB), located in
Berkeley, CA, will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2018 - 2021. The theme of the REU is "Integrating Biology from
Molecules to Ecosystems." The program offers research training in molecular
biology, cell biology, developmental biology, physiology, and ecology. Evolution
is central theme and inherent part of all research programs included in the
program. Students will be able to conduct research in areas that could include
anything from gene regulation and cell morphogenesis, to examining environmental
factors that alter developmental trajectories in whole animals, to studying
evolution in the field. In addition to the intensive research experience (with
students mentored by faculty members and doctoral or postdoctoral students), the
program offers an intensive week of introductory courses, a weekly research
seminar presented by faculty members from across campus, writing and oral
communication exercises, ethics training, a weekly professional development
course, and a balanced social/recreational program. Students will assess the
program by using the REU common assessment tool. The UCB REU program seeks
students interested in pursuing graduate school and research careers in the
biological sciences. Student applications are assessed by the PI, co-PI and
training faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 48
undergraduate students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. One of the program goals is to
increase the number of women, underrepresented minorities, first generation
students, students from low income backgrounds and students with disabilities
who pursue graduate degrees in the biological sciences. Students in the program
will learn how research is conducted, and enhance their skills and confidence to
do science. Many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences, improving their chance to get into the most competitive graduate
programs in the country. Further, the UCB REU program will strengthen ties with
colleges and universities that serve the targeted student populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the program and
must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting http://mcb.berkeley.edu/nsfreu/ or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Gian Garriga at garriga@berkeley.edu or co-PI (Dr. Tyrone
B. Hayes at tyrone@berkeley.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.