* 1758432
* SBIR Phase II:  Employing a New Class of Chemosensors for Continuous, Real-Time Measurement of Heavy Metals in Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Bruce Bathurst, AquaMetals, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 693,202.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project uses a new class
of chemosensor films to continuously measure the concentration of heavy metals
in a flowing stream of industrial wastewater. This will make it possible to know
the concentration of several heavy metals at any given time so that treatment
chemicals used to remove those metals can be metered precisely. Current
treatment methods typically rely on infrequent sampling of wastewater streams
and time-delayed, labor-intensive laboratory measurements. Without the ability
to measure continuously, wastewater treatment is adjusted based on periodic
averages and estimated peak discharges. To reduce the risk of regulatory
violation, most wastewater treatment systems use twice the volume of treatment
chemicals than might otherwise be needed. With the ability to measure metal
concentrations continuously and automatically, wastewater treatment can be
controlled in real time, cutting treatment chemical costs, solid waste costs and
measurement labor costs by more than 50%. Continuous measurement also reduces
the risk of regulatory violations by > 90%, in turn reducing the potential costs
of remediation and compliance as well as improving environmental conditions for
the general public.

The key outcome of Phase I research was the successful development of 15 new
chemosensors permanently bound to a substrate, each with a unique response to
zinc, cadmium, cobalt, chromium, lead, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese,
mercury, nickel and tin. In Phase II, responses from an array of chemosensors
will be fully characterized with a prototype instrument developed for commercial
use in different industrial environments. With that instrument, a mathematical
model will be constructed to accurately convert sensor responses into scientific
units of measure for multiple dissolved metals. The lower limit of detection for
existing sensors ranges from 5 ppb to 50 ppb. In parallel with analytical
modeling work, chemosensor synthesis work continues to lower the limit of
detection to 1 ppb, extend sensor life beyond 6 months, and broaden the
portfolio of sensors to improve metal selectivity. In the future, this new class
of bonded chemosensors may be extended to determine the concentration of
phosphates and many other species that are currently sampled occasionally and
measured with lab instruments. For applications where continuous measurement is
important, this unique family of chemosensors offers great potential for real-
time process control in a variety of industrial applications.