* 1758688
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Estimation of Restricted Latent Class Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Yinghan Chen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 37,286.00

This research project will advance statistical methods known as cognitive
diagnosis models (CDMs). CDMs are the statistical machinery that link cognitive
theory with applications in online learning technology. They serve as a
framework for providing fine-grained classification of the skills and attributes
needed for success in the classroom and beyond. Robust cognitive theory is
central to ensure accurate inferences with CDMs. This project will develop new
statistical methods for validating cognitive theory in the context of CDMs. The
modern classroom generates a wealth of longitudinal information from
computerized student assessments. The innovations from this project will provide
a framework for human development that harvests the available information to
track skill development and to support teachers' instructional decisions in real
time. The new methods will be applicable more broadly to other disciplines, such
as the social sciences, neuroscience, medicine, and business, as an approach to
gain more detailed and nuanced information about cognitive processes underlying
human judgment and decision making. Software developed during the course of the
project to implement the developed procedures will be made publicly available.

The project will advance statistical and psychometric theory by developing
Bayesian methods for estimating the Q matrix for a general class of models.
Cognitive theory will be incorporated into CDMs by specifying a Q matrix that
catalogues the skills required by each task. The general unavailability of
cognitive theory Q matrices for most content areas and research domains poses a
barrier to widespread application of CDMs. The project will offer several
advances to existing research. The project will develop procedures for
estimating Q for the most general restricted latent class model. Bayesian
estimation methods will be employed that explicitly enforce identifiability
conditions to ensure consistency and accuracy of parameter recovery. Stochastic
processes and irreducible transitions will be created to estimate Q when the
number of latent attributes is unknown a priori. The project also will consider
methods that incorporate expert knowledge in the statistical model to improve
estimation of Q and to enhance interpretation of uncovered attributes.
Psychometric insights gained from working on this important problem can lead to
significant developments in the underlying statistical theory for estimation of
cognitive diagnosis model Q matrices and could potentially have an impact on the
broad spectrum of applications beyond education and psychology, such as machine
learning applications that seek to cluster binary data according to a set of
underlying features.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.