* 1758227
* Blazing the Trail for STEM Teachers: A Noyce Capacity Building Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Kelly Demers, Saint Anselm College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2020
* USD 74,826.00

The "Blazing the Trail for STEM Teachers: A Noyce Capacity Building Project"
aims to address the demand for qualified STEM teachers in the high-need school
district of Manchester, New Hampshire. The long-term goal of the project team is
to create a comprehensive program at Saint Anselm College (SAC) that will
recruit, prepare, and support an increased number of STEM majors skilled at
teaching in high-needs urban schools. This goal is relevant to resolving the
critical shortage of qualified secondary STEM teachers in Manchester and across
New Hampshire. In this project, the PI and Co-PI will work with other members of
the SAC community to determine whether an innovative semester-long after-school
teaching experience is effective for recruiting SAC STEM majors to pursue a
joint degree in education. This project will lay the foundation for a future
Noyce Teacher Scholarships and Stipends (Track 1)
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three primary goals: (1) gauge
the interest of STEM majors in STEM teaching as a profession; (2) improve the
perception of STEM students and faculty regarding a teaching career; and (3)
increase the number of STEM students pursuing a joint education degree and a
degree in a STEM discipline. The project will be driven by two interrelated
objectives: (1) determine whether a semester-long after-school teaching
experience can attract STEM majors to consider a career in teaching; and (2)
identify the root cause(s) of the current low interest in STEM education, so
that interventions can be designed. Research approaches include assessment of
STEM major interest via the STEM Career Interest Survey (STEM-CIS) taken by all
first year SAC STEM majors. Attitudes about urban schools and students will be
measured with a pre-/post-questionnaire and an exit interview. The interest in
STEM education across campus will be measured with a survey developed by the
project team, the "STEM Faculty Attitudes about Teaching as a Career Survey."
This project will expand the Noyce portfolio by adding the perspective of a
small, urban, liberal-arts college and by impacting Manchester, NH, a community
with a large refugee population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.