* 1758498
* Noyce Scholarships to Prepare Teachers for Culturally Congruent Science and Mathematics Education of Native American Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Polly Dupuis, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,199,824.00

Salish Kootenai College's Noyce Track 1 project aims to address the critical
shortage of mathematics and science teachers from Native American communities
throughout Montana. The project will provide scholarships and stipends to
support the preparation of 20 mathematics and science majors to become licensed
teachers in high-need secondary schools. These prospective teachers will mostly
be Native American students on or near the Flathead Indian Reservation. The
project will also provide undergraduate internships to increase the number of
mathematics and science majors who will enter K-12 teaching as a career.
Additionally, it will develop structures that help new teachers to thrive and
persist in the teaching profession. The project will build on a successful
Native American teacher preparation model that focuses on professionalism and
teaching practices. This approach has the potential to improve learning by
inviting the experiences and perspectives of under-served learners into
mathematics and science classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
partner with the Salish and Kootenai Tribes and Elders, Flathead Reservation
School Districts, and educators in informal educational settings. This
partnership will provide support for undergraduate pre-service teachers as they
develop culturally congruent instructional practices. The project will also
support Noyce recipients through induction as new teachers. This support will
include classroom visits by project staff, professional development,
professional learning community meetings, online discussions, and administrative
support. The project can contribute new knowledge about the ways teachers are
prepared to meet the needs of underserved students. It also aims to contribute
to higher science achievement for all students, as project graduates model the
application STEM-focused equity and access pedagogy with colleagues in the
professional learning communities to which they
belong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.