* 1758506
* Building Capacity to Prepare STEM Majors to Become STEM Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Shannon Seidel, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 72,858.00

The Building Capacity to Prepare STEM Majors to Become STEM Educators project is
a Capacity Building project at Pacific Lutheran University (PLU), in preparation
for a Noyce Track 1 proposal. The project's primary goals include building
institutional capacity to produce highly skilled K-12 STEM teachers,
particularly for service in marginalized communities, as well as deepening
partnerships with surrounding school districts. The project aims to develop an
undergraduate course that will deepen preservice teachers' knowledge of STEM
content and pedagogy. As a part of the new course, preservice teachers will have
field experiences in culturally and linguistically diverse public schools.
Preservice teacher supervisors will receive training on how to best foster STEM
teaching development. The project will also create a resource library with
curriculum materials and STEM related diversity-responsive literature for use by
PLU students and local school partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to build capacity to prepare highly qualified STEM teachers through (i) strong
collaborations with local and regional partnerships via an advisory board and
(ii) the engagement of diverse student populations in STEM learning through
culturally responsive curriculum. Preservice teachers participating in the
project will be undergraduates from all STEM disciplines including biology,
chemistry, physics, geosciences, mathematics, and computer science. The project
will develop an interdisciplinary, research-based course that includes K-8
classroom experiences to deepen students' knowledge of science content and
pedagogy. Through the development of interdisciplinary partnerships, students
will co-plan and teach science lessons with local K-12 teachers. Student field
placements will occur in three local school districts (Tacoma, Franklin Pierce,
and Clover Park) that serve diverse student populations in poverty affected
communities and that are intentionally building their STEM teaching capacity.
The mutually beneficial partnership between PLU and local school districts has
the potential to result in authentic school and university-based experiences for
PLU students. In addition to their impact on preservice teacher knowledge, these
experiences aim to enhance STEM education for school district students, foster
school-university STEM collaborations, enhance teaching and learning in the
schools and PLU, and provide new materials and intellectual resources for local
teachers. The advisory board will include members from the Puget Sound
Educational Service District, the Board of the Smithsonian Science Education
Center's program (Leadership and Support for Science Education Reform), PLU
faculty, and the Institute for Systems Biology. Through a design-based research
(DBR) approach, this project aims to generate knowledge on how to leverage
collaborations to create effective STEM-focused course offerings, improve
teacher preparation and development, and foster mutually beneficial
partnerships. The DBR approach to bring about change involves implementing
multiple iterations of design, implementation, analysis, and redesign. This
project is the first iteration that will collect and analyze data such as
observations, surveys, and student reflections, within the DBR context.
Dissemination efforts will focus on sharing the project's results at STEM and
Education conferences as well as in science education and teacher education
journals, both regionally and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.