* 1758426
* Laboring for Less? Understanding the Micro-Level Anatomy of the Aggregate Labor Share Decline
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Matthias Kehrig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 274,999.00

The term labor share is defined as the share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
that is paid out to workers as salaries and wages. The labor share of US GDP has
declined for several decades; this is also true in many other countries around
the world. This research project seeks to understand the causes of this decline
and the consequences for the well-being of working Americans. Past research on
this topic has focused on documenting aggregate patterns in labor share, at the
level of an entire economy, an economic sector, or a specific industry. This
investigation will use a different approach, and will study the dynamics of
labor share by looking at evidence from a large number of individual factories
and retail outlets. The research seeks to distinguish between trends that are
common across all these establishments and shifts of economic activity from
individual factories and stores with relatively high labor share to low labor
share establishments. Initial results suggest that this second kind of shift in
economic activity is the major driver of the aggregate pattern. These
preliminary results also show that individual establishments only maintain a low
labor share for a few years; the team will also test hypotheses about why these
establishments have a low share and why that share increases after several
years. Understanding the causes of labor share decline is important. We need
this information to better target policies encouraging firms to hire and train
the U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new knowledge
about the establishment-level factors that are responsible for the aggregate
decline in labor share. It will do this by using simple but powerful statistical
tools to analyze establishment level data from the U.S. Census of Manufactures
and Retail Trade. It will highlight the elements of current economic models that
are inconsistent with the data on dynamics at both the establishment and
aggregate levels of analysis. The result will be more useful information on
establishment-level heterogeneity that can be used to redesign the assumed
dynamics of firm behavior in macroeconomic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.