* 1758015
* REU Site: Program in Molecular Biosciences at the University of Oregon
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Peter O'Day, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2022
* USD 360,001.00

This REU Site award to the University of Oregon (UO), in Eugene, OR, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2018-2020. Student interns are trained in scientific research methodologies,
presentation, critical thinking, and experimental design. The scientific focus
of the program (UO REU) is in molecular biosciences. UO REU provides closely
mentored cutting edge research projects in a rich active learning environment
for interns. Research areas include molecular biology, biochemistry, structural
biology &amp; biophysics, bioinformatics, molecular neurobiology, molecular
evolution, microbiology, developmental biology, genomics, molecular genetics,
cell biology, and computational biology. The Program features training in
professional and responsible conduct of research, graduate school counseling,
training in oral and written scientific communication, accessing, processing,
and evaluating scientific literature, and informal and formal presentation of
research outcomes. Weekly research group discussions, professional development
workshops, faculty seminars, and oral and written progress reports provide
rigorous preparation for graduate school and careers in research. Professional
and social interactions with active researchers at all levels are offered.
Recruiting and selection strategies focus on students having limited access to
research opportunities, students from groups underrepresented in STEM,
disadvantaged students, and those with disabilities. The selection process
involves all participating faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and all interns are expected to attend and present findings at
national professional conferences. The program aims to enhance the diversity and
talent of the next generation of life scientists in the research community and
train role models for future generations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to assess the
effectiveness of the training program, and UO REU specific focus groups and
assessment will be used as well. Students will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by
visiting http://uoreu.uoregon.edu or by email (uoreu@uoregon.edu) addessed to
the PI, Dr. Peter O'Day, or co-PI, Dr. Bryan Rebar.