* 1758371
* Collaborative Research: Four Corners Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Alicia O'Brien, San Juan College
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 351,624.00

The Four Corners Noyce Scholars (FCNS) program is a Track 1 Noyce project. It
will be a cross-state collaboration between Fort Lewis College (FLC) in Durango,
CO and San Juan College (SJC) in Farmington, NM. It will deliver highly-
qualified STEM teachers to a rural service region that overlaps three states.
This project will provide one-year scholarships to 29 students who have already
completed a STEM degree and will pursue Post-Baccalaureate teacher licensure
through FLC or SJC. An additional 15 undergraduate students will be awarded
multi-year scholarship support while pursuing licensure in conjunction with a
degree in Math, Biology, Chemistry, Geoscience or Physics. This project will
address the lack of qualified secondary STEM teachers in the Four Corners area.
FCNS will increase the number of these teachers by recruiting and training
students who are predisposed to living in rural communities. Then they will
place them in high-need communities via student teacher assignments and long-
term employment. The first goal of FCNS will be to increase the number and
diversity of certified Math and Science teachers in the Four Corners region.
Secondly, the project will provide mentorship and professional development to
induction year teachers. Thirdly, the project will assess the effectiveness of
the program's recruitment and support strategies. FCNS will develop a
recruitment funnel that will expose promising STEM undergraduate students to
instructional experiences. Selected students will receive a stipend to take part
in summer internships through one of ten community partners in NM, CO, or AZ.
Prior to receiving scholarship support, Noyce Scholars will attend a summer
bridge program. This program will build camaraderie, create networking
experiences, and address cultural fluency, literacy, and numeracy. These
scholars will receive the training and induction year support needed to teach
effectively in impoverished, isolated, rural communities with large Native
American and Hispanic populations. A partnership between FCNS and the Navajo
Nation Math Circle (NNMC) program will create exciting opportunities to recruit
highly-qualified Navajo students into teaching and to provide FLC and SJC
students exposure to the Navajo Nation and culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
five years, 44 teachers will complete certification and teach in one of thirteen
high-need partner school districts. Starting in their freshman year,
undergraduate students at both FLC and SJC will work with middle- and high-
school students through activities on their college campus. These activities
will include math festivals, chemistry demonstrations, science fair judging, and
guiding visits to animal labs. Sophomore-level students will take their pre-
teaching experiences into the schools. They will give sample lessons, tutor, and
visit schools. The school visits will include both in-school and after-school
programs through NNMC. Transfer pathways will be developed between SJC (a 2-year
institution) and FLC (a 4-year institution). This will allow SJC students to
receive Noyce support while completing STEM degrees at FLC. Dissemination of
project results will include conference presentations by co-PIs, FCNS Scholars
speaking in their home communities, and educational research results being
submitted to appropriate journals and conferences. The project will seek to
evaluate the effectiveness of recruitment activities, collaborative
arrangements, and pathway alternatives, to generate evidence-based strategies
for the preparation and retention of effective STEM teachers in the Four Corners
region and similar settings around the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.