* 1758114
* SBIR Phase II:  Increasing Student Engagement through Adaptive Instructional Video Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Benjamin Levy, PlayPosit, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,149,447.00

This SBIR Phase II project addresses low student engagement through a dynamic
video delivery environment with a novel, real-time algorithm that adjusts the
instructional pathway to each student's readiness level. According to research,
the greatest challenge facing teachers is overcoming the fact that between
25-66% of students are disengaged. Adapting instruction to each student's
learning background has long been touted as the most effective method to drive
student engagement; when instruction is individualized, engagement and outcomes
increase dramatically. By calibrating video segments to student readiness, this
project delivers appropriately challenging instruction to most effectively
sustain engagement. Building on promising results in Phase I, the project aims
to improve engagement and outcomes for all Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math (STEM) students and, most pointedly, impacts English Language Learners
(ELL) who often fall behind in STEM classes because instruction is beyond their
readiness and in-class support is insufficient. Considering that ELL population
is the fastest-growing population of public school students in the United
States, this project has a significant potential to drive a STEM proficient
workforce. Furthermore, given a strong, pre-existing client base, the project
team is well positioned to penetrate the $110 million immediately addressable
market. By 2020, the project team expects to be changing how 10% of U.S. middle
schoolers absorb STEM instruction, opening a pathway to the adoption of powerful
blended classroom techniques that enhance engagement, improve learning, and
promote STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
innovation is a research-founded algorithm to deliver appropriately complex
instruction through all video segments. For successful delivery of appropriately
complex instructional video segments, the project (1) measures student
complexity readiness, (2) maintains a database of video segments categorized by
complexity (using factors such as syntactic and lexical complexity), and (3)
uniquely unifies that information to identify a real-time next step for that
student (which video segment should be shown). The aim is to enhance outcomes by
providing each student an appropriately complex instructional pathway forward.
With roots in the leading interactive video solution, this project is made
possible through access to a large database of tagged and curated videos
(hundreds of thousands) and questions (millions) and provides an unprecedented
opportunity to develop adaptive instructional pathways for a diverse learning
spectrum. For Phase II, the project team's goal is to deploy a fully functioning
classroom prototype of a product built around a middle school Physical Science
unit and measure impact on engagement and learning. The team will employ
stimulated recall interviewing techniques, speak aloud interview protocols, and
quantitative usage logs to assess the feasibility of highly-adaptive video
instruction to increase student engagement. Evaluation will include both
formative components (to gauge implementation and iterative improvement) as well
as summative components to assess impact on engagement and learning outcomes in
a mixed-methods design including multiple pilot studies with control and
experiment groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.