* 1758472
* Alternative Pathways to Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2019
* China Scherz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 110,458.00

Narratives of personal change often include accounts of spiritual experiences.
The research supported by this award will investigate if and how these
experiences actually affect people's lives going forward. Anthropologists have
studied how cultural beliefs and practices produce spiritual experiences but
less is known about the long-term effects of the experiences that informants
describe. Do these experiences matter, and if so, how? Answering this question
is important for understanding how and why people make major changes in their
lives. These changes could include mundane choices of school or career, or
weighty choices such as whether to stop using drugs or join a terrorist
organization. Understanding the full range of factors involved in personal
change is critical for developing interventions, counseling programs, and
policies that will help Americans to live healthy, safe, and productive lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia anthropologist, Dr. China Scherz,
and her team will investigate this question by studying the effects of spiritual
experience in the lives of people attempting to make a major life change.
Building on two years of preliminary research, they have chosen to focus the
final phase of their study on recovery from alcohol addiction. The research will
be conducted in Uganda because spiritual experiences are more commonly
foregrounded in Ugandan recovery narratives due to the limited options for
biomedically based addiction treatment. Over the course of a year, the
researchers will will gather data with qualitative ethnographic observations,
semi-structured interviews, and mapping exercises. They will follow 25-30 people
who have tried to stop drinking, focusing on the effects of spiritual
experiences in their lives over time. Results of this research provide a model
for including spiritual experiences in social scientific understandings of life
transformation, which will be generalizable to many United States populations.
The study will also provide the first extended analysis of contemporary modes of
conceptualizing and addressing problem-drinking in an African context. Poverty,
access to schooling, and diseases including HIV, tuberculosis, cancer, and other
non-communicable diseases in many sub-Saharan African countries have been
increasingly linked to high levels of alcohol consumption. Addressing these
problems is important to U. S. interests in global health and development. This
study will highlight novel and cost-effective ways to capitalize on local
paradigms for addressing problems related to substance abuse and mental health.
Dr. Scherz's ties with academics and policy-makers at leading national
psychiatric and medical facilities in Uganda and in the United States will
facilitate the dissemination of results and the translation of the study's
findings into meaningful program and policy recommendations. This study will
also help to develop a cohort of researchers working in this area by providing
opportunities for Ugandans and U.S. undergraduates to develop their research
skills and capacities through hands-on practice and
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.