* 1758430
* CRII: SCH: Characterizing, Modeling and Evaluating Brain Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Ruogu Fang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 157,504.00

Brain dynamics, which reflects the healthy or pathological states of the brain
with quantifiable, reproducible, and indicative dynamics values, remains the
least understood and studied area of brain science despite its intrinsic and
critical importance to the brain. Unlike other brain information such as the
structural and sequential dimensions that have all been extensively studied with
models and methods successfully developed, the 5th dimension, dynamics, has only
very recently started receiving systematic analysis from the research community.
The state-of-the-art models suffer from several fundamental limitations that
have critically inhibited the accuracy and reliability of the dynamic
parameters' computation. First, dynamic parameters are derived from each voxel
of the brain spatially independently, and thus miss the fundamental spatial
information since the brain is ?connected?. Second, current models rely solely
on single-patient data to estimate the dynamic parameters without exploiting the
big medical data consisting of billions of patients with similar diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a framework for data-driven
brain dynamics characterization, modeling and evaluation that includes the new
concept of a 5th dimension - brain dynamics - to complement the structural 4-D
brain for a complete picture. The project studies how dynamic computing of the
brain as a distinct problem from the image reconstruction and de-noising of
convention models, and analyzes the impact of different models for the dynamics
analysis. A data-driven, scalable framework will be developed to depict the
functionality and dynamics of the brain. This framework enables full utilization
of 4-D brain spatio-temporal data and big medical data, resulting in accurate
estimations of the dynamics of the brain that are not reflected in the voxel-
independent models and the single patient models. The model and framework will
be evaluated on both simulated and real dual-dose computed tomography perfusion
image data and then compared with the state-of-the-art methods for brain
dynamics computation by leveraging collaborations with Florida International
University Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital /
Weill Cornell Medical College (WCMC) and Northwell School of Medicine at Hofstra
University. The proposed research will significantly advance the state-of-the-
art in quantifying and analyzing brain structure and dynamics, and the interplay
between the two for brain disease diagnosis, including both the acute and
chronic diseases. This unified approach brings together fields of Computer
Science, Bioengineering, Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroradiology to create a
framework for precisely measuring and analyzing the 5th dimension - brain
dynamics - integrated with the 4-D brain with three dimensions from spatial data
and one dimension from temporal data. Results from the project will be
incorporated into graduate-level multi-disciplinary courses in machine learning,
computational neuroscience and medical image analysis. This project will open up
several new research directions in the domain of brain analysis, and will
educate and nurture young researchers, advance the involvement of
underrepresented minorities in computer science research, and equip them with
new insights, models and tools for developing future research in brain dynamics
in a minority serving university.