* 1758924
* Cryogenic Wear of Novel High-Entropy Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Francis Kennedy, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 448,869.00

Friction and wear are a leading cause of energy loss, inefficiency, and failure
in structural alloys, and a scientific understanding of the mechanisms of wear
is critical to the design of high performance materials for energy,
manufacturing, and infrastructure applications. A new class of alloys known as
High Entropy Alloys has recently been found to possess both high strength and
the potential for very high wear resistance. This award supports research to
determine the fundamental mechanisms of this high wear resistance in two novel
High Entropy Alloy compositions. The new knowledge to be gained from this work
has the potential to enable the design of high performance materials able to
withstand large forces in extreme service environments, including friction and
wear at cryogenic temperatures. Students engaged in the research activities will
gain valuable educational experience at the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to examine the
hypotheses that the high entropy alloys CoCrFeMnNi and carbon-doped
Fe40.4Ni11.3Mn34.8Al7.5Cr6, because of their superior yield strengths compared
to stainless steel, will show better wear resistance than stainless steel at 77
K, that that the contacting surfaces of the two alloys will be resistant to
phase transformations during dry sliding wear at either room temperature or 77
K, and that the worn surfaces will not exhibit ferromagnetism, whereas
austenitic stainless steel AISI 316 will exhibit both of these problems. Dry
sliding pin-on-disk wear tests will be performed at both 77 K and 293 K at
different sliding velocities and in different environments on these two alloys,
and compared to the behavior of 316 stainless steel. The relationship between
the microstructure, deformation processes (including material transfer), phase
transformations, friction and wear behavior will be determined. Microstructural
characterization of the pre- and post-wear specimens will include transmission
electron microscopy, X-ray dispersive spectroscopy; computed-assisted
profilometry; X-ray diffraction; nanoindentation; cross-sectional scanning
electron microscopy, atom probe tomography; and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.