* 1758889
* Targeting a conserved structural module in Phytophthora effectors for disease resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Wenbo Ma, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,591.00

The human population is projected to reach 9.7 billion by 2050. The looming
challenge of feeding the rapidly growing population is threatened by crop losses
from plant diseases. Phytophthora are filamentous eukaryotic pathogens that
cause numerous destructive plant diseases including potato late blight that was
responsible for over 1.5 million deaths during the Great Irish Famine and the
sudden oak death that has killed millions of forest trees. As a group of
pathogens with both historical and current importance, battling Phytophthora
diseases is an important mission and a major challenge in agriculture. This
project aims to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying Phytophthora
pathogenesis and, based on this knowledge, develop durable resistance in potato
and other important crops. As such, this project will not only provide insight
into basic biology of plant-pathogen interactions but also directly benefit US
Agriculture. Broader impacts of this project include providing interdisciplinary
training to postdoctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduate
students on cutting-edge technologies of genetics, biochemistry and molecular
biology. It will also reach out to stakeholders, such as potato growers, by
informing them with the latest findings and technologies on developing disease
resistance in crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by NSF
and by NIFA/USDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phytophthora employs a large arsenal of
virulence proteins, called effectors, to facilitate infection. Directly
manipulating plant cellular processes, effectors play an essential role in the
arms race with the hosts. An overall understanding of effector functions and the
molecular mechanisms underlying their diversification and adaptation is critical
to implement durable resistance. This project is based on the exciting discovery
that a large number of Phytophthora effectors contain tandem repeats of a
conserved structural module, which tolerates a high level of sequence
flexibility. Using a combination of genetic, molecular biology, and biochemical
approaches, this project will test the hypothesis that this conserved module may
serve as a basic building block to enable effector evolution for novel
activities and thereby contributing to virulence. Furthermore, plant defense
mechanism targeting this conserved module may enable effective resistance
against the destructive Phytophthora diseases. The goals of this project are: 1)
elucidating the role of this conserved structural module in Phytophthora
effector function and evolution; and 2) identifying resistance genes that
recognize this conserved structure of Phytophthora effectors from wild potato
species. The outcome of this project will make major advancement in the
fundamental understanding of Phytophthora diseases. This project is
translational because the resistance genes identified from wild potato
accessions may be incorporated into elite varieties in order to confer
resistance to late blight. These genes could also be used to confer sustainable
resistance to a broad variety of Phytophthora species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.