* 1758156
* Electronic and Thermoelectric Properties of High Mobility Few-Layer Phospherene Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Marc Bockrath, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 68,538.00

The advancement of next generation electronics requires breakthroughs in
materials, functionalities and even device operation paradigms, in order to
address challenges such as thermal management and charge tunneling as devices
continue to be miniaturized. Graphene has recently generated a great deal of
excitement as a one-atom thick conductor with exceptional electronic properties
with especially high mobility electrons, with the 2010 Physics Nobel prize being
awarded for groundbreaking work on this material. However, as graphene is not a
semiconductor, digital electronics realizations such as those forming the basis
of computing devices are difficult. Phosphorene, a single or few layers of black
phosphorus, a stable layered phosphorus allotrope, has highly mobile electrons
like graphene but is also a semiconductor like silicon. This potentially enables
it to form the basis for digital electronics and logic gates. However, many of
its basic properties are unknown and, since phosphorus reacts with air, device
passivation is important. The proposed research aims to investigate device
passivation, as well the fundamental properties of phosphorene, with the goal of
realizing novel, high performance electronic and optoelectronic devices. The
program will integrate the recruitment and education of undergraduate and
graduate students, including those from under-represented groups, via
semiconductor and materials research, and help to maintain the much-need
pipeline of scientists and engineers for American technological sector. By
outreaching to local high school students and teachers, this program will also
positively impact the ethnically diverse local communities in Inland Empire.

The goal of this proposal is to investigate electronic, thermal and
thermoelectric properties of mono- or few-layer black phosphorus, or
phosphorene, and explore novel devices based on this new material. Phosphorene
has emerged as a promising material for electronics and optical applications,
due to its many desirable properties such as very high bulk mobility, in-plane
anisotropy, expected large thermoelectric power and a direct band gap that is
tunable by strain or thickness over a large range. However, basic properties
such as the mobility bottleneck and major scattering mechanisms are not known
and device passivation remains important. Our approaches include (1).
fabrication of stable, high mobility devices by encapsulation, and optimization
via control of substrate, protection layers, and Schottky barrier; (2). tuning
device properties via ionic liquid gating and isotropic or anisotropic strain,
(3). thermopower measurements of anisotropic Seebeck coefficients and Nernst
power; (4). spatially modulated devices such as pn junctions for electronics,
electroluminescence and photovoltaic applications, and twisted phosphorene
bilayers for periodic band gap modulation. This program builds on the PI's and
co-PI's strong track records on graphene and carbon nanotubes, and exciting
preliminary data such as unprecedented mobility of 4000 cm2/Vs and observation
of quantum oscillations in phosphorene. Outcomes of this research include
elucidation of the fundamental material properties of single- and few-layer
phosphorene, and providing the much-needed route for stable, high mobility
devices, while exploration of anisotropic thermopower, pn junctions and twisted
bilayers will open the door for novel electronic, thermoelectric and
optoelectronic applications.