* 1758599
* Third Workshop on an Open Knowledge Network: Building the National Semantic Information Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Sharat Israni, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2018
* USD 48,465.00

This workshop engages a multidisciplinary community in a discussion about taking
the initial steps in building an evolving Open Knowledge Network to encode all
entities and the relationships among them, that would evolve continuously with
new data and information. The OKN would thus be a fundamental building block in
evolving the world-wide web to a new level of semantic understanding and
application. The vision of such a knowledge graph is feasible given the
availability of big data that are growing with time; advanced machine learning
techniques that can aid in the creation of such a massive graph, and in its use;
and, importantly, demonstration of the power of such knowledge graphs via extant
commercial services such as Apple Siri; GoogleTalk; Amazon Alexa, and Microsoft
Cortana. An Open Knowledge Network would enable a new generation of knowledge-
rich intelligent applications and systems.

The workshop examines the applicability of this idea across multiple disciplines
and applications domains. Experts from a wide range of disciplines, including
biomedicine, medicine, geosciences, finance, and manufacturing, will discuss
domain-specific issues as well as identify common approaches and common issues
that cut across domains. The workshop will develop concrete steps to be taken to
help realize the vision of OKN.

Natural interfaces to large knowledge structures have the potential to impact
science, education and business to an extent comparable to the WWW. While the
first wave of such technology is now available in consumer services such as
Siri, GoogleTalk, Cortana and Alexa, these services are limited in their scope
of knowledge; not open to direct access or to contributors beyond their
corporate firewalls; and, able to answer only relatively limited questions in
specific business domains. An open initiative of the type being proposed would
allow for experimentation at scale across many user communities and would
support research and innovation in academia, enable industry to experiment, and
enable governments at various levels (local, state, federal) to create new
services using Open Data. The vision for the proposed OKN is that it would
aspire to be a listing of every known concept from the worlds of science,
business, medicine and human affairs. It would include not just raw data, but
semantic information in machine readable form. The architecture would allow
contributors to encode the knowledge related to their topics of interest and,
thus, connect that to the larger network, without having to go through so-called
"gatekeepers". By providing an open service, OKN would enable the notion of
"permission-less innovation." Indeed, an open resource like OKN may be in a
better position to provide more trustworthy information/knowledge than
proprietary, closed systems. The vision for creating such a common knowledge
network resonates with the NSF Big Ideas of Harnessing the Data Revolution and
Convergence.