* 1758406
* Supporting the Preparation of Science and Mathematics Teachers in Rural South Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* K. Christopher Smith, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,508.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, this project at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
will recruit undergraduate majors in science and mathematics and prepare them to
become secondary science and mathematics teachers. Over the five-year span of
the award, the project will support 55 scholars. In this project, the University
of Texas Rio Grande Valley will collaborate with nine public school districts in
South Texas (McAllen Independent School District, Edinburg Consolidated School
District, South Texas Independent School District, Harlingen Consolidated School
District, Brownsville Independent School District, Mission Consolidated
Independent School District, Sharyland Independent School District, San Benito
Consolidated Independent School District, and Los Fresnos Consolidated
Independent School District). Noyce Scholars will have internship opportunities,
and this project has a strong evaluation plan to investigate the outcomes of the
scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prepare science and
mathematics majors to become certified high school science and mathematics
teachers who will then teach in high-need school districts in the Rio Grande
Valley of South Texas and surrounding areas. This project will be administered
at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, a federally designated Hispanic-
serving Institution in South Texas with 89% of its more than 27,000 students
self-identifying as Hispanic. By leveraging a curriculum grounded in equity,
along with other strengths of the established UTeach model, this project has the
potential to increase understanding of factors that contribute to successful
recruitment and retention of STEM teachers, particularly those serving in
largely Hispanic populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.