* 1758649
* SBIR Phase II:  High multiplex visual mapping of heterogeneity in FFPE biospecimen
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Dmitry Derkach, BioSyntagma, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 892,086.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to facilitate understanding of cellular
diversity in tumors, a phenomenon that contributes to acquired drug resistance.
Quantifying and understanding this diversity may help predict a patient?s
response to certain drugs which would allow the selection of ideal drug
combinations for an individual patient?s tumor, thus enabling personalized
medicine. This Phase II project will provide drug developers and researchers
with a tool that can quantify diversity by correlating genetic and spatial
information from tumors, providing crucial information about tumor composition
that is currently missing today. This project will translate the technology into
an efficient, high-throughput workflow that will enable commercialization with
drug developers, researchers, and reference laboratories, generating both income
and multiple job opportunities. The commercialization of this innovation will
significantly impact scientific, corporate, and patient communities. Researchers
will have a new tool improving drug development for cancer and other diseases,
including Alzheimer?s and diabetes. Payers, such as insurance companies and the
government, will save costs by eliminating unnecessary spending on treatments
for patients who will not respond. Most importantly, patients will have broader
access to personalized medicine through new treatments and screening methods
that can help determine the optimum drug combinations for
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A single tumor contains multiple populations of cells
that each have unique mutations, and it is necessary to understand the location
and genetic differences of these cells in order to provide effective combination
therapies that will not result in overall treatment failure or relapse. This
Phase II project aims to provide drug developers, researchers, and physicians
with a tool to correlate genetic and spatial information about individual
tumors. Using a proprietary microfluidic device adhered to a standard microscope
slide and tissue biopsy, incorporated with a laser-coupled microscope, this tool
is capable of providing information that it is not possible to obtain from any
other method today. Building upon the feasibility established during the Phase I
project, Phase II will involve performing NGS to demonstrate the instrument?s
usefulness in providing data for clinical research and biomarker discovery. It
will also involve building a fully integrated prototype instrument with features
that increase automation and throughput to make the technology economically
feasible for commercialization. These developments will showcase the
instrument?s value to customers as well as enable the commercial launch of a
service.&lt;br/&gt;