* 1758370
* Future Urban STEM Educator Capacity Building Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Brian Kowalczk, Davenport University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 74,851.00

Future Urban STEM Educator (FUSE) is a Capacity Building Project at Davenport
University (DU). FUSE will institute plans to increase the number of STEM
students who pursue and become prepared for teaching urban youth. The main goal
of the FUSE project is to create a STEM educator pipeline through DU's
Certificate in Urban Education program. The project aims to produce a plan for
increasing the enrollment and diversity of students pursuing STEM teaching
careers within DU's computer science and biological laboratory science
bachelor's degree programs. FUSE will accomplish this objective by (1)
establishing new dual enrollment pathways for high school and community college
students to enter DU's computer science and biological laboratory science degree
programs on an accelerated schedule and at reduced cost; (2) creating future
teacher clubs at diverse high schools that expand opportunities for high school
students to participate in teaching experiences and develop an early interest in
a STEM education career; (3) creating service-learning opportunities within the
computer science and biological laboratory science programs that provide
teaching experiences; and (4) developing a new education course and capstone
internship experience to prepare computer science and biological laboratory
science majors to enter STEM education and prepare for the Michigan Test for
Teacher Certification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DU's College of Urban Education
will collaborate with existing and new school partnerships (Hope Academy, Eaton
Regional Education Service Agency, and Grand Rapids Community College). These
partnerships will support the establishment of middle college and dual
enrollment programs with a curricular focus on computer science and biological
laboratory science. Additionally, service learning programming will be developed
in partnership with the Expanded Learning Opportunities (ELO) network. ELO
provides afterschool and summer programs for 67% of African-American children
and 41% of Latino children within the project's geographic area. DU has campuses
throughout Michigan's urban areas where shortages of STEM educators exist. FUSE
will support the ability of the College of Urban Education to establish the
partnerships and infrastructure necessary to implement a new STEM education
pathway throughout the state. Students will benefit from the new curricular
elements developed through the FUSE project, including a foundational teacher
education course, education-based service learning, and a capstone internship
experience in education. FUSE responds to the national call for change in STEM
teacher preparation as well as Michigan's need for effective teachers to serve
students in urban schools. Through the FUSE Capacity Building project, the
College of Urban Education will have the potential to develop STEM teachers who
can foster equity, creativity, and opportunity for urban
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.