* 1758423
* SBIR Phase II:  A complete bioprocess for medicinal plant opioids
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Kristy Hawkins, Antheia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,233,952.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a manufacturing platform for
opioid medicines. Opioids enable physicians to provide compassionate care to
patients suffering from acute or chronic disease and trauma. The need for opioid
analgesics is even more salient for surgeons anticipating the post-operative
recovery of their patients and planning for end-of-life care. However, opioids
are highly addictive medicines, a property that has been exploited for
commercial gain by certain players in the pharmaceutical industry. The impact of
this project will be to deliver a technology that transforms the existing supply
chain for opioids by removing the need to grow opium poppy as a drug crop.
Instead of sourcing poppy materials from poppy-growing countries, this new
technology will allow for complete production of opioids in a secure industrial
facility located in the United States where federal agencies can provide
oversight and regulation. Additionally, investment in this technology will
enable the development of many more existing and experimental medicines derived
from plants, including greatly improved opioids with improved efficacy and
safety, and cardiovascular and chemotherapeutic therapies that will extend and
enhance human lives.

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a bioprocess for opioid active
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). To date, the only commercially-competitive
method for manufacturing opioids and related alkaloids is to extract these
molecules from plants. However, Baker's yeast was recently engineered to
biosynthesize opioids, which is a technological advance that could enable opioid
production by fermentation. However, many technical hurdles remain in developing
a reliable and cost-effective, commercially-viable production system based on
existing strains. The objective of this Phase II project is to provide a
complete demonstration and pilot-scale operation of an API bioprocess that is
ready for industrial scale up. The research employs four approaches: 1) Further
development of the engineered yeast strains, 2) scale up of fermentation from
laboratory scale to pilot scale, 3) optimization of downstream recovery and
purification, and 4) evaluation of the resulting products to establish their
validity as drop-in-replacements for existing opioid APIs. The outcome will be a
process validated at pilot scale and ready for technology transfer to a secure
industrial facility that will make and sell into the opioids API market. This
research will replace opium poppies with a modern bioprocess that resembles
established, standardized pharmaceutical industry methods for antibiotic and
biologic APIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.