* 1758947
* Harnessing biological complexity to improve food security: How do mycorrhizal networks control resource transfer and plant productivity in inter- and mono-crop model systems?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Scott Bridgham, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2022
* USD 294,705.00

A long tradition of research suggests that exchange of resources between plants
and their fungal symbionts in linked networks in the soil can increase the
resilience of ecosystems to environmental change. There is growing interest in
harnessing the resilience building power of these networks of plant and fungi to
enhance the sustainability of ecosystems that are managed for food production,
but progress in this field has been hindered by difficulties in understanding
complex network behaviors that arise from different plant and fungal
communities, especially when under stress. This project will address this
challenge by combining field experiments, laboratory studies, and mathematical
models to quantitatively characterize the exchange of carbon and nitrogen in
networks of prairie and pasture systems across the Pacific Northwest. In this
region, increasingly severe seasonality, characterized by wetter winters and
drier summers, are expected to cause declines in prairie and pasture
productivity. This is a significant problem to address because Northwest prairie
and pasture systems currently sustain more than 1 million beef cows and cow-calf
production costs are expected to increase to offset the effects of drought. The
project will test the hypothesis that variation in plant species traits, caused
by a decline in native species cover in favor of exotic grasses, will be
reflected in the plant-fungi network's function. Network behaviors that regulate
responses to drought will be measured to quantify interactions between plants
and soil microbial communities that are complex, yet predictable. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess plant and soil community sensitivity to
experimentally imposed drought across a 520 kilometer latitudinal gradient.
General hypotheses pertaining to the role of root-fungal networks in maintaining
diverse prairie and low-diversity pasture productivity will be tested to address
a major challenge for sustainability in the region and in similar systems
elsewhere. Specifically, the proposed tasks will identify plant and fungal
species that best maintain primary productivity, plant water-use efficiency, and
foster carbon and nitrogen exchange in communities under stress. This knowledge
will be used to determine thresholds of species composition and soil resource
availability beyond which intervention is needed to prevent loss of biodiversity
and resilience to drought. Alterations of mycorrhizal networks-mediated transfer
or retention of carbon and nitrogen will be monitored using stable isotope
labeling experiments to determine whether and how inter-specific connectivity
increases community resilience and productivity under stress. A replicated
nested design across a latitudinal gradient will be used to characterize network
behaviors that can be simplified to improve inter-specific connectivity and
resource transfer in native and managed systems. Passive and active resource
transport among different plant species and fungi will be distinguished through
stable isotope probing of DNA sequences and used to develop a spatially-explicit
model for the scaling of mutualistic and competitive interactions affecting
composition and function of common mycorrhizal
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.