* 1758496
* NebraskaSTEM: Supporting Elementary Rural Teacher Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Leen-Kiat Soh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,499,493.00

NebraskaSTEM: Supporting Elementary Rural Teacher Leadership is a Track 3 Master
Teaching Fellow project that seeks to improve rural elementary teachers'
leadership in supporting successful experiences for students in STEM
disciplines. This project focuses specifically on challenges that elementary
teachers in rural high-need schools face in providing rich learning
opportunities in STEM subjects. The program aims to increase the Master Teaching
Fellows? depth of content knowledge in the various STEM disciplines, and to
enhance their instructional practices and pedagogical skills. As a result, it is
expected that they will be better able to lay the foundation for the students?
future academic success. NebraskaSTEM will create a 14-month Master of Arts
degree program in elementary education with a specialization in STEM Education.
It will also work with the Master Teaching Fellows to develop and implement STEM
initiatives (school/community-based STEM projects) in the rural schools in which
they teach. The integration of STEM content areas will also be a powerful
feature of NebraskaSTEM, enabling teachers to teach STEM in more integrated
ways, thus enhancing integrated STEM learning for K-6 students in rural Nebraska
schools. The degree program and findings related to how a Noyce project can
enhance rural elementary STEM teacher leadership will have potential value for
other elementary teacher programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fifteen experienced,
exemplary elementary teachers will be recruited from high-need rural elementary
schools to receive professional growth experiences (including graduate
coursework), mentoring as teacher leaders, and salary supplements of
$10,000/year. During the first project-year, they will take graduate coursework.
NebraskaSTEM coursework will lead to a master's degree for those without one;
Master Teaching Fellows with master's degrees will take one less course and will
not write a thesis. Coursework will include four STEM content courses, a
pedagogy course, a culture course focused on rural schools, and multiple
leadership courses. Master Teaching Fellows without prior coursework in
education research will take courses to develop research skills. Ongoing
mentorship and professional development during years two through five will
provide MTFs with opportunities to apply and share their knowledge and skills as
they implement high-quality STEM instruction in their classrooms and serve as
STEM leaders in their local schools and communities. Developing elementary STEM
leadership capacity in rural Nebraska schools is intended to positively affect
the schools, districts, and regions in which the Master Teaching Fellows serve.
NebraskaSTEM Master Teaching Fellows and the project team will establish and
maintain a website for outreach and dissemination of the project activities and
results, and develop videos during years 2-5 to document and share information
about the NebraskaSTEM master's degree program and Master Teaching Fellows STEM
initiatives. Teachers throughout Nebraska and the nation may benefit from the
dissemination of scholarly publications, conference presentations, and
professional development related to NebraskaSTEM programs and related STEM
initiatives in rural Nebraska schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.