* 1758698
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of an ultrasensitive, high-throughput autoantibody discovery platform using agglutination-PCR
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2021
* David Seftel, Enable Biosciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2021
* USD 899,627.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop a platform technology for detecting
autoantibody markers for research and clinical diagnostics. Precision medicine
requires the development of more powerful bioanalytic technologies to diagnose
disease and direct targeted therapies. This platform uses a ligation-based DNA
barcoding technology for improved antibody detection with increased analytical
sensitivity and multiplex power to detect more at the most clinically useful
time. Additionally, as a solution-phase assay, it is able to detect numerous
clinically-relevant autoantibodies that are refractory to common techniques like
ELISA. This platform has the potential to accelerate the development of
lifesaving diagnostics across a broad spectrum of human diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
aims to develop the first solution-phase, ultrasensitive and multiplex antibody
assay platform for the early detection, monitoring and treatment of human
diseases. The Antibody Detection by Agglutination-PCR (ADAP) platform represents
a major advancement in multiplex immunoassay testing. Many current multiplex
technologies, such as microarrays and bead-based arrays, scale poorly due to
cross-analyte interference, and lack the analytical sensitivity to detect
crippling diseases at the most favorable time. The Phase I results showed the
expanded and validated ADAP technology for the ultrasensitive and multiplex
detection of antibody biomarkers. The Phase II objectives are: 1) Validation of
the multiplex ADAP assay for clinical diagnostics serving autoimmune connective
tissue diseases, thyroid disorders and celiac diseases; 2) High-throughput
automation of multiplex ADAP assay technology for clinical diagnostics; 3)
Manufacturing of assay reagents and establishment of quality control standards;
and 4) Demonstration of the applicability of multiplex ADAP for a broader set of
antibodies. The intellectual merit of this project resides in the achievement of
10,000x increased sensitivity, and 20-30% increased specificity at multiplex
while having the option to use existing PCR reader platforms to help keep lab
capital costs low.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.