* 1758325
* VolsTeach for Appalachia: Strengthening the STEM Teacher Pathway from Community College to East Tennessee High-need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,445,001.00

This project, referred to as VolsTeach for Appalachia (VFA), is a Robert Noyce
Track 1 project at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. The project aims to
help meet the national need for new STEM teachers who can serve in diverse rural
school settings. To accomplish this goal, the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, will collaborate with Pellissippi State Community College (PSCC) will
and five East Tennessee school districts (Anderson County, Campbell County,
Claiborne County, Lenoir Count, and Sevier County). The goal of VFA is to grow
and diversify the STEM teacher workforce by supporting community college
students to become STEM teachers. Located in the heart of Appalachia, the East
Tennessee region is experiencing a persistent shortage in mathematics and
science teachers that is increasingly compounded by many retiring teachers. VFA
will support 32 high-potential Noyce Appalachian Scholars, recruited from PSCC,
as they become STEM teachers. Scholars will devote at least their first four
years of teaching to high-need school districts. VFA aims to accomplish this
goal by recruiting students and providing them with summer internships, enhanced
coursework, academic supports, and out-of-classroom experiences. The research
results and lessons learned from this project will be shared nationally to help
address the need for highly prepared STEM teachers who will teach and inspire
the next generation of STEM professionals and problem solvers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By effectively connecting University of Tennessee with
PSCC faculty, VFA aims to select community college students as Noyce Appalachian
Scholars, and support them to complete a bachelor's degree in a STEM major with
a minor in education and receive a teaching certification. Scholars will
complete the program under the guidance of master teachers, STEM faculty, and
STEM education faculty. VFA's recruitment plan will include delivery of a STEM
Teaching and Learning course at PSCC, along with a four-week summer internship
that aims to inspire first-year students' love of STEM teaching. VFA's program
development will include refocusing coursework to support learning about
Culturally Relevant Pedagogy. Additional program supports for Scholars will
include academic coaches, supplemental instruction, transfer coaches, content
area advisors, education advisors, and out-of-classroom experiences. Scholars
will receive scholarship support for two years, along with community learning
and building and tailored supports. VFA aims to contribute to the knowledge base
about teacher preparation, recruitment, and retention, especially in high-need
school districts. The project's research components will focus on: (1) identity
in relation to culturally responsive teaching; and (2) the study of the VFA
model of STEM teacher preparation. Such research has the potential to inform
coursework design and resources that support preservice teachers' learning of
and identification with culturally relevant pedagogy. Project outcomes and
research results will be disseminated statewide and nationally in publications,
conference presentations, and other communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.