* 1758321
* Collaboration to Improve STEM Teacher Recruitment and Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Cynthia Singleton, Southern University New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,197,505.00

Collaboration to Improve STEM Teacher Recruitment and Preparation is a Robert
Noyce Track I Scholarships and Stipends project at Southern University of New
Orleans. The project aims to recruit, retain, and certify 22 highly qualified
minority biology and mathematics secondary teachers. These undergraduate biology
and mathematics majors and postbaccalaureate STEM professionals will complete
the project prepared to teach in high-need schools in Louisiana's Jefferson
Parish School District. STEM teacher training efforts in the project have the
potential to enhance student learning and lead to better employment
opportunities and job stability in Louisiana, translating to STEM education
excellence in the state. Project results will impact over 17,000 students in the
partnering school district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are
to 1) certify 22 secondary mathematics and biology teachers to serve in high-
need schools and 2) provide early professional support for long-term success in
the teaching field. Project activities will include: i) intensive recruitment of
future STEM teachers from a pool of STEM undergraduate students and STEM
professionals; ii) early field experiences for prospective teachers in high-need
schools; iii) an on-campus seminar series on Characteristics of Highly Effective
STEM Teachers; iv) Praxis I and II teacher certification exam preparations; v)
development of a STEM teaching lab; vi) post-certification mentoring of scholars
by the project's leadership team and secondary mentor teachers; and vii)
research investigations on the effects of summer training and enrichment on the
motivation of STEM majors. Customized content and pedagogy courses, unique field
experiences, and internship opportunities at Brookhaven National Lab will serve
as project resources in the project's development of well-rounded, well-prepared
secondary mathematics and biology teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.