* 1758501
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining STEM Teachers for Western Kansas
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Paul Adams, Fort Hays State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,610,220.00

Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining STEM Teachers for Western Kansas is a Noyce
Track 1 Scholarships &amp; Stipends project at Fort Hays State University. The
project aims to place new teachers into rural high schools in Western Kansas,
thus increasing the workforce for secondary STEM education. To accomplish this
goal, the project will provide students with scholarships and develop curriculum
materials to prepare them to be successful teachers in high needs, rural
classrooms with high percentages of students eligible for free and reduced
lunches (a poverty indicator). A key element of the curriculum will be a rural
field experience planned in cooperation with the school districts through a
regional service center, coupled with academic year seminars. The project will
use a mentoring program for undergraduates and a professional development
program for early teachers that will support both future and practicing
teachers. Rural areas in Kansas have a critical shortage of STEM teachers. By
supporting the pipeline of students from community college, through teacher
certification, and placement into high-need rural areas of Western Kansas, this
project will contribute to STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to recruit 33 undergraduates from five local community colleges
(Dodge City, Garden City, Barton County, Colby, and Seward Community Colleges)
to Fort Hays State University, where they will double major in secondary
education and a STEM discipline. The project will also collaborate with the
Southwest Plains Regional Service Center, which serves 34 rural school districts
in Western Kansas. The service center will provide scholarship recipients with
early experiences in rural schools and assist with student teaching placements.
The project will provide scholarships and support activities to students through
their undergraduate and post-baccalaureate year, intended to enable the students
to become certified STEM teachers. The project focuses on research questions
including: What recruiting practices for attracting STEM teachers to FHSU are
most effective? What recruiting strategies attract more STEM teachers? What
factors result in retaining STEM teachers once they enter the profession in a
high needs rural area? What factors negatively impact retention in rural areas?
Answers to these questions has potential value to other teacher education
programs, particularly those focused on preparation of pre-service teachers for
high-needs, rural schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.