* 1758218
* Preparing Mathematics Teachers to Enact Engaging Discourse-based Teaching Strategies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Steven Rosenberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Track 1 Noyce project seeks to address the national need for more highly
qualified mathematics teachers with strong backgrounds in both math content and
effective pedagogical methods. It aims to prepare 33 new middle and high school
mathematics teachers to teach in high-need schools. The project is a
collaboration of mathematics education faculty in the School of Education and
mathematics faculty in the College of Arts and Sciences at Boston University
(BU), and four high-need school districts (Boston, Chelsea, Malden, and
Waltham). Research on mathematics teaching and learning supports the benefits of
engaging students in mathematical discussions in the K-12 math classroom. This
project will teach preservice mathematics teachers to use productive classroom
discussions about math to improve students' attitudes toward and understanding
of math. These skills can help teachers motivate students from linguistically
and racially diverse low-income communities, well as communities that have
suffered significant teacher attrition. This project will provide a model for
recruiting, training, and retaining highly qualified STEM majors and
professionals into teaching. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has the
following goals: (a)recruit 33 diverse and highly talented STEM majors and STEM
professionals to teach secondary mathematics in high-need schools across the
five years of the award; (b) prepare highly effective secondary mathematics
teachers who are skilled in using discourse-based teaching strategies and
implementing related curriculum materials; and (c) support the retention of
highly talented secondary mathematics teachers who teach in high-need schools.
Scholars will receive scholarships to enroll in a one-year graduate program that
leads to a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) degree and initial licensure to
teach secondary mathematics. As part of the MAT program, scholars will: (1)
enroll in education courses that prepare them to teach in high-need districts;
(2) enroll in mathematics courses that integrate content and pedagogy to develop
teachers' use of high-leverage teaching practices; and (3) participate in field
placements through existing partnerships with four high-need urban and suburban
school districts that provide opportunities to connect their university learning
to the classroom. As part of the Noyce Seminar Series, scholars will also
participate in six professional development workshops that focus on developing
their ability to enact rich mathematical lessons using discourse-based
instructional strategies. Following the completion of the MAT program, scholars
will begin their teaching careers with mentoring support from BU. During their
two-year induction period, scholars will continue to attend the Noyce Seminar
Series to further develop their discourse-based teaching practices and
collaborate with other BU Noyce scholars. Data documenting the Scholars? career
decisions and effectiveness as mathematics teachers in high-need schools will
inform the NSF, researchers, teacher educators, and the public about the
usefulness of focusing on mathematical discourse and curriculum during teacher
preparation programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.