* 1758389
* Transitioning Math Majors into Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* David Pagni, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,448,621.00

Transitioning Math Majors into Teaching (TMMT) is a Noyce Track I project
designed to encourage talented mathematics majors to become secondary school
mathematics teachers. The project seeks to recruit and prepare highly effective
mathematics teachers in high-need local educational agencies as well as increase
the number of highly qualified secondary math teachers. TMMT is a collaboration
between California State University, Fullerton (CSUF), the Anaheim Union High
School District (UHSD), Santa Ana Unified School District (AUSD) and Santa Ana
Community College (SAC). Each year for five years, the CSUF College of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics and College of Education, and math faculty at SAC will
actively reach out to the STEM majors and identify and recruit 11 Noyce
Associates and 10 Noyce Scholars into a mathematics teaching concentration. The
TMMT project will provide internships for the Noyce Associates and scholarships
for Noyce Scholars. Freshmen and Sophomore students at CSUF and SAC will be
recruited to be Noyce Associates and receive intentional mentoring experiences
and internships, including content and teaching seminars hosted by the two
institutions, tutoring opportunities, and visitations to partner secondary
school math classrooms. Associates will be groomed to become Noyce Scholars
during their Junior, Senior, and post baccalaureate credential year. This
collaboration seeks to create a continuum of experiences in teaching secondary
school mathematics for future teachers, from the first year of college through
the post-baccalaureate credential year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associates and
Scholars will be provided with a range of enrichment and supportive experiences.
After Scholars transition into their first teaching jobs, TMMT will provide
induction support, including the launch of a Math Teachers' Circle at CSUF.
(These are professional communities of K-12 mathematics teachers and
mathematicians that meet regularly to work on rich mathematics problems,
allowing teachers to enrich their knowledge and experience of math, while
building meaningful partnerships with other teachers and mathematicians.) In
this way, TMMT will help support the Associates' and Scholars' development into
highly effective mathematics teachers who persist in their careers. At the same
time, TMMT will create an effective, sustainable model for preparing prospective
secondary school mathematics teachers who transfer in a teaching track from
community college to a four-year institution, thus adding new knowledge on how
to streamline this process. The project will examine the effectiveness of
mentoring on persistence rates and success in achieving a degree and teaching
credential. Results will be disseminated via the TMMT website as well as through
professional organizations such as Mathematical Association of America (MAA),
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), and the Math Teacher
Education Partnership (MTE-Partnership). CSUF and SAC are Hispanic-serving
institutions and Anaheim UHSD and Santa Ana USD are high-need school districts
in Orange County, CA. Because the Noyce Scholars will seek to include diverse
groups, the Scholars will serve as role models and mentors for diverse students,
thus promoting access to mathematics and science careers for diverse secondary
students in the CSUF service area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.