* 1758807
* Supporting US-Based Students to Participate in the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Vijay Raghavan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2018
* USD 24,000.00

This award provides travel support for 16 U.S.-based graduate students to
participate in the 2017 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2017),
held in New Orleans, LA, November 18th - 21st, 2017
(http://www.icdm2017.bigke.org). The conference attracts new and original
research, and some of the top data mining researchers from the U.S., and abroad
to discuss their latest. The conference covers advancement in research in many
topics relevant to data mining that include statistics, machine learning,
pattern recognition, databases, data warehouses, data visualization, knowledge-
based systems and high-performance computing. The proceedings of the ICDM
conference will be distributed through the IEEE Computer Society and will be
available through the IEEE Explore Digital Library. Besides having a strong
technical program, the conference features workshops in emerging topics on data
mining, tutorials, panels, demos, and the PhD Forum. The PhD Forum is designed
to provide an interactive environment in which PhD students can meet, exchange
their ideas and experiences both with peers and with senior researchers from the
data mining community. The ICDM organizers recognize the importance of
recruiting, engaging and retaining students in data mining research given the
importance of this topic in emerging field of data science. The conference
participation enables the students to share their original research results with
their peers and experts, learn about new algorithms and tools in the field of
data mining, and obtain experience with application of data mining for various
transdisciplinary problems. Participation of U.S.-based students is critical to
developing U.S. competitiveness of future workforce in science and technology.