* 1758994
* Targeting of salicylic acid-activated NPR1 by a bacterial type III effector
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Zhengqing Fu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2021
* USD 493,567.00

Plant diseases caused by pathogens pose a major threat to food security
worldwide. A deeper understanding of how plant pathogens cause diseases lays
foundations for developing effective strategies to keep plant diseases under
control for sustainable agriculture. Many plant pathogens including fungi,
bacteria, nematodes, bacteria, and oomycetes rely on effectors that they deliver
into plant cells to suppress plant defenses and establish infection. The plant
hormone salicylic acid plays an essential role in plant defense against pathogen
infection. The investigators discovered that a bacterial type III effector
targets the master regulator of salicylic acid-mediated plant defense for
degradation, causing disease. This project aims to elucidate the molecular
mechanism and biological consequences of the bacterial effector-mediated
degradation of the master regulator, and identify a mutant form of the
regulator, which cannot be degraded by the effector. This non-degradable
regulator could potentially be used to generate disease-resistant plants.
Disease-resistant crops are critical to feed a global world population on a
decreasing amount of arable land, and to reduce the amount of environmentally
harmful pesticides. Two graduate and four undergraduate students will be
supported through this project each year. Funding will also be used to train
middle school teachers and students in South Carolina to detect citrus greening
disease before citrus trees show obvious symptoms in SCienceLab. By connecting
hands-on cutting-edge experimentation with urgent real life plant pathology
problems, this project will inspire students and make them aware of the
importance of plant science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the targeting of SA-activated NPR1 by the Psudomonas syringae type
III effector AvrPtoB. Though it has been known for many years that NPR1 plays an
essential role in both local and systemic plant defense, it has not been
reported that a pathogen effector targets NPR1. SA facilitates the reduction of
plant cytosolic NPR1 oligomers into monomers, which enter the nucleus and
function as transcriptional coactivators of plant defense genes. This project
showed that SA promotes the interaction between AvrPtoB and NPR1, suggesting
that AvrPtoB only interacts with the active form of NPR1. This project
demonstrated that AvrPtoB targets NPR1 for degradation, dependent on AvrPtoB's
E3 ligase activity. In addition, this project found that the master regulator of
SA signaling, NPR1, plays an important role in MTI (MAMP-triggered immunity).
This proposal seeks to 1) investigate how SA promotes the interaction between
NPR1 and AvrPtoB by determining if AvrPtoB only targets monomeric NPR1 protein,
2) determine the molecular mechanism of AvrPtoB-mediated poly-ubiquitination and
degradation of NPR1, 3) show how NPR1 contributes to MTI, and 4) determine how
AvrPtoB targets SA-activated NPR1 to disrupt NPR1-dependent MTI to subvert plant
innate immunity. These studies will provide fresh insights into effector biology
and increase our understanding of MTI and the molecular and biological functions
of NPR1 and SA in plant defense. The work will involve training of two
postdoctoral fellows to perform research and mentoring of undergraduate students
from under-represented groups to empower them to pursue careers in scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.