* 1758335
* Ohio Excels: Preparing Highly Qualified Educators through the Integration of Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Tena Roepke, Ohio Northern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,199,667.00

Although few states have K-12 engineering teacher licensure programs, there is
an increase in the number of pre-engineering K-12 programs. Many of these
programs often lack formally trained engineering teachers. In this Noyce Track 1
project, Ohio Northern University will address this teacher shortage in Ohio.
The project aims to prepare and support 29 engineering and mathematics majors in
the university's accredited Engineering Education and Mathematics Education
programs. Pre-service teachers in these programs will complete secondary teacher
licensure requirements for grades 7 - 12 and leave the program prepared to teach
engineering and/or mathematics in secondary high-need schools in Ohio.
Additionally, these Noyce scholars will participate in professional training and
immersive experiences related to diversity and cultural awareness. Successful
implementation of this Noyce project has the potential to positively affect
engineering and mathematics educators statewide and to strengthen partnerships
with area K-12 schools. The project will result in the creation of a new
Engineering Education Certificate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project
aims to increase the number of engineering and mathematics graduates at Ohio
Northern University who are certified to teach mathematics and/or engineering.
The project will offer multidisciplinary coursework, engineering and mathematics
education cross-instructional preparation, cultural responsiveness training,
peer mentoring, and immersive field experiences in urban and rural settings.
Scholar recruitment activities will leverage high-impact experiential learning
opportunities. These opportunities will include outreach events held at area
K-12 schools, STEM-focused summer camps, university-supported internships,
faculty-advised research, and a five-day intensive urban teaching experience.
Noyce scholars will be prepared to use a constructionist approach to inductive
learning, guided inquiry, and project-based learning. The project aims to
produce educators with increased competencies in teaching and learning
strategies aligned with the national science and mathematics education
standards. Lessons learned through the development of teacher recruitment and
preparation practices for engineering and math educators can provide insight for
further increasing the number of highly qualified engineering and mathematics
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.