* 1758731
* Suburban Social Contacts and Changing Demographic Balances
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Victor Ortiz, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,934.00

The United States is becoming an increasingly multi-ethnic society. This
demographic reconfiguration is expected to have widespread impacts. The research
supported by this award will investigate one of these impacts: how the
increasing residential proximity of different ethnic groups living in the same
neighborhoods affects their social interactions. Investigating this question is
complicated by another well-established social trend: decreasing interactions
within and between all social groups, not just across ethnic lines. Therefore,
the overarching research question is, "What does the increase in racial and
ethnic diversity in national residential patterns mean as residential social
ties among all neighbors, not only across race or ethnicity, become weaker?" The
research is important because neighborhood social cohesion affects both
community security and quality of life. Findings from this research will help
social scientists, policy makers, and city planners to better understand what
supports healthy neighborhoods during periods of widespread social
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in a suburban
community near Chicago. The researcher chose this site because it is an
established, mixed Latino and non-Latino, middle-class neighborhood, where
similarities of class and experience could be expected to facilitate inter-
ethnic contacts, if other factors, such as ethnic sorting and decreasing
sociality, were not also at work. Data will be collected through a combination
of social science methods, including household surveys of a stratified sample of
128 households, 64 structured interviews, archival research, and on-going
participant observation. The surveys and interviews will be applied to an equal
number of Latino and non-Latino households. Two adult respondents will be
surveyed and interviewed in every household whenever possible with the aim to
also detect gender-related variations. Findings from the research will
contribute to remaking overly monolithic analytical categories such as class,
race, and ethnicity. The research also will contribute to improving the quality
of life in America's neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.