* 1758752
* SBIR Phase II:  An Innovative and Open Satellite-Based Internet of Things (IoT) Network
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Sara Spangelo, Swarm Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,240,743.00

The proposed project centers around further development on the world's smallest
2-way communications satellites and associated ground hardware. Key
contributions of this project include system and networking optimization and
validation of the technology through end to end demonstrations. The system
optimization component will involve the development of system-level models that
capture the complex interaction of all elements, including dynamics,
constraints, and objectives. The network optimization component will focus on
the development of algorithms that enable seamless communications scheduling as
the network scales to several thousand devices on the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project spans commercial,
scientific and humanitarian applications by extending IoT (Internet of Things)
connectivity to remote regions without cell coverage and where satellite data is
prohibitively expensive for vital applications including agriculture, energy,
shipping, and weather. The satellites and ground hardware being developed in
this SBIR Phase II project have been driven towards miniaturization and power
reduction to enable a broader range of customers to take advantage of the
network by allowing easy integration into their devices and easy-to-install
autonomous ground solutions. The unique launch economics afforded by the
miniaturized satellites enable IoT (Internet of Things) sensing and data return
at a cost 1/10th to 1/100th that of incumbent satellite data
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.