* 1758835
* SABLE: Sensor-Based Assessment of Behavioral Lifestyles and Experiences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Gabriella Harari, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2022
* USD 310,143.00

This research project will develop and evaluate SABLE, a smartphone-based
toolkit for unobtrusively capturing human behaviors as they unfold in the course
of everyday life. These behaviors, such as activity, sociability, and sleep are
associated with such significant outcomes as physical health (e.g., heart
disease, obesity), mental health (e.g., depression, anxiety), subjective well-
being (e.g., mood, stress), and performance (e.g., academic, occupational). When
it comes to measuring behaviors in the real world, however, researchers are
surprisingly bad at measuring what people do. The problem is that collecting
data on objective behaviors in the real world is almost impossible to do,
especially if it must be done without affecting the behavior one is trying to
record. With the knowledge and consent of participants, SABLE will use data
collected by sensors routinely embedded in smartphones to yield high-fidelity
portraits of how behaviors are played out in everyday life. Substantively, the
data will illuminate previously unmapped dynamic patterns of human behavior.
Methodologically, SABLE will advance techniques for inferring complex behaviors.
SABLE will be made available to the research and applied communities, allowing
researchers and practitioners to measure everyday behavior unobtrusively with
high levels of ecological validity. Data gathered by SABLE will allow
researchers to address long-standing questions about the psychosocial patterns
of day-to-day life and to identify behaviors that predict consequential life
outcomes. SABLE will facilitate new smartphone-based interventions designed to
improve lifestyles through self-insight and behavior change. The project will be
integrated into psychology and computer science coursework, and it will provide
education, training, and mentorship opportunities for more than 50 undergraduate
and graduate research apprentices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behaviors constitute
the independent or dependent variables of many studies in the social and
behavioral sciences and many more in the health sciences, but the predominant
technology for assessing behavior, self-reports, are subject to an array of
limitations ranging from susceptibility to memory constraints and deliberate
malingering to being time consuming and disruptive. The advent of smartphones
and their ubiquity offer an opportunity to revolutionize the way social
scientists collect behavioral data. The investigators will use mobile-sensing
methods to address basic questions about the structure and contours of behavior
as they play out in everyday life and develop automated behavioral classifier
models (e.g., watching TV alone at home) derived from smartphone sensing data.
The investigators will build on existing sensing software to permit automated
data collection from a broad array of smartphones, with the data delivered to
social-science researchers in an easy-to-access format. The investigators will
explore answers to basic questions about the structure and contours of behavior
and linguistic expression in everyday life. They will create a set of sensor-
based classifiers that researchers can use to extract behavioral inferences from
mobile-sensor data, and they will create an open-source online resource for
these materials. By providing the means to automatically and unobtrusively
assess psychological characteristics from people's smartphones, this project
will catalyze the integration of behavioral data in all areas of research and
applied settings that involve human participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.