* 1758663
* SBIR Phase II:  Making Makers-  Developing Multiple Pathways to Invention through a Low Cost Maker Device
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Jay Silver, Joylabz LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,038,684.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will continually refine
and move towards production of this project's Creative Maker Tool, an augmented
reality experience where the act of playing is inherently inventing. The system
uses modern technology to avoid digital screens. Throughout this experience,
learners tap into their natural proclivities to make and shape ideas in the non-
digital world, and develop the ability to fluently construct new ideas in a
technical medium. The commercialization of this project will address two,
nationally important issues. First, by scaffolding young learners through
progressively bringing their ideas into reality, this project will foster
creative confidence: the natural ability to come up with ideas and the courage
to act on them. Next, there is a gender gap in innovation and entrepreneurship
in the United States. Women patent at 40% the rate of men, only 9% of
information technology related patents have one or more female inventors, and
only 8% of the beneficiaries of incubators meant to commercialize innovations
were women. This project will address gender equity issues in the maker
community (currently 80% male) and by widening pathways to engage in
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system is composed of a projection
system that allows real-time programmable interactions between everyday and
virtual objects without a computer screen. Throughout this research, we will
create and refine STEM (Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics) Apps,
which are built-in augmented activities where users create small inventions with
everyday objects to code interactions and affect program flow or gameplay,
develop Augmented Tutorials, bridge seamlessly to existing STEM tools through
real-time interfacing, as well as manufacture and prepare the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.