* 1758369
* Growing Future Science Teachers in Maine: Connections and Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Emily Lesher, Saint Joseph's College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 102,997.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Capacity Building project will
address a severe shortage of science teachers in Maine. The overarching goal of
the project team is to create a plan to enable high-needs schools in the state
to "grow their own" science teachers by recruiting and training students from
these schools and having them potentially return to that school as teachers.
Three project objectives will guide the work of the principal investigators.
First, they will develop new ways to increase student awareness of science
teaching careers. Second, they will create smoother pathways to enter the
science and secondary education programs at Saint Joseph's College (SJC). Third,
they will establish connections between SJC and high-needs Local Education
Agencies (LEAs) to enable recruitment of potential teachers, placement of
apprentice teachers, and support of new teachers in those schools. Innovative
features of the project include the piloting of a no-cost, college credit-
bearing, online "Introduction to Education" course, a series of career
exploration workshops, and a study of the barriers to entering science teaching
that community college students face. Taken together these efforts will build
SJC's capacity to attract students to their science teacher training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop partnerships between SJC
and high-needs LEAs Biddeford, Bonny Eagle, Caribou, Fort Kent, Gray-New
Gloucester, Lewiston, Westbrook, and Windham school districts. Southern Maine
Community College and Central Maine Community College will serve as community
college partners. These partnerships will support the "Grow Your Own" model by
facilitating communication among the members so that the model can be
continuously improved and so that students can remain engaged throughout their
training and first years of teaching. The proposed online course, career
exploration workshops, and study of barriers to entering science teaching among
community college students will generate new knowledge of interest to the STEM
education community about effective practices to increase the number of high
school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.