* 1758745
* ECA-PGR: Developing multiplexed transcriptional regulation systems for plant genome reprogramming
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Stephen Mount, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,089,196.00

Altering gene regulation, also known as transcriptional reprogramming, is at the
heart of plant development, reproduction, and responses to various stresses.
Simultaneously reprogramming multiple, specific genes is desirable for studying
gene function and expression, dissecting complex signaling networks, engineering
metabolic pathways, and building synthetic switches and circuits. However,
genetic tools that would allow biologists to turn multiple genes on and off in
this way in plant cells are currently unavailable. This project develops these
tools and will not only aid basic research in plant science, but also allow
plant scientists to seek novel solutions to global challenges such as
devastating plant diseases, economical bioenergy production, sustainable
agriculture and response to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
applies recent technical advances in CRISPR plant genome engineering to build
essential comprehensive genome reprogramming tools and demonstrate them in rice,
an important crop. The specific aims of this project are to develop 1) an
efficient multiplexed transcriptional activation system; 2) an efficient
multiplexed transcriptional repression system; 3) a bidirectional multiplexed
transcriptional regulation system; and 4) a CRISPR design tool within the
software of the Integrated Genome Browser for transcriptional regulation in
plants. The highly efficient plant transcriptional reprogramming systems and the
design tool developed in this project will benefit the plant research community
in advancing basic research and crop improvement. These easy-to-use, effective
tool packages will be tested for sophisticated multigene, transcriptional
reprogramming and made available to researchers at the public repository,
Addgene. In addition, the project will provide cutting-edge training to a
diverse group of students at various levels, including a postdoctoral scientist,
two PhD students, and many undergraduate and high school students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.