* 1758009
* Bio-inspired &amp; Bio-mediated Geotechnics Research Experience for Undergraduates (BBG REU)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Jason DeJong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 684,435.00

The Bio-mediated and Bio-inspired Geotechnics Research Experience for
Undergraduates (BBG REU) prepares future scientists and engineers to develop
sustainable solutions to make our nation's infrastructure safer, less intrusive
and more resilient. The program will invite a total of 48 students to spend 10
weeks at one of four partner research universities (UC Davis, Georgia Tech,
Arizona State University and New Mexico State University) to work on a research
project while being mentored by graduate students and faculty in microbiology
and civil engineering. All BBG REU projects look to nature for inspiration,
either using biological processes or principles to create low-impact solutions
for society's infrastructure that work in harmony with natural ecosystems. While
introducing students to research and the emerging field of biogeotechnics, the
program will focus on the intellectual and professional growth of students in
the program. Students learn about career and graduate school opportunities,
improve their communication skills, and start to develop their professional
networks. All involved in the program will embody a culture of inclusion.
Program recruitment will focus on students with little opportunity for research
at their home institutions and target students from diverse backgrounds and
pathways. A goal of the program is that participants' experiences inspire them
to consider academic, industry or government careers that focus on the
biogeotechnics discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BBG REU program complements
the NSF-funded Engineering Research Center (ERC)for Bio-mediated &amp; Bio-
inspired Geotechnics (CBBG). Its primary objectives are to: 1) recruit and
prepare students from diverse pathways to increase URG representation in
geotechnical engineering; 2) increase awareness of graduate school and career
opportunities in engineering; 3) develop students technical and professional
skills; 4) emphasize the need to consider sustainable solutions to future
engineers and scientists; 5) expose participants to bio-mediated and bio-
inspired geotechnologies; 6) advance CBBG research from fundamental research
stages to implementation in practice; and 7) create inclusive learning and
research environments. The BBG REU targets students from diverse backgrounds and
pathways, focusing on institutions where students have limited access to
research opportunities. Students from underrepresented groups in engineering,
including veterans and students with disabilities, are encouraged to apply.
Selected students attend the 10-week apprenticeship program at one of four CBBG
partner institutions (UC Davis, Georgia Tech, Arizona State University and New
Mexico State University). Activities include a local institution and cross-
institution orientation, a one-week CBBG immersion experience for professional
development training and activities, weekly webinars/trainings, networking
sessions, poster presentations, and social events. All BBG REU projects support
new and on-going CBBG research projects. CBBG projects seek to understand and
harness the scientific processes and principles of natural phenomena to develop
more sustainable, safer, less intrusive, more resilient civil infrastructure
systems. The CBBG's approach embodies a transformational shift from traditional
energy intensive, mechanical methods for engineering the ground to a
sustainable, nature-compatible biogeotechnical approach that employs innovative
bio-mediated and bio-inspired technologies to meet the demands of modern
society. Throughout the REU program, 48 undergraduate students will complete
research projects in the transformative area of biologically-focused civil
engineering design. Their exposure is posited to inspire students to consider
academic, industry or government careers that focus on protecting society's
infrastructure, using low-impact solutions that work in harmony with natural
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.