* 1758286
* SBIR Phase II:  Climate Analytics Platform for Catastrophe Modeling and Risk Management
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Evan Kodra, RISQ INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,150,957.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project extends to industry stakeholders holding
financial interests that are impacted by climate change. Climate change has a
scientifically evident impact on the intensity, duration, and frequency of
extreme weather events. It has become imperative for organizations in all
sectors to gain a clear understanding of the impacts of climate change on their
business so as to inform strategic planning and risk management strategies.
Those in the risk transfer industry, in particular reinsurance companies, are
the most likely early adopters given their technical sophistication and their
increasing and acute awareness of the financial impacts climate change now has
on their bottom line. Thus, the company's goal is to penetrate the reinsurance
industry as an entry point to the more broadly defined risk transfer industry.
Subsequently, the company will utilize the platform to address problems in
agricultural investment, real estate investment, and energy planning - all
sectors that will be adversely impacted by climate change in specific, well-
defined ways. The adaptation in each of these sectors is vital to the well-being
and prosperity of the ultimate stakeholder: the American taxpayer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
aims to harness industry knowledge and expand on the technical work conducted
during the company's Phase I project, with the objective of building a modular
software platform generalizable to multiple key climate change hazards and
extensible to other strategically identified sectors. The knowledge gathered via
customer discovery interviews in Phase I will serve as a guide for product
development. The technical work completed in Phase I, in particular extreme
precipitation modeling under climate change and its application to the risk
transfer sector, will serve as a foundation for expansion into the modeling of
additional hazards. There are currently no tools available that integrate
climate change informatics into risk management at scale. The company aims to
address this problem through the translation of physics-guided statistical
modeling to a commercial software platform. Upon conclusion of the Phase II
project, the company expects to have a completed product that will house data on
additional hazards exacerbated by climate change, with applications in the
agriculture, commercial real estate, and the energy sectors. The company will
show product value through sector-tailored software demonstrations and case
studies that demonstrate return on investment to be realized by using this
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.