* 1758774
* RCN: Housing Justice in Unequal Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Ananya Roy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 486,784.00

This award will support the establishment of a research coordination network
(RCN) to address the housing crisis in a variety of cities. The network will
advance research on the interconnected processes related to the precarious
nature of housing such as evictions, homelessness and displacement, and plans to
study them in tandem with forms of segregation and discrimination. The RCN fills
a gap in research by systematically analyzing community and policy responses
that seek to create housing access and housing justice through legal frameworks,
cooperative models of land and housing, and collective action. An important
aspect of the RCN is its coordination at the intersection of social movements,
universities, and policy. Paying close attention to housing movements and policy
interventions, the RCN will synthesize the primary modalities of housing justice
and its conceptual underpinnings into a Housing Justice Handbook that will be
broadly disseminated. Focused Summer Institutes with a diverse group of scholars
looking at housing issues will be held in a variety of settings. By integrating
experience from a variety of contexts and settings, this RCN will generate new
formats of university-community partnerships and engaged research in the United
States focused on the experiences of marginalized social groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN builds a transnational, interdisciplinary, and
intergenerational collaboration to tackle analytical and methodological problems
pertaining to spatial exclusion. It cuts across various silos of housing
research and links housing to two other relevant realms of geographic inquiry,
carceral geographies, and land dispossession. In doing so, it builds data
collection, data visualization, and story mapping tools that can capture the
complex space-time geographies of housing precarity. By developing novel methods
of research dissemination and pedagogy that link key nodes of knowledge
production in the Global South with those in the Global North, it fosters
critical geographies of learning. Such an approach sheds new light on the
housing crisis in the United States through comparison and demonstrates how the
social function of land and housing is being addressed in other democratic
contexts with long histories of spatial inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.