* 1758805
* Molecular mechanisms integrating fungal growth with plant innate immunity suppression
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Richard Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2022
* USD 599,999.00

By addressing the fundamental question "How do fungal cells thrive in plant
cells?" this project aims to resolve substantial issues in plant pathology
regarding what molecular mechanisms integrate fungal metabolism and growth in
host cells with sustained plant innate immunity suppression. The project
involves forward and reverse genetics, genome-wide proteomic and metabolic
approaches, and live-cell imaging to understand how the growth and metabolism of
rice blast fungus in host rice cells is facilitated and linked to host immune
suppression. This could lead to the development of novel crop protection
strategies targeting molecular pathways that are critical for the growth of the
fungus but are not required for the normal function of the host cell, and could
shed new light on both the basic principles of cell growth, and on the nature
and regulation of host-microbe interfaces. The educational objectives will
expand scientific education by stimulating undergraduates' science learning,
preparing graduate students for scientific life beyond the university, and
inspiring scientific interest in underrepresented high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to cause plant disease, and in common
with other plant-associated microbes, the devastating rice blast fungus
Magnaporthe oryzae initially forms intimate associations with living rice cells
and grows for the first few days of infection as a symptomless biotroph,
elaborating invasive hyphae (IH) wrapped in plant-derived membranes, acquiring
nutrients and evading rice innate immune responses as it spreads cell-to-cell.
After 3-5 days of infection, M. oryzae undergoes a lifestyle transition to
necrotrophy, resulting in disease symptom development, host cell death and
sporulation from leaf lesions. How M. oryzae controls the development of IH
during the biotrophic growth phase while simultaneously evading or suppressing
host innate immunity, and what triggers the transition to necrotrophy following
the extended biotrophic growth phase, is almost entirely unknown at the
molecular level. This project seeks to address these knowledge gaps by
generating and characterizing mutants of M. oryzae that are unable to colonize
host plant cells. This is expected to uncover novel cellular, biochemical, and
genetic mechanisms governing rice infection. Results from the proposed work
could point to novel sources of disease resistance, shed light on fundamental
concepts of plant host-microbe interactions, and indicate how beneficial plant-
fungal interactions might be promoted while those detrimental to crop health are
diminished. The work will foster the molecular training of postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds through active
participation in tackling the real-world problem of rice blast
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.