* 1758046
* Pathways for Colonization of Plant Genome by Agrobacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Vitaly Citovsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Agrobacterium, a fascinating microorganism that can genetically modify its plant
hosts, represents an important research subject for plant biology and a major
biotechnological tool for agriculture. Despite four decades of research,
critical aspects of the Agrobacterium-mediated transformation process remain
obscure. One of the most intriguing, yet least understood, aspects is how the
bacterium utilizes its protein effectors, which it transfers with the
Transferred (T-)-DNA, into the host cell, to "colonize" the host genome; prepare
it for T-DNA invasion at additional integration sites, recruit bacterial and
host DNA repair machinery, and repress host defenses to assure optimal
expression of the T-DNA. This project aims to provide these missing pieces of
information by investigating functional interactions between Agrobacterium
effector proteins and their host cell partners. The broader importance of the
resulting data lies in the enhancement of our basic understanding of plant-
bacterium interactions and Agrobacterium pathogenicity, translation of the
developed models to a broader range of bacterium-host interactions, and in
providing a scientific foundation for the design of safer and more efficient
genetic transformation procedures that benefit science, agriculture and the
society. This research will serve as a platform for teaching undergraduate and
community college science and introducing young scientists into the fields of
experimental plant microbiology and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agrobacterium
has been considered a unique prokaryote that encodes a protein machinery for DNA
transfer and integration into eukaryotic genomes. This dogma is challenged by
recent discoveries that other diverse bacterial species, also encode functional
DNA transfer machineries. Enhancing fundamental knowledge about genetic
transformation with Agrobacterium, therefore, will advance understanding of
plant-pathogen interactions and improve Agrobacterium as a gene transfer tool
for agriculture, but also will inform translation to a broad range of eukaryotic
host-prokaryotic pathogen interactions. This project's goals are to understand
how Agrobacterium creates double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs), which are used as
preferred integration sites, how the T-DNA molecule and the appropriate cellular
DNA repair factors are recruited to DSBs, and how Agrobacterium overcomes host
defenses that can silence T-DNA expression. Aim 1 examines the mechanism by
which Agrobacterium enriches DSBs in the plant genomic DNA. A hypothesis will be
tested that a bacterial virulence (Vir) effector protein (e.g., VirE3) interacts
with a host S1-type endonuclease to initiate generation of DSBs. Aim 2 examines
the mechanism by which Agrobacterium targets the T-DNA to the DSB and recruits
the host DNA polymerase to integrate the T-DNA and repair the DSB. A hypothesis
will be tested that a bacterial Vir effector associated with the T-DNA (e.g.,
VirE2) interacts with a host DSB-bound factor (e.g., a BRCA-like protein) to
direct the T-DNA to DSB, and another T-DNA-associated Vir effector (e.g., VirD2)
recruits a host DNA polymerase (e.g., Pol theta) to the same DSB. Aim 3 will
examine how Agrobacterium suppresses the host defensive RNA silencing to
facilitate expression of T-DNA. A hypothesis will be tested that Agrobacterium
utilizes one of its F-box protein effectors to target the components of the host
RNA silencing machinery to proteasomal degradation via the SCF
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.