* 1758547
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Radar Using 3D Printed Luneburg Lens for Autonomous Transportation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Min Liang, LUNEWAVE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,377,495.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be that this
research will address the resolution and detection range requirements of
autonomous driving in complex environments such as urban scenarios. The next
major revolution of transportation is undoubtedly autonomous driving, which will
increase safety, mobility and productivity. Fully autonomous transportation may
eliminate human error, the leading cause of traffic accidents, and could also
lead to reduced traffic congestion, higher energy efficiency, and enhanced
mobility for the aging and disabled population. The proposed advanced sensing
system with intelligent algorithms is expected to help enable and advance the
autonomous driving revolution. The proposed effort will also have great
commercial impact. The global market size of autonomous sensors is expected to
grow from $5.2 billion in 2018 to $11.9 billion in 2023, with the radar-based
sensor segment representing $2.9 billion in 2023. In addition, the expected
research outcome may lead to advancements in a number of important market
sectors including wireless communications, sensing, mobile internet, assistive
technology, and additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project aims to realize a 3D-printed Luneburg
lens-based high performance automotive radar for autonomous driving. Existing
automotive radars do not have enough distance detection, field of view, and
angular resolution for classifying and locating dense targets, which is critical
for achieving fully autonomous driving. As a result, current autonomous driving
tests utilize LiDAR ((Light Detection And Ranging) systems which are more
expensive and less reliable than radar especially under adverse weather
conditions such as rain, snow, fog, and smoke. Compared to conventional
manufacturing techniques, this project utilizes 3D printing, which is
convenient, fast, inexpensive and capable of implementing millimeter wave
Luneburg lenses. Based on the Luneburg lens?s ability to form multiple beams
with high gain and broad bandwidth, a novel automotive radar will be designed by
mounting radar detectors around the lens. Moreover, with the wide bandwidth and
natural beam forming capabilities of the Luneburg lens, an adaptive sensing
approach is proposed to improve the scanning efficiency and avoid interference
from nearby or intruder radar systems. With these proposed approaches, the
objective is to achieve a high performance and high value millimeter-wave
sensing system suitable for autonomous transportation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.