* 1758644
* SBIR Phase II:  Whole Genome Sequencing - Data to Insight in One Hour
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Mehrzad Samadiarakhshbahar, Parabricks Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 748,104.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enhance precision medicine by reducing
data processing time and cost, leading to faster results, higher genomic data
processing throughput and, ultimately leading to better treatment of patients.
Many diseases have their impacts locked in DNA data. Unlocking the data for an
individual may provide a significant boost to human healthcare. By providing
Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data analysis in one hour, as compared to the
current standard of several days, and at a fraction of today's cost, DNA tests
can become mainstream and research can be accelerated. WGS data is becoming a
key component in ensuring correct and timely treatment of vulnerable
populations, including newborn babies, people with cancer and rare diseases, and
pregnant women. Correct prediction and treatment based on WGS data will extend
human lives and promote better quality of life by accelerating the development
and broad implementation of precision medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to develop a cloud-based
framework to accelerate whole genome sequencing data analysis. This SBIR Phase
II project creates a software framework where multiple industry-standard genomic
analyses will be accelerated transparently to run orders of magnitude faster,
while reducing computational costs by up to 4x. The proposed innovation solves
the scaling, performance, and cost challenges of WGS computing through novel
parallelism extraction and mapping techniques. The framework under development
for accelerating genomic analysis has been implemented to focus on GPUs and
traditional processors (CPUs). Using this framework, secondary data analysis
programs can use all the computing resources present in a standard computing
node (CPU cores; GPUs), leading to higher utilization of the system and higher
throughput. The GPU accelerates the data parallel portion of the software, while
the CPU is mainly responsible for the orchestration of data between CPUs and
GPUs, load balancing across multiple accelerators. By providing this framework
to run on the cloud and on-premise, users can scale to meet the exploding
demands of the DNA analysis industry. The software generates exact results to
industry standard tools and does not sacrifice configurability that is critical
for users. This framework also will enable researchers and medical professionals
to analyze several thousands of genomes simultaneously, leading to higher
quality results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.