* 1758252
* ABI Sustaining: The REDfly database of transcriptional regulatory elements
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Marc Halfon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 446,543.00

Transcriptional cis - regulatory modules (CRMs) are DNA sequences required for
regulating gene expression - determining when and where genes are turned "on"
and "off". CRMs play critical roles with respect to normal variation between
individuals, birth defects, chronic diseases, and evolution. Despite the clear
importance for many areas of biology, these sequences are not well-documented.
The REDfly (Regulatory Element Database for Fly) database helps fill this gap in
CRM annotation by curating known CRMs and transcription factor binding sites
(TFBS) for the important research organism Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly).
REDfly is the most detailed existing platform for regulatory element annotation
for any animal. It's records include over 16,000 experimentally verified CRMs
and 2000 TFBSs along with their DNA sequence, their associated genes, and the
gene expression patterns they direct. REDfly is a well-used and valuable
resource for the genomics, bioinformatics, and Drosophila communities and is an
important platform for supporting hypothesis-driven empirical and computational
research. It has contributed to numerous studies in multiple areas relating to
non-Drosophila as well as Drosophila systems including CRM biology, CRM
discovery, construction of regulatory network models, interpretation of genomic
datasets, and CRM evolution. The current project will focus on continued
curation and maintenance of the database so that it remains up to date and
functions with maximum utility for its users. This will ensure that REDfly
continues to be available as an important source of raw data for analysis,
hypothesis generation, assessment and validation, and empirical research in
molecular and developmental biology, genetics, genomics, bioinformatics, and
evolution. The current project also has a valuable undergraduate education
component. It will continue to be the focus of a University at Buffalo course
"Genome Annotation", in which the students participate in annotating regulatory
elements for entry into REDfly, thus making genuine contributions to the
research community while learning the techniques of genome annotation and
biocuration and the science of gene regulation. In a new effort, a REDfly unit
will be introduced into a Developmental Biology course at Baruch College-CUNY,
one of the nation's most diverse campuses. Students who excel in the class will
be invited to Buffalo to participate in the Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience (SURE) program and serve as REDfly curators.

The specific objectives of this Sustaining Award are to keep REDfly up to date
with the rapidly increasing numbers of CRMs and TFBSs being discovered and
reported in the literature, and to maintain the REDfly site in a manner that
will maximize its utility to the research community. The focus is on: (1)
Curation. REDfly will be kept up - to - date as new studies are published.
Emphasis will remain on in vivo assays, but in vitro studies will be included
where encountered and appropriate. (2) Education. The PI will continue to use
REDfly as the basis for his "Genome Annotation" course. A REDfly unit will be
introduced in an undergraduate course at Baruch College-CUNY, and bring up to
two course alumni to Buffalo each summer to work on REDfly curation as a part of
the University at Buffalo Medical School's Summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (SURE) program. (3) Service. REDfly will continue to serve its
user community with a high degree of responsiveness, including rapid response to
queries, custom searches and downloads on request, error correction, and support
for undergraduate courses. (4) General maintenance. REDfly will be maintained in
peak operating condition through identification and correction of programming
bugs, regular updates to genome annotations imported from FlyBase and other
sources, active maintenance of links to outside resources, software and/or
hardware updates, etc. These activities will ensure that REDfly data continue to
be available as an important resource for the scientific community. The REDfly
database can be found at http://redfly.ccr.buffalo.edu.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.