* 1758545
* SBIR Phase II:  Modular Manufacturing - Democratizing Functional Materials Printing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Raymond Weitekamp, PolySpectra, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,415,837.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will research
and develop new functional materials for advanced additive manufacturing. The
goal of this project is to develop high performance materials for light
activated 3D printers. If successful, this will enable new tools for
manufacturing and research. Applications of this project would enable
affordable, waste-free, and energy-efficient manufacturing with the goal of
lowering barriers to innovation. Specifically, this project has the potential to
improve the quality of healthcare around the world, by dramatically lowering the
costs of designing and manufacturing biomedical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;polySpectra has developed a new class of modular
3D printing resins, capable of manufacturing production-quality parts with
tailored geometry and chemical functionality in a single step. This process is
called ?functional lithography,? and it unlocks the ability to simultaneously
define the form and function of advanced materials. The application of
functional lithography to additive manufacturing enables production-ready parts
to be directly 3D-printed, whereas existing materials can only make prototypes,
mock-ups or toys. The goal of this project is to develop new advanced
manufacturing processes using functional lithography, towards direct additive
manufacturing of high-fidelity polymer components, devices and hardware.