* 1758544
* SBIR Phase II:  Telescopic Structural Flood Walls
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jorge Cueto, Smart Walls Construction LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2022
* USD 830,676.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed to
develop and commercialize an extendable/retractable telescopic structural wall
for flood protection. This technology will enable more resilient infrastructure
in flood-prone areas. Coastal cities and riverine communities are vulnerable to
flooding hazards. These population centers tend to be located near bodies of
water, and finding the space to accommodate increasing populations, as well as
hazard-resilient infrastructure, represents a challenge for city officials and
the engineering community in general. The commercial opportunity of the
technology lies on the increasing worldwide need for flood protection. In fact,
the World Bank estimates that 50 billion dollars a year will be spent worldwide
in measures to mitigate this hazard. In U.S. only, floods are considered one of
the costliest and deadliest natural hazards with an estimated 7.9 billion
dollars in damages and 82 fatalities per year. This technology, when developed,
will provide a paradigm shift for the prefabricated concrete industry. It will
also develop and validate new methods for telescopic interconnection of
structural elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in a unique concept where structural boxes, made out of fiber reinforced
concrete, can be deployed telescopically to withstand forces imposed from
external sources, and then return to a retracted position. In Phase I, the
feasibility of the concept was demonstrated by the ability of specimens to
withstand the forces from three flooding scenarios representative of the
targeted market sector: riverine, storm-surges and tsunamis. The Phase II
project will focus on assessing the technical features of the walls based on
lead-off customer sites. These will include the height of the walls, type of
soil, and the hazard assessment, among others technical factors. Studies will be
conducted on the local and overall structural response of the walls and the
functionality of their mechanical components. Analytical and numerical models
will be built and validated with tests on specific components and on full-scale
models. The full-scale specimens will be subjected to storm-surges, hurricane,
tsunami, slow-rising waters, and impacting debris forces. Robust theoretical
framework along with analytical and numerical models and design guidelines will
be built to reliably scale and replicate the technology for virtually any site
where flood protection is needed.