* 1758037
* Elucidating genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying symbiotic specificity in the Medicago-Sinorhizobium mutualism
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Hongyan Zhu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,734.00

The availability of nitrogen in the soil is a major limiting factor for
agricultural production. Although the use of industrial fertilizers has
contributed substantially to feeding the world, the production of nitrogen
fertilizers requires fossil fuels and excessive fertilizers cause serious
environmental pollution. In contrast, plants of the legume family can make their
own nitrogen fertilizer by forming symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria,
called rhizobia. This symbiosis culminates in the formation of specialized root
organs, called nodules, within which the bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen
into ammonia for use by the plant. One important property of the legume-
rhizobial symbiosis is its high level of specificity. Such specificity can take
place at various stages of the interaction, ranging from initial bacterial
infection and nodulation (nodulation specificity) to late nodule development
associated with nitrogen fixation efficiency (nitrogen fixation specificity).
This project aims to elucidate genetic and molecular mechanisms that regulate
symbiotic specificity in the legume-rhizobia interaction. Such knowledge will
facilitate development of novel strategies to enhance the benefits of symbiotic
nitrogen fixation for sustainable agriculture. This project will contribute to
the training of students at graduate, undergraduate and high school levels. The
research group will particularly encourage the participation of members of
under-represented undergraduates to join the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent advances in our understanding of
the signaling pathways leading to root nodule development, the molecular
mechanisms underlying natural variation in nodulation capacity and nitrogen
fixation efficiency are still not well understood. In the Medicago truncatula-
Sinorhizobium meliloti interaction, the Zhu laboratory recently cloned two host
genes, NFS1 and NFS2 that regulate nitrogen fixation specificity concerning S.
meliloti Rm41 and an NS1 locus containing two receptor-like kinases that
restricts infection and nodulation by Rm41. The polymorphic NFS genes encode
nodule-specific cysteine-rich (NCR) peptides. In contrast to the predominant
notion of NCR peptides as effectors of endosymbionts' differentiation to
nitrogen-fixing bacteroids, this finding demonstrated that specific NCRs
negatively regulate symbiotic persistence. NFS1 and NFS2 provoke bacterial cell
death and early nodule senescence in an allele-specific and rhizobial strain-
specific manner, and their function is dependent on the host's genetic
background. This project addresses how NCR peptides, on one hand, can induce
terminal bacteroid differentiation needed for nitrogen fixation, and on the
other hand, some NCR variants result in lysis of bacteroids. Specifically, the
project will determine whether the pro- and anti-symbiotic peptides interact
with the same bacterial targets, how amino-acids of the peptides affect their
function, and how the functions of these peptides are affected by the genetic
background. The specific objectives of the research include: (1)
characterization of the NFS1 and NFS2 genes and their roles in negative
regulation of symbiotic development with Rm41; (2) cloning and characterization
of a suppressor of NFS1; and (3) characterization of the NS1 locus that
restricts nodulation by Rm41.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.