* 1758290
* CAREER: Virus Infection and Immune Responses: Modeling, Analysis, and Implications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Libin Rong, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 325,892.00

The objectives of this project are to develop and analyze mathematical models to
quantitatively investigate virus infection and immune responses and to
demonstrate their implications for antiviral treatment and vaccination.
Mathematical models, validated and informed by experimental data, have made
important contributions to the understanding of interactions between virus,
cells, and immune responses. However, new data emerge and update our
understanding of the biology underlying these processes. Sometimes the analysis
of new data generates conflicting results. This project will develop and analyze
new models, compare them with experimental data, explain potential discrepancies
generated by new data, and address the implications to therapy and vaccine
development. The first part of this project develops multi-scale models to study
hepatitis C virus (HCV) dynamics in patients treated with new antiviral drugs.
These models include both intracellular viral replication and extracellular cell
infection. The second part of the project develops comprehensive immune models
to elucidate the mechanisms in controlling HIV, a virus that causes AIDS in
humans. The modeling predictions will be compared with experimental data to
determine the relative roles of target cell availability and specific immune
mechanisms in viral control. This project will generate modeling, computational,
and data analysis methods in quantitative studies of virus infection and immune
responses. The multi-scale virus models will establish a theoretical framework
for studying viral dynamics in patients treated with new drugs and will
investigate the emergence of drug resistance. This can help to develop more
effective combination therapy and improve cure rates. Such combination
strategies have achieved a great success in the management of HIV infection. The
comprehensive immune models developed in this project will address fundamental
questions in immunology, e.g., how the immune system controls viral load and why
some monkeys can live with an HIV-like virus without progressing to AIDS. The
results may suggest effective strategies for the development of future virus
vaccines and immune-based therapies. This interdisciplinary research will
provide extensive training opportunities to students from diverse backgrounds at
levels from high school to graduate school. This project includes extensive
collaborations with experimentalists which will provide mathematics students
with a broad range of training opportunities in the biomedical field. The
interdisciplinary collaboration will also help to improve the dissemination of
the project's results to a broad scientific audience.