* 1758823
* Elementary STEM Teaching Integrating Technology and Computing Holistically
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Colby Tofel-Grehl, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2022
* USD 441,220.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The E-STITCH
(Elementary STEM Teaching Integrating Technology and Computing Holistically)
project is a curriculum and professional development project designed to
facilitate meaningful scientific inquiry with computer science in grades 3-6.
Based on recent national findings that about half of students who intended to
pursue science-related careers in 6th grade ultimately earned STEM-related
baccalaureate degrees, in contrast to only one third of their counterparts who
planned on non-science related careers, students' early educational experiences
influence potential future career choices based on both academic preparation and
the formulation of personal identities compatible with STEM pursuits. Therefore,
the project's significance and importance lies in its creation of meaningful and
integrated STEM learning experiences that will provide foundational knowledge,
prepare young students to become informed citizens, and stimulate their interest
in and awareness of professional opportunities in STEM prior to completing
elementary school. Further, increased student interest and engagement with STEM
by 6th grade is a critical predictor of later commitment to entering the STEM
workforce. The professional development of teachers within a single geographic
region will additionally provide the opportunity to establish an extended
learning community of professionals that can sustain continued development and
support of instruction enhanced by e-textiles, especially significant in rural
districts where teachers are often geographically dispersed and may not be able
to come together as a professional learning community on a regular
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project E-STITCH focuses on integrating e-textiles
technologies to develop innovative technology experiences for elementary
teachers and students, especially in rural areas. E-STITCH is a curriculum
development project designed to facilitate meaningful scientific inquiry related
to physical science with technology (both hardware and software applications and
development). The project targets teachers and their students in grades 3-6 by
developing new curriculum to engage students in computing activities that are
integrated with multiple content areas appropriate for a multi-subject
classroom. These projects provide the opportunity to use new technologies as
tools for scientific inquiry and data modeling while leveraging connections to
students' out-of-school interests and cultural backgrounds. Project E-STITCH
will meaningfully engage 30 teachers and 1,800 students in a novel approach to
integrating computing into science and engineering activities in diverse rural
communities across the state of Utah, including rural White, Latinx and Native
American populations. E-STITCH engages students directly with STEM content and
skills through the design, prototyping, and creation of objects that are
relevant to their interests and needs. E-textiles incorporate elements of
embedded computing for controlling the behavior of fabric artifacts. In contrast
to conventional wires and breadboards, these artifacts are created using novel
materials such as conductive fibers or conductive Velcro, sensors for light,
sound, and pressure, and actuators such as LEDs and speakers, in addition to
traditional aspects of fabric crafts. By sewing circuits using these materials
to produce wearable items (e.g. t-shirts, backpacks), students engage in
designing solutions that are intellectually rigorous as well as culturally and
personally meaningful. The data collected will contribute to understanding of
how to integrate Making effectively into K-12 core content areas in ways that
align with standards and address the needs of diverse learners at scale. Because
Project E-STITCH uses non-traditional materials to create new and meaningful
points of entry into STEM learning through inquiry, it will engage students
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.