* 1758781
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing and Testing an Incubator for Digital Entrepreneurship in Remote Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Timothy Pasch, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2022
* USD 166,322.00

Abstract: Public &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative award supports
research to design and evaluate a model for entrepreneurial small-business
accelerator optimized for job creation in remote Alaskan communities, in
collaboration with indigenous populations. Specific objectives and outcomes of
this project include:&lt;br/&gt;* To conduct two workshops with large-scale
community involvement in Noorvik, Alaska and Arviat, Nunavut gathering and
linking data to the Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic
(ELOKA) project related to comparative US/Canadian venture capital investment
potential in the North American Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;* To develop a digital
incubator/accelerator model specifically optimized towards preparing North
American indigenous Arctic entrepreneurs to start businesses in the creative and
cultural sectors.&lt;br/&gt;Diversifying and strengthening Alaska's economy
aligns strongly with U.S. Arctic Policy for national security and economic
development. Alaska is a frontier market with extensive untapped creative
entrepreneurial assets. Drawing from existing rural and Pan-Arctic business
innovation and research, coupled with direct work with Alaskan communities, the
IdEA initiative works to grow the Alaskan economy for the transformative benefit
of the United States Arctic and potentially other rural communities in the
United States. In addition, this research project will also provide key insights
into the infusion of training in entrepreneurship into diverse undergraduate and
graduate experiences, as the NSF Strategic Plan 2018-2022 notes such training
"can speed the translation of new discoveries into commercial applications" and
greatly benefit the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Technical
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (IdEA) Incubator for Digital Entrepreneurship in the
Arctic works with remote Alaskan communities to co-produce transformative
digitally-focused and economically-centered knowledge developing a digital
incubator/accelerator connecting Alaskan rural entrepreneurs with venture
capital. The proposed research activities permit comparative cross-pollination
of concepts related to Pan-Arctic labor market opportunities for economic
development potential, technological capacity, and cultural capital. The
incubator leverages multidisciplinary mixed-methodological community-centered
approaches to develop and test coproduction of a framework for scientific and
economic knowledge in the field of Community Informatics. IdEA applies optimized
entrepreneurial training linking entrepreneurship best practices with venture
capital support, enabling rural Alaskan communities to develop and apply their
unique expertise for the specific purpose of growing and diversifying their
economy in alignment with U.S. Arctic Policy for national security and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.