* 1758598
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing the Standalone Tongue Drive System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Jill Kolczynski, Bionic Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2020
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on bringing
enhanced independence, productivity, and quality of life for hundreds of
thousands of individuals in the US who live with severe physical disability due
to spinal cord injury or other debilitating neurodegenerative disorders, such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Due to improvements in emergency medicine
and increasing average age, these individuals represent a growing population
that is underserved by current assistive technologies (ATs). The ATs being
relied upon to carry out basic tasks are still primitive, offer limited
versatility, and fail to meet end-user needs. Meanwhile, computers and internet
play ever-growing roles in everyday life and are regarded as equalizers that
allow individuals to have similar vocational, recreational, and educational
opportunities. The Tongue Drive System (TDS) offers individuals with severe
physical disabilities an intuitive and superior mechanism for accessing
computer-based resources, wheelchairs, smartphones, smart homes, etc. TDS
harnesses the power of the human tongue, which often retains full capability in
these individuals despite losses of other functions, to drive human-computer
interactions. TDS has the potential to revolutionize the current AT market in
the US and around the world with an anticipated market size of $1B within its
primary market segment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase-II project aims to bring this transformative and game-
changing AT to market by continuing the design, development, evaluation, and
expansion of a robust, reliable, and real-time TDS ecosystem. In Phase-I, the
TDS hardware was redesigned and consolidated so that all signal processing
functions were self-contained into a new standalone TDS (sTDS) headset system
with a dual-band wireless link that can directly interface with a target
peripheral by transmitting formatted user-defined commands. In Phase-II the
designs for a solid and intuitive user interface, a smartphone app, and a robust
and rugged powered wheelchair interface module to effectively control key target
devices will be fine-tuned in the final stages of development in preparation for
launch. The sTDS hardware/software/enclosure will also be tested and ready for
manufacturing and meet the FDA regulatory requirements towards submission of a
510(k) premarket notification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.