* 1758820
* Deciphering the guard cell metabolome in plant pathogen defense
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Sarah Assmann, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2020
* USD 91,288.00

Crops are constantly challenged by bacterial pathogens, which cause huge losses
in yield and economical value every year. The pathogens enter the plant body
through wounds and through tiny pores on leaf surfaces. These pores are called
stomata, and are formed by highly specialized cells called guard cells. Stomatal
opening mediated by the guard cells allows carbon dioxide uptake. After uptake,
carbon dioxide is captured by photosynthesis, generating organic materials such
as carbohydrates; therefore stomatal opening is critical for agricultural yield
and bioenergy production. However, the open stomatal pores also allow water
vapor loss, and create entries for pathogens, which are liabilities for plants.
It is known that when guard cells sense pathogens, they close stomata within an
hour as an immune response. However, subsequently, the stomata open again and
pathogens go in. This project aims to elucidate how lipids and fatty acids
function in regulating the stomatal closure and opening during pathogen
infection. This research will enable scientists to gain an in-depth
understanding of guard cell lipid metabolites important for pathogen triggered
stomatal closing and opening. The outcome of the research has broad societal
impact, e.g., for informing rational crop breeding to enhance pathogen defense
and crop yield. The results will be made available to the public via community
repositories and no-cost publications (e.g. Metabolight, the Plant Journal). The
project will also enable cross-disciplinary training of students at different
levels, including women and under-represented students. Training the next
generation of scientists and citizens has far-reaching positive impacts for
society and the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chen lab has observed
significant lipid metabolite changes in guard cells in response to treatment
with a bacterial elicitor comprised of the flagellin N-terminal 22 amino acid
peptide (flg22). The Assmann lab has previously demonstrated the effect of the
lipid metabolite sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) as a component of abscisic acid
signaling. However, the roles of S1P and other lipids and fatty acids in
stomatal immunity against Pseudomonas syringe pv. tomatao (Pst DC3000) are not
known. Here the hypothesis is that lipid metabolites function as important
regulators of guard cell pathogen signaling. The goals are to: 1) determine
dynamic changes of lipids and fatty acids in guard cells during Pst DC3000
triggered stomatal movement; 2) determine stomatal movement triggered by Pst
DC3000 in relevant mutants of lipid biosynthesis and metabolism implicated from
the lipidomics analyses, and characterize the effects of lipid metabolites as
signaling molecules in triggering stomatal movement. Approaches to be used
include lipidomics, cell biology, genetics and biochemistry. This focused
project specially targets the functions of lipids and fatty acids in stomatal
immunity against Pst DC3000. The results are expected to reveal novel lipid
metabolite functions, boost understanding of molecular mechanisms that underlie
stomatal immunity, and illustrate the power of integrated approaches involving
lipidomics to reveal novel biological mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.