* 1758556
* Collaborative Research: Using Computer Vision to Measure Neighborhood Variables Affecting Health
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Jackelyn Hwang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 138,913.00

This project will develop an automated method, using advances in computer
science, to observe and record systematically the physical conditions of
neighborhood environments at a large-scale. Neighborhood environments play a
significant role in shaping the health of individuals and communities,
consequently contributing to inequality in the U.S. Past research suggests that
the presence of physical disorder, poorly maintained properties, and vacant lots
in neighborhoods can negatively affect physical and mental health, attract more
crime and disorder, and lead to neighborhood disinvestment. The measures
resulting from this study will facilitate examination of these processes and
provide a powerful resource for the scientific research community. They will be
more broadly beneficial as well by allowing policymakers, practitioners, and the
public to track neighborhood progress and target
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of Google Street
View imagery--the largest publicly available longitudinal dataset of visual
appearance of street blocks--and will use Amazon's Mechanical Turk--a
crowdsourcing platform--and existing field survey data to identify indicators of
physical disorder and maintenance, such as trash and blighted buildings, on a
sample of street segments across three distinct cities: Boston, Detroit, and Los
Angeles. These data will be used to train an algorithm that draws on recent
advances in machine learning and computer vision. Reliability and validity of
the method for identifying characteristics and measures will be tested
throughout each step of the process. The resulting longitudinal measures of the
physical conditions of neighborhoods will be linked to longitudinal health
surveys conducted in each of the three cities to analyze the relationship
between physical neighborhood conditions and health. In addition, the new
measures will be released as a publicly available database of longitudinal
measures of physical neighborhood conditions across multiple
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.