* 1758006
* REU Site: Computational Modeling Serving the City
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Christof Teuscher, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2022
* USD 310,400.00

The focus area of this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site is
computational modeling to serve and enhance the Portland metropolitan region as
it grows and evolves. Students will be involved in cutting-edge, multi-
disciplinary research projects and trained in computational thinking across
different disciplines and communities. In doing so, they will gain an
understanding of the potential and limits of these tools and how they can serve
diverse urban communities. Portland State University (PSU), with its newly-
funded Portland Institute for Computational Science (PICS), has developed a
reputation as a national model for urban universities that enhance their region
by working with partners to solve problems. The activities of this REU site will
involve a 2-week training to teach students the foundations of computational
modeling, followed by an 8-week research project completed in a research lab
under a mentor's guidance and with the involvement of a community partner. The
community-oriented aspect is aligned with PSU's motto "Let knowledge serve the
city." The investigator will recruit a very diverse population of undergraduate
students across disciplines, in particular from institutions with limited
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) research opportunities, such as
2-year community colleges. The REU site will allow students to enrich their
educational experiences by providing them with an intellectual toolbox that has
the potential to have a lasting impact on their diverse
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is rooted in
exposing students to community-based computational modeling projects as a way of
developing their computational thinking well beyond the computing disciplines.
Interdisciplinary projects across disciplines and communities together with
weekly site meetings will provide students a unique, multi-faceted perspective.
The intended impact of the REU site is to teach students the fundamental skills
of computational modeling and thinking that will help them understand and solve
complex problems in a complex world. At the end of the internship, the student
will present the research outcomes to the community partner. Weekly site
meetings, seminars, site visits, and a final symposium will enrich the
internship. The hands-on nature of the cutting-edge research projects has the
potential to attract and motivate a diverse population of students to pursue a
STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.