* 1758201
* Collaborative Research: Evaluation of ACA Reform
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Igal Hendel, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,304.00

At the core of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is the "individual mandate" law.
Under this law, each individual in the ACA's "health insurance exchanges" needs
to buy coverage or pay a penalty. Individual mandate has perhaps been the most
controversial part of the ACA. This research aims at answering two crucial
questions about this law. First, by how much would the uninsurance rate increase
after lifting individual mandate? Second, to what extent could the proposed
replacements to this law mitigate the negative impact of that lift on
coverage?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops an economic model of
healthcare exchanges that incorporates asymmetric information and consumer
dynamics. It allows for heterogeneity in health statuses of individuals,
enabling it to capture adverse selection -- the main reason why the market could
collapse without individual mandate. The model is dynamic, allowing it to
capture consumers' foresighted decision making. This is crucial for evaluating
the impact of the proposed replacements to individual mandate, which all
penalize consumers who stay uninsured today with restricted access to health
insurance in the future. Using the model, the investigators examine how
different ways to replace or reform the ACA might affect the performance of the
health insurance exchange and the consumer welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.