* 1758932
* Testing a two phase model of broad-host range necrotrophic compatibility
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Rollins, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 667,537.00

This project is broadly focused on understanding the fundamental mechanisms by
which aggressive, broad host range plant pathogens are able to cause disease on
diverse groups of plants. The specific focus is on the fungal plant pathogen
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, the cause of white mold disease in soybean, sunflower,
cole crops, pulse crops and a variety of others. In total, this agricultural
pathogen infects over 600 plant species and accounts for an estimated $200
million in annual economic loss in the U.S. Market losses can be extremely high
when disease outbreaks occur on a large scale; the U.S. soybean stem rot
outbreak in 2009, for instance, directly reduced harvests by approximately $560
million. In the field, diseases caused by S. sclerotiorum are challenging to
control for the lack of resistant cultivars effective against this pathogen and
the long survival properties of the fungus. In Florida, losses occurring in
crops of green bean, carrot, Brassica carinata, bell pepper and cabbage are of
perennial concern. This research addresses the need to elucidate the genetically
based mechanisms of S. sclerotiorum that are required for its aggressiveness and
the genetic factors from the host that account for susceptibility or resistance
to the pathogen. This information is fundamentally important for the long-term
purpose of developing effective disease control strategies against this
devastating fungal pathogen. This research will have the broader impact of
training undergraduates recruited from the University of Florida Undergraduate
Research Minority Participation Program in molecular genetic techniques using
cutting edge tools for genome manipulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to elucidate factors that underlie the establishment of basic compatibility
in broad host range necrotrophic pathogens. The working model is that these
pathogens, exemplified by Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, utilize a two-phase strategy
for establishing basic compatibility and host colonization. From this model two
hypotheses are possible.The first hypothesis is that basic host-pathogen
compatibility across a broad range of hosts is established by pathogen targeting
of universally conserved host targets (e.g., MED16). The alternative, but not
mutually exclusive, hypothesis is that these pathogens have evolved and utilize
independent virulence factors and effectors for different hosts to overcome
host-specific defenses (e.g., glucosinolates). One discovery-based and two
targeted Specific Objectives will test these hypotheses. The first is to create
and phenotype gene-specific loss-of-function mutations for select members of the
predicted S. sclerotiorum secretome chosen from transcriptome data. The second
objective is to characterize the pathway of Arabidopsis Mediator complex subunit
16 (MED16) protein modification and degradation to understand its role in broad
host range necrotrophic pathogen susceptibility and resistance. The final
objective is to determine the role of MED16 degradation in host susceptibility
to S. sclerotiorum and other broad host range necrotrophic pathogens. Plant
disease resistance to this class of pathogens lags behind the understanding of
other classes of host-pathogen interactions. The genetically complex nature of
these interactions is a major factor limiting understanding. Utilizing new
molecular genetic tools and genomic resources, the proposed research will
establish greater mechanistic understanding of broad host range necrotrophic
pathogen-host compatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.