* 1758154
* I-Corps: Brain Organoid Cell Products for Research and Therapeutic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Timothy O'Brien, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from its
potential applications that enable a better understanding of, and treatments
for, brain disorders. Last year, over 50 million U.S. adults were afflicted by a
central nervous system disease such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease,
Huntington's disease, depression, and autism. Particularly as the population
ages, neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's
disease are rapidly increasing. This project further develops an innovative
technology that, for the first time, enables scalable, cost-effective, GMP-
compliant generation of human brain organoids. The technology will facilitate
the development of applications for human brain organoids both for basic
research, including drug discovery and disease-in-the-dish modeling of
neurological disorders, and clinical applications, where the human brain
organoids may be developed as a source of therapeutic cells for transplantation.
This technological advance, furthermore, promotes the advancement of
personalized medicine approaches to both therapeutic development and brain cell
transplantation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on the
production of human brain organoids as an enabling technology for advancements
in basic science discovery, neuropharmaceutical discovery, and therapeutic cell
production for a wide variety of human brain disorders. The project further
develops an improved method for the generation of human brain organoids from
induced pluripotent stem cells. The technology has several advantages over
previously described methods including improved simplicity and efficiency of
organoid production, documented consistency of the product, production method
using only a chemically defined hydrogel matrix and cell culture medium, and
improved scalability of manufacturing. Taken together these features enable, for
the first time, a commercially viable means of brain organoid production. The
method is also amenable to cGMP-compliant manufacturing which enables the
development of therapeutic cell products from the organoids.