* 1758238
* Developing STEM Teachers to Support Digitally-Rich Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* David Goldfarb, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,250,120.00

This Noyce Track 1 project seeks to address the growing national need for
mathematics and science teachers who are equipped to teach in digitally-rich
classrooms and who can build upon the increasingly technology-savvy students who
enter schools each year. It benefits from two previously successful Noyce
Scholars' projects awarded to the University of Rochester, and involvement of a
newly formed Consortium of involving the university and several school districts
in upstate New York working together toward district-wide digital conversion.
Digital conversion includes providing each student with a tablet or laptop
computer and using these computers to access digital curriculum resources that
can enhance student learning. This project's goals are to: 1) continue to
increase the number of highly-qualified mathematics and science secondary
teachers serving students in high-need school districts; 2) engage these Noyce
Scholars in the effective use of technology in the classroom; 3) create a state-
wide network of Noyce Scholars for support and sharing of resources; and 4) to
better understand what it takes to prepare future teachers most effectively.
Achieving the fourth goal has the potential to affect STEM teacher preparation
programs nationwide. The teacher certification program for post-baccalaureate
students involves 15 courses, including a teaching practicum, four courses
specific to teaching science and mathematics, three courses that integrate
digitally-rich technology in teaching and learning in mathematics and science,
and five courses focused on teaching students from diverse backgrounds and
differentiated needs, including students with disabilities and English Language
Learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is directed by the University of
Rochester (through its Warner School of Education and STEM departments), in
partnership with East High School (a "district within a district" within the
Rochester City School District, under New York City Educational Partnership
Organization legislation), and East Irondequoit Central School District (a high-
need suburban district that is a local pioneer in digital conversion). It will
prepare 26 mathematics and science teachers, who are post-baccalaureate (either
recent graduates or career changers) STEM majors (geoscience, computer science,
biology, physics, engineering, chemistry, or mathematics), for teaching in high-
need schools. In addition to obtaining teacher certification, these Noyce
Scholars will also receive an Advanced Certificate in Digitally-Rich Teaching in
K-12 Schools approved by the New York State Education Department. A critical
aspect of the project evaluation seeks to identify common challenges that
novice, reform-minded STEM teachers encounter and ways to support them in
constructively addressing these challenges. Findings from this evaluative study
have the potential to inform teacher education programs and practices
nationwide. This project intends to advance, apply, and disseminate knowledge
about innovative strategies for the recruitment, preparation, induction, and
retention of highly-qualified STEM teachers for high-need schools, with a focus
on digital transformation efforts to increase student learning and engagement.
As more districts throughout the country move toward digital conversion, a clear
need exists to prepare teachers who can thoughtfully integrate technology in the
classroom to promote learning and student engagement, particularly in ways that
can make mathematics and science more interesting and accessible. This project
is poised to contribute evidence about preparing teachers to incorporate high-
quality, digitally-based curriculum and instruction in high-need
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.