* 1758565
* Bering Strait 2018-2022: Quantifying the changing Pacific inflow to the Arctic Ocean- a critical component of the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Ana Cecilia Peralta Ferriz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,394,993.00

Part A: The core of this work will be the installation and annual servicing of
three oceanographic moorings in the Bering Strait, at sites (all in US waters)
which have been shown to provide an effective quantification of the oceanic
fluxes through the strait. These moorings measure (hourly, year-round) water
velocity, water temperature and salinity, and the thickness and motion of the
seasonal sea ice in the region. The installations are available also to support
instrumentation from other studies, e.g., marine mammal research. The project
will provide data products of oceanic fluxes and water properties at various
timescales (including hourly, monthly, and annual), interacting with
stakeholders to provide the most relevant products. Combining these data with
satellite data sets, modeling results, and indigenous knowledge, the researchers
will quantify long-term change and the changing drivers of the properties of the
inflow. The project also trains students in oceanographic techniques; brings
western science to the classroom through a ?5-year journey in science? outreach
project to native communities in Alaska and Hispanic/Latino-dominated schools in
Seattle; and connects the Arctic and the public through university classes,
various public talks, and the annual Polar Science Weekend at Seattle?s major
Science museum. &lt;br/&gt;Part B: The Pacific inflow to the Arctic Ocean (which
is via the Bering Strait) is critical to the oceanic systems of the Alaskan seas
and western Arctic Ocean. Recent years are showing dramatic increase and early
warming in this inflow. This has consequences regionally, in the Arctic, and
(models suggest) also globally. Consider some examples. The inflow impacts
nutrient supply to the nationally crucial Bering Sea, source of ~ 50% of the US
fish catch. Heat carried by the inflow (increasing in recent years) is a trigger
of early Arctic sea-ice retreat. Water properties of the inflow control how the
ocean interacts with sea ice over roughly half the Arctic Ocean. Nutrients
carried by the inflow feed Arctic ecosystems, both in the Arctic Ocean and in
the US and Canadian northern coastal regions. It is thus vital to assess the
changing Pacific inflow to the Arctic - for local native communities; for the
new focus on pan-Arctic access, global shipping and resource exploitation; and
for understanding (and predicting) how the Arctic is changing and the impacts of
that change. To date, the only effective way of making this assessment is
through year-round in-water measurements. The US started such measurements in
1990, allowing us now to quantify in context the remarkable transitions
currently in progress. This new research will continue these measurements to
2022, also seeking understanding of the drivers of recent change. Crucially, the
work will provide oceanic information in useful forms to the many stakeholders,
including local and global science, local native communities, the public, and
industry (e.g., oil/gas exploration, shipping, tourism). Internationally, the
project is a substantial US contribution to global cooperation in the Arctic.
Educationally, the project brings science and the Arctic to school and public
communities, including role modeling success of diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.