* 1758481
* Carver Teaching Initiative Inspiring the Next Generation of STEM Teaching Professionals through Internships, Recruitment, and Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Robert Yost, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,419.00

The low number of highly qualified mathematics and science teachers is an
ongoing national challenge. This challenge is exacerbated by the racial and
ethnic mismatch between the nation's mathematics and science teachers and the
nation's students. Although 44% of US K-12 students are non-white, only 8% of US
mathematics and science teachers are non-white. Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis seeks to address this challenge through the Robert Noyce
Track 1 project, Carver Teaching Initiative Inspiring the Next Generation of
STEM Teaching Professionals through Internships, Recruitment, and Engagement
(CTI Inspire). CTI Inspire aims to: (a) increase and diversify the available
pool of high-achieving STEM majors who consider STEM teaching, by providing 90
STEM research teaching internships to high achieving, STEM majors; (b) increase
and diversify the number of STEM graduates with secondary certification, by
providing two-year scholarships for 25 high-achieving STEM majors; and (c)
increase the number of new graduates who engage in new teacher induction, by
providing new teacher induction program incentives to graduates. This project
will be a collaboration between Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Ivy Tech Community College, Metropolitan School District of Pike
Township, Metropolitan School District of Lawrence Township, and Muncie
Community Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate STEM majors
participating in the CTI Inspire scholarship program as summer interns and
scholarship recipients will (a) complete a six-week STEM summer teaching
internship with high-need K-12 students in urban settings; (b) build ongoing
mentoring relationships with STEM and STEM education faculty; (c) participate in
semiannual professional development seminars with practicing teachers from
partnering districts; and (d) actively engage in professional teaching
associations. Teachers prepared through CTI Inspire will be trained in use of
socially transformative STEM pedagogy, which aims to stimulate STEM interest
among minority STEM learners and build cultural awareness among non-minority
STEM learners. Finally, insights developed from the CTI Inspire scholarship
program will be shared with STEM teacher educators through regional, national,
and international research and practitioner conferences and through publication
in STEM and STEM education journals. These dissemination efforts will position
other STEM teacher educators to replicate successful approaches and to avoid
unsuccessful approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.