* 1758000
* REU Site for Oregon Marine Science: From upper estuaries to the deep sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Itchung Cheung, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2023
* USD 778,503.00

Research training for the next generation of marine scientists and
oceanographers is an important focus for the Division of Ocean Sciences. Oregon
State University will be supported to host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site for three years (2018-2020). The program is run on two
campuses, the Hatfield Marine Science Center (HMSC) located in Newport, OR and
the College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences (CEOAS) in Corvallis, OR,
and will bring cohorts of undergraduates to each campus for a ten-week summer
internship. Students will conduct independent research projects with the
guidance of research mentors and will participate in a variety of professional
development activities, including workshops on scientific ethics, scientific
writing, the graduate school experience and career options. Students will also
participate in a number of field trips and outreach events. The program conducts
a national search for applicants and seeks to engage students who are from
schools with limited research opportunities, including community colleges. Most
of the funding provided supports student stipends, housing and travel to attend
the program. This project supports the national goals of developing the next
generation of scientists and the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
OSU REU Site will provide a total of sixty-seven undergraduates with research
internships over the three-year period. Research opportunities at HMSC focus on
biology, ecology and environmental science, and at CEOAS the opportunities are
focused on marine science applications of physics, geology, chemistry, and
mathematics. Independent research projects conducted by the students will fall
into one of four themes, including: 1: Biology and Ecology of Marine Organisms -
genetics of marine organisms, biological and fisheries oceanography, and
environmental effects of marine renewable energy development, 2: Ocean Ecology
and Biogeochemistry - population and community ecology, biogeochemical cycling,
and the deep-biosphere, 3: Marine Geology and Geophysics - volcanism in
spreading centers, subduction zones, seamounts and hotspots, as well as
paleoclimate and paleomagnetic studies, and 4: Physics of Oceans and Atmospheres
- physical oceanography, numerical modeling, ocean acoustics, optics, remote
sensing, and ocean-atmosphere observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.