* 1758591
* STTR Phase II:  An On-Demand, Computational and Microfluidic-Driven Cell-Free Protein Engineering Platform
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Philip Romero, SYNVITROBIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,277,495.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) will be to develop a platform to accelerate the engineering of
biological products, including enzymes and pathways, for production of
chemicals, additives, and therapeutics. Enzymes are used in household materials
(detergents and cleaners) and in chemical processes (cheese production, and
bioremediation of waste). Pathways can produce bioplastics from sugar by
engineered gut bacteria, or artemisinin (an antimalarial) from sugar by yeast.
These biological products are engineered in cells. Cellular engineering,
however, requires extensive scientific expertise, financial and material
resources, and time. This project will design an engineering platform that
eliminates production in cells. The goal is to simplify engineering and decrease
costs 20-100 fold, and decrease time 2-5 fold. This results in a faster time-to-
market for novel biological products and additional information to inform the
engineering process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes
to utilize cell-free systems to speed up enzyme and pathway (metabolic)
engineering. Cell-free systems can catalyze reactions without cellular
complexity and without the need to maintain cellular growth. The goal of the
project is to continue to develop a platform that can take as input user enzyme
and pathway engineering questions and produce as output assay data. The primary
focus is on developing computational methods for identification and optimization
of enzymes and pathways for testing, molecular biological methods for assembling
DNA, microfluidic methods for ultra-high-throughput analysis of cell-free
expressions (10e7 samples), and analytical methods for detection. A secondary
focus is the demonstration of this platform through cytochrome P450 engineering.
Success with the primary focus demonstrates feasibility of replacing cellular
engineering with faster and higher-throughput cell-free engineering processes.
Success with the secondary focus produces directly-relevant enzymes for
metabolic engineering pathways utilizing cytochrome P450s (e.g., natural
products, bio-catalysis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.