* 1758419
* Preparing Equity-Minded Mathematics and Science Teachers to Work with Diverse Communities of Learners
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* R Macdonald, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,199,858.00

This Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends Noyce project at the College of William
and Mary (WM) aims to meet a national need for talented STEM teachers who are
prepared and committed to teaching diverse communities of students in high-need
schools. The project includes collaborations with six high needs school
districts: Gloucester and New Kent Counties (rural); York and Williamsburg-James
City Counties (suburban); and Newport News and Hampton (urban). A major project
goal is developing a new model to: (1) interest outstanding mathematics majors
in teaching; (2) help students sustain an enduring commitment to STEM teaching;
and (3) develop students' ability to connect effectively with diverse
communities. The project will work with the WM Office of Community Engagement to
engage first- and second-year mathematics and science students in teaching
activities and reflection. Working with WM community engagement staff,
prospective teachers will explore issues of fair access to skills in mathematics
and science for all students. These activities will expand preliminary research
on factors that enhance the motivation of prospective teachers for STEM
teaching. Once recruited into the Noyce Program, Noyce scholars will take two
project-specific courses. The "How Students Learn" course will focus on how to
teach learning skills and self-management. The other course, a Practicum in High
Need Schools, will use early visits to high-need schools to help Noyce Scholars
understand how skilled STEM teachers can effectively support student success.
The project will also offer opportunities for experiences and courses in special
education and teaching English language learners. The project will supplement
cultural competency preparation in the curriculum with activities focused on
equity-mindedness and working with diverse communities. Following placement of
new STEM teachers in schools, a mentoring program will engage teachers in skill-
building and problem-solving in their first years of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to recruit and prepare 33
new teachers who are licensed in STEM disciplines. STEM majors will be recruited
from two pools: (1) Undergraduate STEM majors, including transfer students, who
will gain licensure as undergraduates or through a fifth-year master's program;
and (2) Post-baccalaureates in STEM fields who will complete a master's program
in mathematics or science education. Recruitment will focus on regional
institutions, including those with high proportions of underrepresented minority
students. Prospective mathematics and science teachers will be supported in
gaining certification in science teaching for grades 6-12, and in mathematics
teaching for grades K-8 or 6-12. Partners include six high-need school
districts. The project intends to continue to develop existing partnerships with
high-need schools to prepare more cooperating teachers to supervise and mentor
Noyce Scholars during student teaching. A key objective is to integrate the
project's data in a published model that can inform other programs to improve
recruitment and preparation of STEM teachers. Through preparation of new STEM
teachers and development of a model to initiate and sustain commitments to
teaching in high-need schools, the project has the potential to support societal
goals of effective preparation of teachers for diverse communities of
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.