* 1758767
* A pathogen-activated transcription program directed by TFIIB-related pBrp1 in plant immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Zhixiang Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 745,874.00

Plant pathogens can lead to severe crop yield loss, thereby threatening global
food security. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of plant immunity will
ultimately help develop better disease control strategies. An integral part of
plant immunity is the activation of a large number of defense-related genes upon
pathogen infection. This project is focused on a potential master regulator of
plant defense gene expression with a critical role in plant immunity. The main
goals of the project are to i) identify the spectrum of genes that are directly
regulated by the regulator, ii) establish the mechanisms by which the regulator
activates plant defense-related genes and iii) determine the regulation of the
regulator during the activation of plant immune responses. Results from this
project will enhance our understanding of the process of differential gene
expression fundamental not only to plant immune systems but also to all complex
processes in living organisms. This project will integrate research with
training, learning, diversity and outreach activities. Postdoctoral fellows and
students working on the project will receive interdisciplinary training in a
wide range of molecular approaches. The project will be integrated into
classroom learning for students, including those from underrepresented groups
and high school students, to increase the general public's awareness of science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Transcription reprogramming in plant
immunity is achieved through concerted action of specific transcription factors
(TFs) through recruitment or release of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II). The RNAP II
holoenzyme contains a group of general TFs (GTFs), which are believed to be
required for transcription of all genes. Transcription factor IIB (TFIIB) is a
GTF for RNAP II. Interestingly, Arabidopsis have 14 genes encoding TFIIB-related
proteins including six plant-specific TFIIB-related proteins (pBrps). This
project is focused on Arabidopsis pBrp1. The pbrp1 mutants are compromised in
both disease resistance and defense gene expression. In uninfected plants, the
pBrp1 protein is retained on the plastid envelop and nuclear pBrp1 is detected
only when proteasome pathways are inhibited. Pathogen infection induces pBrp1
accumulation. These results suggest that pBrp1 is a regulated GTF of a special
RNAP II holoenzyme that directs a defense gene transcription program. To test
this hypothesis, the project will identify the direct target genes of pBrp1
using genome-wide transcriptome profiling and ChIP-seq. The direct association
of pBrp1 with RNAP II will be determined using co-immunoprecipitation to confirm
pBrp1 is a GTF for RNAP II and to identify other components in the complexes
with roles in the action and regulation of pBrp1. The protein levels and nuclear
translocation of pBrp1 will be manipulated to determine the importance of the
tight regulation of pBrp1 for balancing plant defense with fitness. These
studies will help elucidate transcriptional regulation of plant immunity, as
well as the intricate mechanisms for timely, accurate and effective activation
of plant defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.