* 1758857
* RUI: Diurnal and circadian regulation of the plant microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 292,217.00

The specific interactions of plants with various soil microorganisms throughout
their life cycle play important roles in plant growth and survival in nature.
Being sessile organisms, plants are directly affected by the continuous but
predictable changes in environmental conditions. This includes the 24-hour
light/dark cycle according to which plants adjust their various physiological
processes. To ensure successful interaction, plants influence the profile and
possibly the biology of certain groups of soil microorganisms such that they
stay in synchrony with the daily changes in the plant physiological processes. A
better understanding of this dynamic regulation would provide valuable
information towards understanding the mechanisms and processes through which
some soil microbes successfully interact with plant roots. Since the summation
of the daily plant interactions with the soil microbes is the basis for their
long-term benefits on the plants, understanding these daily interactions at the
molecular level is important. The manipulation of these daily interactions
through plant breeding may allow for improved plant productivity through
efficient interaction with certain natural microbes, reducing the dependency of
agricultural operations on expensive synthetic fertilizers. This project also
provides valuable opportunities to engage undergraduate and high-school students
in scientific research and introduce them to the natural and sustainable
approaches of food production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbiome has profound
effect on a host's health and nutritional status. In animals, light and the
host's circadian clock, a cell-autonomous internal biological timekeeper that
generates roughly 24-hour rhythms in many metabolic and physiological processes,
regulate host-microbiome interactions. The first aim of this research is to
study the roles of the Arabidopsis thaliana's circadian clock on its interaction
with the bacterial microbiome in the endosphere (inhabiting the root interior)
using a metagenomic approach. The plant circadian clock will be disrupted
environmentally and genetically. The 24-hour fluctuations in the endospheric and
soil bacterial profiles will be determined by sequencing bacterial 16S-ribosomal
(r) genes at both the DNA and RNA level to better understand the role of the
circadian clock regulation. The second aim is to identify the root and bacterial
pathways underlying this dynamic interaction using a metatranscriptomic
approach. Both root and bacterial transcriptomes will be depleted of ribosomal
RNAs and sequenced to identify possible mechanisms and processes through which
some endospheric bacteria interact with Arabidopsis roots. The third aim is to
investigate the role of daily bacterial fluctuations on plant performance using
a physiological approach. Soils will be conditioned by growing Arabidopsis,
tomato, and soybean plants in normal light/dark cycles or prolonged constant
light for two generations. The performance of Arabidopsis, tomato, and soybean
plants on these conditioned soils will be assessed by weekly measurements of
total leaf diameter and petiole length, plant height, chlorophyll content, and
stomatal conductance. The outcome from this research will be an integrated
analysis of circadian impacts on the relationship between plant hosts and their
endophytic microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.