* 1758264
* Effective Novice Teachers: A Study of How Systems of Support Can Transform the Clinical Experience During Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Mark Windschitl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

This Noyce Research Track 4 project seeks to develop and study systems of
support for preparation of teachers who are learning to enact equitable
instruction in high-needs schools. This type of instruction provides students
with opportunities to reason deeply about core subject matter ideas, take part
in the discourses of the discipline, and solve authentic problems. It is
designed to engage all students, regardless of gender, socioeconomic status, or
cultural background, and to enable all students to learn science and math. This
project proposes to: (a) test tools, routines, and materials designed to develop
pre-service teachers' knowledge of their students; (b) identify instructional
practices appropriate for novice teachers at different points on their learning
trajectories; (c) support cooperating teachers in their roles as mentors; and
(d) investigate the links between agency and novice learning. In this context,
agency is the capacity to seek out diverse opportunities to learn and to
advocate for opportunities to plan, teach, and engage with students. The project
will develop ?opportunities-to-learn resources? and associated case studies.
These materials have the potential to help other teacher education programs
improve the impact of preservice teachers? clinical experiences, resulting in
more teachers who are prepared for their own classrooms, especially when serving
racially, ethnically, and linguistically diverse students. Cooperating teachers
(veteran teachers) may benefit from other project resources that will be
designed to guide collaboration. These materials will also include guides for
complex instruction and students' intellectual engagement. Adoption of these
opportunities-to-learn materials by teacher education programs, novice teachers,
and mentor teachers in host schools could create a common language and
understanding of research-based clinical practices, which could inform more
effective teacher field placements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on a
previously-funded Noyce Research project that documented how the clinical
experience of 68 pre-service teachers shaped their eventual practice, and by
extension, chances for their future students to learn. Based on these data, this
project intends to: a) strengthen the framework about systems of support for
novice learning during clinical experiences by combining findings from the
previous and the current study: b) develop a system of tools, routines, and
resources that teacher education programs and their school partners can use to
enhance pre-service teachers' opportunities-to-learn about ?ambitious
instruction? over the course of their field placement; and c) test the
implementation and effect of the opportunities-to-learn materials that the
project will develop. More than 60 pre-service secondary science and mathematics
teachers, and their cooperating teachers, will participate in the project. The
three teacher education programs involved in this research study recruit from
diverse demographics and send their novices to varied communities, mostly
underserved urban, sub-urban, and rural. This participation should allow the
project to improve materials and implementation procedures for their specific
context, and to disaggregate the findings according to different groups of pre-
service teachers and the communities served by their placement schools. Data
analysis should increase the functionality of the project's theory of action and
the system of supports across settings. Survey and interview data will be
collected to test if the system of resources influences the frequency,
variability, and quality of pre-service teachers' opportunities-to-learn. The
project will examine the novice teachers' adherence to a productive trajectory
of such opportunities over the course of their clinical experience. Study
findings will contribute to understanding how pre-service teachers learn under
supportive conditions, as well as assist the project in refining resources and
programmatic experiences to optimize the potential success of pre-service
teachers as professional educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.