* 1758282
* Studying the Retention of Novice Science Teachers by Learning from School District Induction and Mentoring Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Sandra Adams, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Retaining STEM teachers is a challenge across the Nation. This Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program Track 4 project seeks to investigate factors that
affect retention of novice science teachers throughout the first five years of
their career. The project will pay particular attention to understanding the
ways in which school districts design and implement mentoring and induction
programs that demonstrate success in retaining teachers. The study will include
examination of retention rates of science teachers in high-need schools, science
teachers of color, and retention of Noyce Scholarship teacher recipients. In the
United States, significant resources are devoted to recruitment and preparation
of science teachers, yet the mentoring and induction experiences that may
contribute positively to science teacher retention are poorly understood. A
better understanding of evidence-based practices for designing mentoring and
induction experiences for new science teachers could have clear implications for
both policy and practice. This study will use state level data, spanning a ten-
year period, from New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and North Carolina, to
identify school districts with exemplary novice science teacher retention, and
then conduct site visits and write case studies that describe the
characteristics that contribute to the high retention of science teachers in
these districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has two phases. In the first
phase, researchers will examine publicly available staffing data to develop a
5-year retention map for three cohorts of teachers in each state, with
additional cohorts tracked over the duration of the study. This staffing data
from each state will be used to map the career paths of individual science
teachers for a more comprehensive picture of teacher retention, mobility, and
attrition. By identifying districts that are highly successful in retaining
science teachers, the findings from this analysis will be used to set the stage
for the second phase of the research. In the second phase, the researchers aim
to closely examine a subset of districts that demonstrate high science teacher
retention rates. This analysis focuses on gaining a better understanding of the
role of mentoring and induction programs, as well as other factors cited in the
literature that may influence teacher retention. This project uses a theoretical
framework, based in research literature, that looks at teacher retention in
terms school contexts and personal/professional backgrounds. One state study
will occur in each of years two through five of the project, beginning with New
Jersey in the second project year. A subset of districts that are successful at
retaining science teachers of color, science teachers in high-need districts,
and Noyce graduates teaching science will be identified for further study. It is
estimated that a sample of 15-20 school districts per each of the four states
will be identified, with the aim of representing the range of district
characteristics, and mentoring and induction programs. From these districts, the
research team will select five to six exemplar districts for case studies that
will address the best practices, structure and organization, funding, and
critical issues in each district related to the mentoring and induction program.
Anticipated outcomes of this study include: state-specific reports on the role
of mentoring and induction and other retention-related factors for dissemination
(through policy briefs, conference presentations, peer-reviewed manuscripts, and
a multiple-case study in the form of a book-length manuscript featuring
generalizable best practices in mentoring and induction, as well as other
factors influencing retention), and the production and dissemination of a
shareable database analysis tool for calculating actual retention rates
(disaggregated by teaching certification) from existing staffing data sets. The
potential contributions of this study include the dissemination of knowledge
about how to better support novice science teachers so that they remain in the
profession. Further, this study will provide all states with a set of tools by
which actual retention rates can be measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.