* 1758669
* DFG/NSF: Novel Low Loss Coatings-Enabling the Third Generation of Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Martin Fejer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 271,724.00

A century ago, Einstein predicted the existence of gravitational waves (GWs)
which are ripples in the curvature of space-time. On 14th September 2015, the
(second-generation) detectors of the LIGO project made the first direct GW
detection. This was a ground-breaking event for fundamental physics, observing
for the first time a binary black hole system merging to form a single black
hole, and has opened a new window into the universe allowing us to 'listen' to
its gravitational signatures. The project supported by this award will enable
sensitivities envisioned for the next generation GW detectors and new
discoveries in gravitational astronomy, as well as an improvement of the
detection rates for black hole and neutron star mergers. Gravitational waves
cause changes in the separation of LIGO's mirrors so small that the thermal
vibration of the mirrors and their coatings, so called Brownian thermal noise,
will limit the sensitivity of current and future detectors. This project will
develop new materials with low thermal noise to be used in future LIGO upgrades.
This work is a collaborative effort between Martin Fejer's group at Stanford
University and Jessica Steinlechner's group at Hamburg University, with this
award supporting the US contribution to the collaboration. Progress in this area
will benefit a broader applied research community, since there are applications
beyond LIGO for low thermal noise coatings: atomic clocks, quantum information
systems, precision interferometry all demand low-loss coatings. The nature of
this multidisciplinary effort makes it ideal for training graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal noise in highly-reflective mirror
coatings is directly proportional to the coating thickness, the mechanical loss
of the materials and the mirror temperature. To significantly reduce coating
thermal noise, future GW detectors will be cryogenically operated. The aim of
this project is the development of highly-reflective multilayer coatings for
future GW detectors, based on studies of coating properties, composition and
structure, to meet the challenging requirements on absorption, reflectivity and
mechanical loss. While this project mainly targets future cryogenic detectors,
thermal noise reduction for detector upgrades operating at room temperature
detectors is also part of the proposed research. A key part of this effort is
optimizing coating materials which have demonstrated lower levels of mechanical
loss, such as amorphous silicon and silicon nitride; and investigate the use of
nano-layers, proven to suppress crystallization enabling higher heat treatment
temperatures, which can lead to lower optical and mechanical losses. Hamburg
will have a unique ability to deposit coatings using a pulsed laser deposition
(PLD) system with heated substrates and variable laser pulse durations. Stanford
has had a leading role within the LSC in developing experimental methods to
characterize the optical and structural properties of the amorphous coating
materials. This work will be underpinned by studies of coating properties to
understand links between deposition parameters, coating structure, loss and
absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.