* 1758386
* Science Math Access, Research, and Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Michael Fleming, California State University-Stanislaus
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,199,951.00

Science Math Access, Research, and Teaching (SMART) is a Track 1 Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program project at California State University Stanislaus.
SMART aims to address the severe shortage of STEM teachers in the university's
service area. While the region has an overwhelmingly large K-12 minority student
population, very few teachers are from underrepresented populations. As such, it
is critical to increase the number of teachers who share their students'
cultural heritage. The overarching goal of this project is to prepare a diverse
group of mathematics and science teachers who can serve as role models and
leaders in high-need schools in the region. SMART will establish professional
learning communities and provide participants with pedagogical training,
mentoring, and ongoing teaching experiences in highly diverse educational
settings. The project will engage participants in carefully structured training
and field experiences to help them develop subject matter knowledge,
understanding of linguistics, language acquisition, academic language
acquisition, and subject-specific methods to make content accessible to all
students. Other project activities will include monthly cohort meetings, a
summer research experience, and tutoring opportunities. In collaboration with
school district teacher induction programs, SMART will develop a New Teacher
Retention Program. This program will be aimed at providing incoming teachers
with guidance and holistic support needed to teach mathematics and science to
diverse student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a five-year period,
SMART aims to increase the number of STEM credential candidates at CSU
Stanislaus from 119 to 200. Half of these credential candidates will be students
of minority backgrounds. SMART will recruit, prepare, and retain 31 Noyce
scholars. Noyce scholars will include STEM majors from CSU Stanislaus and UC
Merced, transfer students from nearby community colleges, and local career
changers interested in entering the teaching profession. An energetic, capable,
diverse community of STEM teachers has the potential to lower the educational
barriers that minority and English Language Learner students often encounter
when completing mathematics and science coursework. A significant percentage of
CSU Stanislaus students are not only ethnically and linguistically diverse, but
also are the first in their family to attend college. SMART will provide the
educational community with a better understanding of the training and support
systems needed to recruit and prepare students of minority background for a
career as a teacher in a high-need school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.