* 1758659
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative High Throughput Automated System for Individualized Poultry Vaccination and Recognition and Removal of Unhealthy Chicks
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ramin Karimpour, APPLIED LIFESCIENCES & SYSTEMS POULTRY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project has the potential to help enhance disease
resistance in poultry and increase yields due to the delivery of only healthy,
fully vaccinated chicks to farms. These healthier chicks will reduce the need
for antibiotics in poultry, aiding to combat antimicrobial resistance. This
technology has immediate applications in other food animal industries and
fisheries, and allows for data capture on numbers of animals and types of
treatments given. Broader applications would include any image capture and
analysis that relies on analytics to identify target areas for delivery of
substances to live animals or humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will allow for the advancement and commercialization of imaging
technologies for the use of screening and targeting live animals. This proposal
brings innovation in the care of food animals allowing for producers to move
away from flock health and focus on the care of individual animals. This will be
a dramatic change for the poultry industry, but is necessary in the face of
antibiotic removal to be able to improve the current vaccination efficiencies
and screen chicks for health status. Individualized care is currently not
possible due to the high throughput needed to keep pace with large scale
commercial hatchery operation. The technical challenges this proposal will
overcome include 1) the safe and effective handling of chicks in an automated
system that can process 100,000 chicks per hour, 2) the development of imaging
systems for health checks and target recognition, 3) the delivery of the
appropriate dose of vaccine with the correct amount of agents (virus, bacteria,
parasite, and other agents) while not damaging the agents during delivery, and
4) development of a system that is rugged and robust enough to survive in a
hatchery environment.