* 1758383
* Long Island Mathematics and Teacher Education Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Luckner Jerome, Long Island University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,450,000.00

Educating high-quality STEM teachers is a national priority that underpins
progress in science, the advancement of national health initiatives, and overall
national prosperity in an increasingly technical economy. The Long Island
Mathematics and Teacher Education (MaTE) Scholarship Program is a Track 1 NSF
Noyce Scholarships and Stipends project. It involves a collaboration between
Long Island University Post (LIU Post), the Glen Cove and South Huntington
public school districts, and Suffolk County Community College. The MaTE program
aims to prepare scholarship recipients to become highly-qualified secondary
mathematics teachers in diverse suburban high-need school districts on Long
Island. Although many programs focus on providing diverse teaching corps to
urban schools, population shifts to the suburbs also require consideration of
teacher diversity. Based on the 2010 census, minorities constituted 35 percent
of all people living in suburbs, and the outward migration of minority
populations from the inner city to suburbia keeps growing. The MaTE program
seeks to respond to these issues by providing approximately 24 Noyce Scholars
with mathematical and pedagogical content knowledge needed to work effectively
in high-need secondary schools. The program emphasizes culturally responsive
pedagogy. The MaTE Program aims to guide three cohorts of Scholars, beginning in
their initial years in community college and extending through their junior and
senior years at LIU Post. During their tenure at LIU, each Scholar will receive
two years of scholarship support, as well as additional supports such as
mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This educational experience includes an
intensive clinical residency in secondary schools within the Glen Cove and South
Huntington school districts, both of which are in suburban communities with
large minority populations. It will culminate in a B.A. Mathematics degree with
a New York State initial teaching certification in secondary mathematics
education (Grades 7-12). The program includes a summer Calculus Enrichment
Program, organized and operated by Suffolk County Community College, intended to
aid community college students in their mathematics courses and serve as a
recruitment tool for the MaTE program. Collected project data will inform
participants, professors of mathematics and mathematics education, and community
school districts of evidence-based results related to the following program
goals: (1) Providing a replicable model for a successful collaboration between
university mathematics faculty, university education faculty, community college
faculty and staff, and teachers in local high-need school districts; (2)
Connecting content knowledge and best practices to develop a better prepared and
more effective new teachers; (3) Increasing and diversifying the corps of local
STEM teachers by recruiting students from underrepresented populations in STEM
who may, in turn, serve as role models to students from similar backgrounds; and
4) Improving the performance of minority students in secondary schools and
reduce the gap between majority and minority students by providing highly
trained teachers from similar backgrounds. It is anticipated that evidence-based
findings and the addition of 24 mathematics teachers to regional high-need
school districts will make important contributions to ongoing national efforts
to produce teachers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.