* 1758400
* Structure-Function Analyses of Plant NLR receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Plants are fertile sources of nutrients for a variety of microbes. Many of these
reduce plant fitness and productivity, and hence are pathogens. Plant pathogens
devastate crops, particularly in developing areas where expensive (and often
unsustainable) fungicides and pesticides are beyond the economic reach of most
farmers. Yield losses due to plant disease are also "water losses", since that
resource is often invested before disease decimates a crop. Hence, successfully
combating plant diseases through rational deployment of the plant immune system
will contribute directly to human and environmental health, and save lots of
water. Plants possess a sophisticated immune system anchored in the functions of
a family of protein, called NLR receptors, that detect the presence of pathogens
and trigger a cascade of events in and around the infected cell that stops
pathogen growth. Plant breeding has benefited from the ongoing definition of
plant NLR function. A mechanistic understanding of NLR function is a
prerequisite for rational deployment of the plant immune system in crops and for
the development of treatments for various human diseases. Researchers
investigating NLR experimental systems in either plants or animals recognize
that it is now vital to understand how signal competent receptors are organized
before infection, the precise mechanisms by which they are activated, and how
this activation is translated in an appropriate output response. Hence, the
broadest impacts of the proposed research project will significantly inform
translation to crop species and to human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the intracellular receptors of the NLR protein superfamily
which are critical for pathogen detection in the innate immune systems of both
plants and animals. Originally discovered in plants in the mid-1990s, NLRs are a
major basis for disease resistance in plants and have been manipulated,
unknowingly at first, by crop breeders as "disease resistance genes" for over a
century. NLRs were subsequently discovered in animals, where they play a major
role in regulating innate immune signaling in infectious and autoimmune disease.
Once activated, NLRs direct a complex output response that ultimately restricts
pathogen growth. Despite the central role of NLRs in innate immunity in plants
and animals, there is to date no generalizable model describing how NLRs
transition from an inactive resting state to an active signaling state after
recognition of microbial signals. Filling this gap is the critical unresolved
research issue pertaining to NLR biology in both plant and animal innate immune
research, and is the focus of this project. This project is aimed at
understanding particular mechanistic exemplars that span the wide gamut of NLR
modularity in order to illuminate the core principles underlying NLR activation,
specifically: (1) as a naturally occurring effector-activated minimal TIR only
domain (RBA1); and (2) as a small family of "helper" NLRs called ADR1 proteins
that use a canonical mechanism to control cell death but a non-canonical
mechanism to enhance sensor NLR function and contribute to the control of
salicylic acid levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.