* 1758912
* How do viruses evict close relatives, and why?
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Feng Qu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Virus diseases quickly spread among host individuals because viruses are able to
multiply exponentially in each of the successive hosts they invade. The fast
multiplication inevitably introduces high numbers of errors in virus genetic
blueprints (genomes). Left unchecked, these errors would render most of the
multiplied viruses defective, thus arresting the spread of virus diseases.
Conversely, natural selection favors viruses that have the capacity to control
error proliferation. Once better understood, such error mitigation mechanisms
could become targets of virus disease control and management. Previous research
unveiled a simple, elegant mechanism used by a plant virus that minimizes
multiplication errors. This mechanism operates by excluding the virus genomes
produced in any given cells from additional rounds of multiplication, thereby
preventing the piling-up of multiple errors in single genomes. The goals of the
research are to gain a deeper understanding of this mechanism, and to determine
whether this error-purging strategy is mechanistically conserved among similar
viruses. Discoveries are expected to ignite intense interest in novel
preventive, therapeutic, and management strategies that abolish error purging by
viruses, leading to more effective control of viral diseases, which will benefit
society at large. The conscious decision to enlist both graduate and
undergraduate students, especially those of under-represented backgrounds, to
accomplish the research contributes to the societal goal of educating high
quality future scientists through integration of teaching and research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Viruses block re-infection of their host cells by closely
related viruses through superinfection exclusion (SIE). SIE is strongest when
the primary and superinfecting viruses are identical. How this highly specific
self-rejection is achieved, and why it is conserved among diverse viruses, are
key questions of this research. Use of the the plant-infecting turnip crinkle
virus (TCV) allowed the discovery that p28, one of the TCV replication proteins,
facilitates replication of the primary TCV, but represses replication of nearly
identical superinfectors through SIE. TCV p28 was further found to coalesce into
large intracellular inclusions that trapped new p28 molecules translated from
superinfector genomes. Together these findings prompted the idea that the
"intended" target of SIE is progenies of the primary virus because, at the time
of superinfector intrusion, these progenies would far outnumber the nearly
indistinguishable superinfector. This project aims to test two inter-connected
hypotheses: (1) a repressive state of p28 exerts SIE in TCV-infected cells by
intercepting freshly translated p28 molecules in a prion-like manner; (2) The
primary function of SIE, at least for RNA viruses like TCV, is to exclude
progeny genomes from re-replication, thereby minimizing random replication
errors in any given progeny genomes. These hypotheses will be addressed in four
objectives: (i) determine the structural characteristics of TCV p28 in vivo and
in vitro; (ii) identify and characterize SIE-defective TCV mutants; (iii)
characterize SIE determinants encoded by two viruses of the family Potyviridae;
and (iv) determine the molecular mechanism of SIE in these Potyviridae viruses.
This project strives to identify motivated students from low-income, rural
families through close collaborations with a community college, and recruit them
as undergraduate and graduate participants of the underlying
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.