* 1758697
* SBIR Phase II:  Quantum Dot-Tinted Glass Luminescent Solar Concentrator Windows
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Hunter McDaniel, UbiQD, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to extend the function of windows by turning
them into daytime sources of electricity. The target market for this technology
is tall buildings in urban areas, where electricity demand is the highest and
the available space for installing solar cells is smallest. This technology
utilizes a window tint that can absorb sunlight and remit light of a certain
color through the window's glass to small solar cells located at the edges. This
technology hasn't been commercialized previously because most tint materials
typically absorb their own emitted light, limiting efficiency. This project will
provide a novel solution to these problems with a low-cost window tint material
made from quantum dots. The work conducted in this project focuses on scaling up
prototypes and optimization for cost and reliability. With this technology, tall
buildings will approach net-zero energy consumption or even supply electricity
to the grid. This would reduce the city's carbon footprint as well as save money
for the companies/individuals occupying these buildings, which would increase
their prosperity and welfare. This technology would also reduce pollution by
limiting the amount of burned fossil fuels needed to generate
electricity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops and scales up
the electricity-generating window prototypes to the square meter size, validates
long-term reliability, optimizes for manufacturing, and launches pilot projects.
The technology is based on luminescent solar concentrators, which are made by
tinting a window with a fluorophore material that partially absorbs sunlight and
then converts it to fluorescence, preferably in the near-infrared. The
fluorescence is trapped inside the window by total internal reflection and is
concentrated to the edges where small solar cells efficiently convert that light
into electricity. Utilizing this technology in windows to generate electricity
has not been commercialized due to unsuitable fluorophores. The fluorophore used
in this project are quantum dots composed of CuInSeS/ZnS, which solves the
problems of previous materials. Traditional fluorophores like dyes typically
have strong self-absorption, narrow spectral absorption, and poor stability.
Quantum dots are more stable, but are expensive, sometimes toxic (due to heavy
metals), and also suffer from self-absorption. The breakthrough in CuInSeS/ZnS
quantum dots is that they are significantly cheaper, avoid toxic elements, have
near-infrared fluorescence optimal for low-cost commercial solar cells, and do
not self-absorb. At the conclusion of the phase II project, prototype products
will be installed in at least one building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.