* 1758207
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Remote Sensing of Urban Tree Species and Tree Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Brenden McNeil, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 09/30/2019
* USD 18,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a robust methodology to
map the species and stress symptom level of individual broadleaf deciduous trees
in North American cities. The project will provide new insights regarding ways
to integrate information about spectral-temporal variability from remotely
sensed images with field inventories of tree species and stress symptom levels.
By furthering the potential to reduce labor-intensive fieldwork and instead use
new, high-resolution remote sensing imagery to assess tree species and stress
symptom levels, this project can help advance research on the interplay of
different factors on the health of urban forests. The project will help advance
the practice of urban forest management, which has significant societal value
because healthy urban forests improve urban air quality, enhance ground water
maintenance, and moderate urban air temperatures. Although this project will
focus on a case study in Washington, D.C., the development of an accurate,
robust, and repeatable methodology for using widely available, state-of-the-art
remote sensing data to update forest inventories of tree species and tree stress
will have utility in a much broader set of urban and rural settings. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than half of the world's population now lives
in cities, and the biodiversity and health of trees has been widely recognized
as central to the sustainability of urban environments. The doctoral student
conducting this project will develop a robust and accurate method to identify
tree species and stress symptom level to improve urban sustainability using
optimized suite of remote sensing data and machine-learning algorithms. She will
seek answers to two questions related to phenological variations in the foliage
of different kinds of trees at different times of the year: (1) With the leaf
pigment-induced changes in the visible-light spectral bands, will spring leaf
emergence and fall senescence phenology periods be most informative to predict
tree species? (2) Will the magnitude of decline in near infrared reflectance
spectral bands during late summer be the most predictive component to predict
changes in stress symptom level within a certain tree species? This project will
pair large field inventories from the District of Columbia Department of
Transportation with a suite of WorldView-3 satellite images to map the tree
species and stress symptom levels of more than 7,000 trees along Washington
streets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.