* 1758452
* Collaborative Research: Teacher Leadership: Investigating the Persistence and Trajectories of Noyce Master Teaching Fellows
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Brett Criswell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 246,933.00

The overarching goal of this collaborative Noyce Track 4 Research project is to
contribute to the currently-limited understanding of STEM teacher leadership by
examining the influences of teacher leadership development on the persistence
and professional trajectories of Noyce Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs). The
Teacher Leadership (T-Lead) project plans to gather data related to the nature
and structure of seven currently active Noyce MTF projects, the professional
trajectories of participating MTFs, the school contexts in which the MTFs teach,
and the leadership activities in which they engage. This data set will allow the
project team to address two main research objectives. The first is to determine
the impact of the professional learning models used in the various Noyce
projects on the professional identities and trajectories of participating MTFs,
and look for patterns in the features of those models that may be correlated
with teacher persistence. The second is to explore how different contextual
factors (e.g. STEM teaching responsibilities, school culture), professional
networks, and leadership opportunities shape the decisions of MTFs to remain in
classroom roles during and/or after the Noyce program. Additionally, the data
may support initial conversations around the opportunities in K-12 systems that
engage classroom teachers as leaders. Such data-supported discussions related to
teacher persistence could look at what are sustainable, scalable models that do
or could exist to provide such opportunities in ways that positively affect
teacher persistence. In summary, this Noyce Track 4 Research grant could further
the overarching goal of the Noyce program by determining what the structure and
mechanisms of STEM teacher leader efforts are that support teacher persistence
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The T-Lead project will
study seven Noyce MTF projects from across the country that include both in-
progress and completed professional learning experiences dedicated to the
development of STEM teacher leaders. These projects involve 159 MTFs from across
the K-12 spectrum, all of whom have STEM teaching responsibilities. Data
collected will include surveys and interviews with MTFs, administrators and peer
teachers at their schools, and PIs of the Noyce projects; analysis of project
design features; and artifacts from project and teacher leadership activities.
Both qualitative (e.g. coding of interview data) and quantitative analysis will
be conducted to determine patterns of project structure, leadership
opportunities, and school culture, which may impinge on MTFs' persistence in the
profession. Quantitative data analysis will use Structural Equation Modeling and
Hierarchical Linear Modeling of survey data. Data collection and analysis will
converge from a comprehensive examination of the projects and participants to
carefully-selected case studies that are intended to help map typical master
teaching fellow trajectories. The results of this project will be disseminated
through numerous local, state and regional outlets (e.g. local teacher
leadership efforts, state meetings and conferences and national research and
STEM teacher educator conferences). The findings are intended to help future
Noyce and related projects better design professional learning for teacher
leaders and better understand the unique challenges of STEM teachers that may
impact their persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.