* 1758345
* Preparing Mathematics and Science Teachers for Middle School
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Donald McEachron, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,199,374.00

This Noyce Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends project seeks to address the
national and local shortage of highly qualified middle school mathematics and
science teachers. Drexel University intends to recruit twenty-four individuals
earning a baccalaureate degree in a STEM discipline and to prepare them to
become teachers of mathematics and science in urban high-need school districts.
It is expected that these STEM majors will earn a minor in education and will
contribute to the teacher workforce in the School District of Philadelphia and
Philadelphia charter schools. In addition to recruiting and preparing these
Noyce Scholars to be successful in teaching in urban middle schools, the project
seeks to retain them in the system for at least five years. Undergraduate
coursework will be supplemented with clinical field, tutoring, and pre-residency
and residency experiences. The program participants will be immersed in
pedagogical experiences and discussions related to their discipline and to
teaching in high-need urban schools. These Noyce Scholars will continue to
receive mentoring during their first three years of teaching; this mentoring
will be provided by the University's newly established Early Career Practitioner
Institute. To support the Noyce Scholars and create a professional community of
teacher learners, the Scholars will also have an opportunity to participate in
summer workshops, work with project staff during periodic site visits, attend
professional conferences, and participate in an online social network created in
support of this project. In addition, Scholars will receive support and
mentoring from university faculty. By creating and sustaining this community of
teacher-learners, the project aims to create a cadre of highly qualified middle-
grades mathematics and science teachers for high-need urban
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use recent scientific,
mathematical, and educational knowledge to prepare and support the twenty-four
pre-service teacher candidates with an emphasis on understanding the culture and
life experiences of students in high-need schools. The project intends to
promote social justice teaching, which emphasizes connecting science,
mathematics, and engineering instruction to students' personal experiences and
culture. This connection can leverage the funds of knowledge that each student
brings to learning. Inquiry-based instruction supports this approach as it opens
communication among students by establishing a learning community of shared
knowledge and experience. Seminars related to mindfulness and developing
emotional intelligence will augment the Scholars' coursework. The latter will be
scaffolded to develop the following behaviors: professionalism, growth mindset,
commitment to serving all students well, and cultural competency. Essential
skills that will be developed through the coursework include understanding
students' cultural communities as a foundation for classroom culture and
building strong relationships, taking ownership of student learning and
professional growth, setting and maintaining high behavioral expectations,
leading rigorous and aligned content instruction, and demonstrating content
expertise and pedagogical content knowledge. These essential skills and core
competencies will be demonstrated in the context of teaching mathematics and
science to middle-grades students in high-need schools. Early experiences
consisting of linking content knowledge with appropriate pedagogical and content
knowledge with pre-residency and residency experiences are intended to
strengthen the Scholars' content and pedagogical knowledge while supporting
first steps into the world of teaching. Rubrics to assess the attainment of the
core competencies and essential skills will be used to collect data related to
the Scholars' proficiency in these aspects. It is anticipated that the
documentation of project activities and identification of learnings from project
implementation will be disseminated to the education community through
conference presentations, a project website, and professional publications. The
long-term and far-reaching benefits to society of this project are the potential
to document and share sustainable approaches, steeped in the context of social-
justice, for recruiting and preparing STEM majors to provide success in learning
mathematics and science for all middle-grades students in a high-need school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.