* 1758002
* REU Site:   Computational Biosciences Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Hilary Coller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 450,999.00

This REU Site award to the University of California LA, located in Los Angeles,
CA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019 - 2021. This REU in Computational Biosciences will provide full-time
immersion training in computational data analysis of genomes and computational
modeling of how genes are interacting. Hands-on workshops in a computer
laboratory will teach students the latest cutting-edge research tools in
sequencing data analysis, systems biology, and molecular and cellular networks.
Students will then apply these in research experiences in UCLA laboratories and
catalyze collaborations with home institution mentors. Students will become part
of a scientific community and engage in journal clubs, research meetings and
workshops, and professional development sessions. At the end of the summer,
students will present a poster on their research, write a final paper and have
an opportunity to present their work at a national conference. Students apply
online and upload a personal statement, a curriculum vitae, transcripts, two
letters of recommendation and a contributions-to-diversity statement. The PIs
and mentors will prioritize students who demonstrate interest in quantitative
and computational biosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need
for a larger and more diverse pool of students in the field of computational
biosciences. The proposed NSF REU will train ten students a year, including
students who would not otherwise have opportunities in computational
biosciences. Students will gain tangible and important skills in computational
biosciences, engage in a research problem, join a community of scholars, and
present their results in a poster session. Many will also present their work at
national scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available at
https://qcb.ucla.edu/undergraduateresearch, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Hilary
Coller at hcoller@ucla.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Alexander Hoffmann at
ahoffmann@g.ucla.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.