* 1758843
* Roles of Epsin1-dependent clathrin-coat in plant immunity against bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Scott Peck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 622,911.00

Improving crop production is important both for enhancing the national economy
and for stabilizing food security. However, plant pathogens greatly reduce crop
yields, negatively impacting these important goals. One approach to crop
pathogen management is to develop highly disease-resistant crops, and an
important aspect of engineering durable crop pathogen resistance is elucidating
and manipulating resistance pathways in model organisms. Increasing evidence
shows that for a plant to manifest a fully active defense response against
pathogens, cells need to make sure that the correct proteins are in the correct
location. In this project, a novel hub controlling the cellular movement of
defense-related proteins has been identified in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. Understanding the full roles and regulation of this hub can lead to
unique strategies for improving crop protection. In addition to its biological
importance, this project will provide multi-disciplinary training to better
prepare young scientists to be successful members of the national scientific
work force. In addition, undergraduate students will be recruited into an
established, multi-lab research training program to improve the scientific
understanding and literacy of first year university
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trans-Golgi Network/Early Endosome (TGN/EE)
is a protein sorting station of increasing importance in plant immunity against
diverse microbial pathogens in model and crops species. The role of the TGN/EE
in trafficking of immune cargo proteins to/from the plant cell surface is
critical, so that the cargo proteins can reach their site of function to
establish effective defenses prior to or in response to pathogen infection.
However, little is known about the molecular machinery that govern trafficking
of immune cargo at the TGN/EE. Here, the PI and Co-PI will utilize cross-
disciplinary approaches including immune-signaling and bacterial infection
assays, plasma membrane and apoplast proteomics, and live-cell imaging to
understand how the individual and combined roles of clathrin-coat proteins
control their trafficking function at the TGN/EE to maintain the correct
location and abundance of defense-related cargo proteins at the cell surface.
Data and tools generated from this proposal will allow formulating new testable
hypotheses on how to manipulate trafficking of defense cargo components for
increased immunity to bacteria and other pathogens. PM proteins are involved in
all aspects of plant biology from plant defense to development, hormone and
nutrient acquisition. Thus, gained knowledge will generate insights into
regulatory roles of clathrin-mediated trafficking beyond plant immunity. Broader
Impact activities will include active participation in the MU-Freshman In Plant
Sciences (FRIPS) Program to recruit MU-Freshmen into plant labs at an early
stage. Training will include learning to design and perform experiments, analyze
data, draw conclusions and communicate their results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.