* 1758786
* The Measurement of Scale and Process Heterogeneity Through Local Multivariate Models
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Stewart Fotheringham, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,864.00

This project will address several fundamental issues in the statistical analysis
of local processes through three types of multi-scale models that recently have
been developed. Such research is important because all data collected in both
biophysical and social environments results from a variety of processes, and a
fundamental characteristic of many processes is the geographic scale at which
they occur. This project will focus on evaluating methods that capture the scale
of spatial processes. It will provide new insights into statistically sound ways
for analyzing complex phenomena like weather, economic markets, and population
dynamic that result from multiple interacting processes occurring across a
spectrum of scales ranging from global (macro) to local (micro). The project
will provide new perspectives regarding statistical approaches to analyze the
ways through which spatial processes exhibit heterogeneity over space. It will
facilitate more effective use of models that allow parameters to vary over space
rather than more traditional global models that reflect a "one size fits all"
mentality. The project will help transform spatial statistical modeling from
being focused on producing average results which are potentially very misleading
to producing local results that will generate much more powerful insights into
the processes operating across space throughout the world. The investigators
will develop a comprehensive, open-source software suite that will make multi-
scale local statistical analysis available to researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although techniques for investigating
possible spatial variation in model parameters have a long history, the
development and application of such models has become increasingly pervasive
over the last two decades. This project will focus on statistical models that
estimate process heterogeneity directly from the data without pre-specified
groups, typically providing estimates of a process at every location in a
sample. Examples of such local modeling frameworks include eigenvector spatial
filter-based local regression, geographically weighted regression, and some
kinds of Bayesian spatially varying coefficient models. Multi-scale extensions
to these approaches have been proposed that allow for an individual indicator of
scale to be derived for each separate relationship within a model. Such models
are still in their infancy, however, and several issues, such as robust
inference, substantive interpretation, sensitivity, and efficient computation,
need to be addressed before they can reach their full potential. The
investigators will develop multi-scale extensions for three distinct local
modeling frameworks. These frameworks will be compared in terms of their
inferential and predictive capabilities in order to assess the relative
advantages and disadvantages of each. The investigators will derive a standard
definition of scale by assessing the meaning of indicators of scale from local
models, and they will analyze the indicators in terms of their generalizability,
interpretability, and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.