* 1758583
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Semiconductor Warpage Measurement Device
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Tong Cui, C&B Tech
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the enablement of advanced integration of
thinner, more flexible and heterogeneous semiconductor devices. It will
accelerate the adoption of next generation integrated circuit chips and bring
significant benefit to society through the development of high performance
electronics. Driven by portable devices in the mobile internet industry and the
cost reduction requirements in Internet of Things (IOT), integrated circuit
chips are becoming thinner and more flexible, whereas the working environments
expose them to more extreme conditions. This trend creates increasing challenges
and reducing reliability due to their higher inclination to failure. This
proposed novel opto-mechanical system is able to identify early indications of
potential problems. It can accelerate the recent industrial trends moving toward
IOT and autonomous vehicle by significantly reducing development cycle time and
engineering labor.

These emerging industrial trends have induced many mechanical reliability
issues, and are making it difficult to meet required quality and reliability of
semiconductor devices. Many of these issues could be anticipated in integrated
circuit design and on production lines with an instrument capable of measuring
the sensitivity at the micron level. The objective of this proposed project is
to develop a system for noncontact detection of premature failure. An imaging
approach and stereo cameras are used to measure and track the sample. The
anticipated result is to develop an instrument with ten-fold performance
improvement over instruments currently available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.