* 1758530
* EAGER: Developing Chemical Probe Technologies to Explore Glycolipid Exchange Between Camellia sinesis (Tea) and Associated Microbes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague from The University of California
at Davis to study plant and microbe interactions important for the sustainable
growth of Camellia sinensis (Tea). Soil microorganisms contribute to the health
of plants by breaking down organic matter and providing essential nutrients such
as phosphorous and nitrogen. This natural exchange is not well understood,
partly due to the complexity of farm settings, which host a wide variety of
microorganisms. The tissue culture methods and innovations in chemical probe
synthesis advanced in this project simplify the problem by focusing on the
chemical actors involved, rather than vast numbers of microorganisms. Student
and postdoctoral trainees propagate tea plants in environmentally controlled
microbe-free environments where all chemical inputs are measured. Plants growing
in this setting are fed chemical compounds that are designed for easy isolation
and identification of transformed substances. Plants growing in natural settings
are also exposed to the same probes and integrated data analyses reveal
differences between these environments. Together, these studies provide a
chemical basis for characterizing microbial contributions to the health and
sustainability of tea plants. Tea is the most widely consumed beverage in the
world, besides water. It is a multi-billion dollar import business in the US,
where less than 100 acres are currently farmed. The potential for US-grown tea
represents an important economic opportunity, if sustainable growing methods can
be established. Through the UC Davis Global Tea Initiative, the results of these
studies will be communicated to the Global Tea community as well as US-based tea
farmers who are invited for field days and seminars in order to maximize
knowledge transfer to the farming community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
undertakes micro-propagation of Camellia sinensis (tea) to establish microbe-
free tissue culture (TC) specimens for chemical profiling studies. Various
growth stages of aseptic TC are profiled and compared to clones being grown in
natural environments with exposure to microorganisms. The plants are fed
chemically synthesized probes that are functionalized to enable metabolic pull-
down with high sensitivity mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance
detection. Trainees learn both targeted and untargeted analysis to differentiate
plant and microbial metabolic pathways. Integrated data analyses, including
principal component analysis, is implemented to reveal important metabolic
relationships and to provide knowledge for developing synergistic and beneficial
plant and microbial environments that promote the growth, health and
sustainability of US grown tea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.