* 1758600
* SBIR Phase II:  SunDIAL: Slot DIscovery And Linking
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2021
* James Kukla, RedShred
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 893,511.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to search and understand documents across
domains. It is a powerful tool for consumers and businesses to route, categorize
and ensure key points of a document are seen. This makes it easy for overwhelmed
users to search, link topic information to knowledge bases and extract
customized data, even if they can't think of the right keywords. Online search
can infer the popularity or relevance of a page based on data from millions of
users, including a user's location and what they've shown interest in; however,
business users don't benefit from these features. Users view concepts in a
summary linked to a knowledge base, allowing them to see summaries, triage
documents on mobile devices, write rules to sort or filter them automatically,
and see key data before ever opening the document. This Phase II project
improves information extraction systems by generating answerboxes from complex
documents. Consumers will be able to quickly get the gist of formal documents
such as consumer credit contracts, insurance policies, industry solicitations,
engineering and other difficult-to-read documents. This innovation advances
knowledge discovery, information retrieval methods, information extraction,
slot-filling, and knowledge-base population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase II Project discovers unsupervised and
unrestricted slots and fillers (attributes and values) to construct structured
summaries based on keywords and underlying patterns in document collections. It
extends the state of the art by not requiring a manually crafted catalogue of
slots and complements supervised approaches by discovering new slots. While
conventional Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches are effective on well-
formed sentences, the techniques described here are effective for semi-
structured content such as section headers, lists and tables. Additionally, NLP
based approaches for fact extraction and text summarization are primarily
lexical, requiring further processing for disambiguating and linking to unique
entities and concepts in a knowledge base. This approach further advances the
state of the art by eliminating these steps as it identifies keywords and links
to knowledge base concepts as a first step in the discovery process. This
concept-linking enables terms to explicitly map to semantic concepts in other
ontologies such that they are available to enable reasoning and
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.