* 1758243
* Developing STEM Master Teachers to Lead Digital Conversion in K-12 Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Raffaella Borasi, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,999,951.00

This Noyce Track 3 Master Teaching Fellowship project seeks to address the
growing national need for mathematics and science teachers who are equipped to
provide instruction in digitally-rich classrooms. It builds upon previous work
at the University of Rochester to develop teacher leaders. It also takes
advantage of a newly formed Consortium of the University of Rochester and
several school districts in upstate New York, that are working together toward
district-wide digital conversion. The project will develop a group of teacher
leaders, known as Master Teaching Fellows, to guide district-wide digital
conversion efforts in high-need school districts. Digital conversion is a
comprehensive process that that provides each student with a tablet or laptop
computer and uses these computers to enhance student learning. Each Fellow will
engage in a five-year program involving 41 credit hours of graduate coursework
accompanied by related mentored experiences. Completion of this program will
lead to an Advanced Certificate in Digitally-Rich Teaching in K-12 Schools,
which is approved by the New York State Education Department. In addition, the
Master Teaching Fellows will receive annual salary supplements, as they persist
as classroom teachers who demonstrate effective use of digital resources.
Through its project evaluation, the project will generate knowledge about how to
prepare teacher leaders who can support implementation of high-quality,
technology-enriched STEM instruction by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty
experienced and exemplary mathematics and science teachers with master's degrees
will be recruited from six high-need, small school districts (including three
primarily rural districts) that are members of the Western New York Digital
Conversion Consortium. This project will capitalize on the long-standing
partnership established in previous Master Teaching Fellow projects between the
University of Rochester (through its Warner School of Education and STEM
departments), the Geneva City School District, the Newark Central School
District, and the non-profit Rochester Museum &amp; Science Center. It will also
add new partners: East Irondequoit Central School District, a local pioneer in
digital conversion, and three additional high-need rural districts from the
Consortium (Dansville, Penn Yan, and Auburn). With more rigorous learning
standards and the challenge of integrating new technology with instruction, it
is imperative that researchers and practitioners collaborate to develop deep
understanding of what is needed to achieve the full potential of digitally-rich
teaching to improve student achievement, especially in STEM. This project will
contribute evidence to the STEM education community about preparation of STEM
teacher leaders to integrate digital resources into instruction, to lead their
districts in digital conversion efforts, and to use technology to improve STEM
instruction and increase student engagement. This program for the preparation of
"digitally-rich STEM master teachers" has the potential to serve as a replicable
model by other universities in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.