* 1758976
* Modular biochemical networks of maize anti-pathogen defense defined by integrating synthetic biochemistry, genetics and physiological function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Eric Schmelz, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2022
* USD 856,000.00

Crop biochemical defense mechanisms effective against most pests and diseases
are essential to agricultural productivity. The natural genetic diversity among
individual cultivars provides unique, but underutilized, layers of stress
resilience. Maize (Zea mays) is the agronomically most important U.S. crop and
among the most genetically diverse. Conceptually parallel to the sticky sap
promoting wound healing in pine trees, maize is protected by inducible
chemicals, termed diterpenoids, that act as antibiotics to suppress pest attack
and disease. Empirically, maize plants lacking diterpenoid defenses display
dramatic increases in fungal disease damage. The current project unveils
mechanisms of crop stress resilience by defining the formation and diverse
bioactivities underlying maize diterpenoid defenses. Variable chemical diversity
between established inbred lines will be leveraged to identify diterpenoid-
biosynthetic genes and enzyme functions using state-of-the-art genetic mapping
and biochemical technologies. Integrating a systematic array of computational,
wet-lab and field-based approaches will discover the biosynthetic machinery,
chemical structures, and ecological importance of maize diterpenoids. These
deliverables will enable new strategies for enhancing crop protection in the
face of pressing needs for improving agricultural productivity. The activation
of diterpenoid synthesis by readily available food-grade fungi will be developed
as an educational tool in high schools to foster intellectual curiosity about
plant immune responses, their agricultural use, and the importance of
biochemicals to humans. The project will positively impact society by
discovering and harnessing biochemical crop defenses and teaching modern STEM
concepts and technologies through implementing high school Lesson Study Modules
using our integrated approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex combinations of
biotic and abiotic stressors can overcome crop defenses and promote yield
losses. As the dominant global grain crop, maize (Zea mays) contains unique and
largely unresolved specialized diterpenoid metabolites that contribute to plant
resilience by conferring quantitative protection against pathogens. A
foundational understanding and agricultural application of molecular mechanisms
underlying maize biochemical networks will be essential to further optimize crop
resilience. This collaborative project will leverage complementary genetic,
biochemical and ecological approaches to gain a precise mechanistic knowledge of
specialized metabolites governing maize disease resistance. Integrating
functional genomics, metabolomics, forward genetics, DNA synthesis, and
combinatorial in vitro and in vivo protein biochemical approaches will enable
rapid pathway discovery to elucidate maize-specific diterpenoid-metabolic
networks. Parallel generation and analysis of maize mutants in defined pathway
nodes will unravel the interrelations between fungal-elicited diterpenoid
biosynthesis and pathogen resistance in planta. In tandem, in vitro anti-fungal
bioassays of purified diterpenoids with a range of maize pathogens will
illuminate the structure-function relationships underlying diterpenoid
bioactivity. The cross-disciplinary nature of this project provides an excellent
framework for training postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students, and
will be leveraged to connect the project team with local high school teachers
for developing Lesson Study Modules as a platform to engage high school students
in cross-cutting principles underlying plant-pathogen interactions. To promote
research and education at the confluence of maize-microbe interactions and
agricultural innovation, knowledge, resources such as enzyme/metabolite
catalogs, mutant lines, and training modules arising from this work will be
broadly shared with the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.