* 1758674
* SBIR Phase II:  Smart Two-Way Shape Memory Polymer Based Sealant
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Lu Lu, Louisiana Multi-Functional-Materials Group LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2021
* USD 746,325.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to provide an
affordable sealant for sealing joints and cracks in cement concrete pavement,
asphalt concrete pavement, bridge deck, etc. In transportation infrastructure,
joints are intentionally constructed in order to allow movement of the
structural elements due to linear thermal expansion/contraction when temperature
rises/drops. Cracks are a common failure mode in pavement, and if not properly
sealed, can cause water damage and rupture of the concrete. Sealing cracks and
joints is a common practice to maintain or extend the service life of structural
elements. Various types of sealants are currently used with an annual market
value of about $6.1 billion. Unfortunately, many of these sealants fail to work
properly and are ineffective in extending service life. In this project, a smart
sealant will be developed that expands upon cooling and contracts upon heating,
a thermal characteristic opposite to that of concrete. The product will address
a significant problem in the industry arising from thermal movement of
joined/cracked structural elements. It is expected that the product will have
about 0.8% market share in 5 years helping with the need for longer lasting and
more reliable infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the development and validation of a smart sealant
technology. The root cause for joint failure is that the thermal expansion
characteristics of most sealants is similar to that of concrete, i.e.,
contraction upon cooling and expansion upon heating. This behavior is contrary
to what is required of sealants in order to avoid thermally induced separation
between the sealant and the concrete. Unfortunately, few materials can fulfill
this requirement in a cost effective way while maintaining other desired
physical properties (such as, deformability). This Phase II project will solve
the century-long problem through the use of a two-way shape memory polymer
(2W-SMP) based sealant that addresses the root cause. Building upon the
feasibility study of the Phase I project, the Phase II project will focus on
further improving the 2W-SMP based sealant for sealing joints or cracks in
pavement, and validate the product through third-party lab-scale testing, and
full-scale field-level verification in both hot and humid environment and
extremely cold regions. Technical outcome will include lab-scale validation,
field level performance and verification, and construction protocols for this
new smart material, laying a solid foundation for adoption by home owners and
transportation agencies.