* 1758678
* STTR Phase II:  Autonomous Landing of Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems onto Moving Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Timothy McLain, Planck Aerosystems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,420,912.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enable Unmanned
Aerial Systems&lt;br/&gt;(UAS or drones) to safely and reliably operate from
moving vehicles and moving vessels at sea.&lt;br/&gt;There is an immediate need
for this capability in many industries. In commercial fishing,
drones&lt;br/&gt;will replace manned aircraft for fish-finding operations,
radically reducing cost and risk. In maritime&lt;br/&gt;security, drones will
provide surveillance around ships, including locating a ?man-overboard?
in&lt;br/&gt;time to save the person?s life. In the oil and gas industry, drones
will provide rapid-response to oil&lt;br/&gt;spills by mapping the location and
extent of the oil slick, limiting the environmental and
economic&lt;br/&gt;damage. In hydrographic surveying, drones will identify and
geo-locate navigation aids, at a&lt;br/&gt;fraction of the time and cost of
current survey methods. In commercial shipping, drones will&lt;br/&gt;inspect
and protect shipping vessels while they are underway. In the transport industry,
drones&lt;br/&gt;will delivery packages the ?last mile? from a delivery truck to
a customer?s door. In law enforcement&lt;br/&gt;and border security, drones will
operate from moving patrol vehicles while officers remain safe&lt;br/&gt;and
mobile in the vehicle. These applications are currently difficult or impossible,
but will become&lt;br/&gt;radically safer and easier with the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project will advance the current state&lt;br/&gt;of the art in UAS/drone
autonomy, to enable reliable drone operations from moving vehicles
and&lt;br/&gt;moving vessels at sea. Shipboard landing is extremely difficult,
due to the heaving and rolling of&lt;br/&gt;the ship deck, potential high winds,
and the high precision control required during landing. Current&lt;br/&gt;drone
technology does not facilitate landing on moving platforms; this prevents their
use in&lt;br/&gt;maritime operations, and has become the main barrier to
commercialization in this sector. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will develop a
vision-aided relative navigation system that combines precise&lt;br/&gt;air-to-
ship observations with onboard sensor measurements to accurately estimate the
relative&lt;br/&gt;state between the drone and the ship. These relative state
estimates will be used to dynamically&lt;br/&gt;route and control the drone
safely on to the ship deck. Technical feasibility of this approach
has&lt;br/&gt;been demonstrated during the Phase I project, which included
demonstration of the technology&lt;br/&gt;in a relevant environment. The primary
goals of the Phase 2 project are to improve system&lt;br/&gt;reliability, expand
the operational envelope, and productize our system. The plan to achieve
these&lt;br/&gt;goals includes scientific development paired with extensive
testing, validation, and demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.