* 1758621
* SBIR Phase II:  Effective Treatment of Groundwater Pollution Using a System Utilizing Controlled Release Polymer Materials
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Stephanie Luster-Teasley, AxNano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2021
* USD 753,347.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will pilot field
test controlled release polymers (CRPs) as an in situ chemical oxidation (ISCO)
remediation material. With a controlled time release of the oxidant payload, the
CRPs technology treats contaminated water over longer periods eliminating the
occurrence of contaminant rebound resulting in overall shorter cleanup time and
total cost. ISCO is the fastest growing field among sub surface contaminant
remediation technologies. Current commercial ISCO deployment methods utilize
liquid oxidants as reagents which possess short term reactivity (days). To
address contaminant rebounding, these injectable formulations require costly re-
injections. This project would result in a novel product that is environmentally
benign and achieves sustained release of oxidative agents over extended
treatment periods (months to years) with a single application. CRPs are a novel
technology, offering a highly tunable remediation amendment for the $1.4B
Chemical Treatment Remediation Market. Ultimately, CRPs based treatments will
decrease exposure to groundwater contaminants known to cause many human health
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase II
research project will be to field test CRPs patented, controlled release polymer
technology for in situ chemical oxidation of contaminated groundwater. To
support field testing, a pilot scale manufacturing process for the initial
minimum viable product established in Phase I will be developed.
Manufacturability will be tested in terms of product quality and stability,
throughput, and cost. CRPs formulations based on multiple oxidants, will be
manufactured to address a broad range of environmental contaminants including
chlorinated solvents, BTEX (benzene/toluene/ethylbenzene/xylene), PAH
(polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons), MTBE (methyl tert-butyl ether), and
petroleum hydrocarbons. CRPs will be pilot tested at two field sites with
impacted soil and groundwater. The rate and duration of oxidant delivery and
contaminant degradation will be measured. In particular, pilot field testing
will assess the ability of CRPs to eliminate rebounding. Field data and
computation modeling will be used to create a remediation design tool to
prescribe future CRP dosing deployment strategies. Collectively, this Phase II
program will result in a clear understanding of in-field performance of the CRPs
technology to guide future full scale deployment and market
uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.