* 1758401
* Teacher Education for Equitable Mathematics Instruction: An Exploratory Study of Noyce Program Impacts
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Marta Civil, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Noyce Program, Research
Track 4, this partnership between the University of Arizona Main Campus,
University of Arizona South Campus, Northern Arizona University, University of
North Carolina at Charlotte, and the University of New Hampshire will examine
teacher efficacy and persistence. Noyce programs seek to prepare effective
teachers who can provide equitable instruction to diverse populations in high-
need districts. The efficacy part of the study will examine the development of
equity-related beliefs, knowledge, and practices of prospective mathematics
teachers in five Noyce programs. The teacher persistence part of the study will
characterize study participants' developing senses of autonomy, competence, and
relatedness, which are predictors of persistence. This research study will
include the participation of approximately 100 prospective teachers from
institutions that have recently received Noyce Track 1 awards. Half of the study
participants will be Noyce program participants. Non-Noyce pre-service teachers
in the same programs will serve as the comparison group. The project will
compare findings for Noyce and non-Noyce prospective mathematics teachers. This
development will be examined as it relates to experiences in teacher preparation
and induction programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to use an
exploratory mixed-methods research design. The investigators propose to explore
the following research questions: How do courses and fieldwork impact the
development of knowledge and beliefs about equity? How are knowledge and beliefs
about equity expressed in teacher practice? Which Noyce program elements are
associated with the development of one or more aspects of equitable practice? To
answer these questions, data will be collected over four years from project
participants across the partnering institutions. Data sources will include
surveys, interviews, work samples, and video of classroom instruction. Analysis
will be framed by theories of culturally responsive teaching (Gay, 2000; 2002),
equity literacy (Gorski, 2014), and Self Determination Theory (Ryan &amp; Deci,
2000). Project outcomes will include important knowledge about the development
of equity-related knowledge, beliefs, and practices in mathematics
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.