* 1758808
* Statistical Analysis with Computerized Linked Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,001.00

This research project will develop a new theoretical framework for analyzing
data obtained from multiple sources to solve important small area estimation
problems. It would be prohibitively expensive to produce statistics on spatial
and temporal granularity using traditional methods that rely solely on sample
survey data. Large databases such as administrative or census records in
combination with sample surveys offer potential solutions to these sparse data
problems, but methodological questions arise when these alternative data sources
are brought together to produce small area statistics. This project will address
these methodological questions by developing a framework that extracts the
maximum possible information from multiple sources of data. The project will
enable formulation and analysis of complex and challenging questions of
scientific interest and societal importance. The research results will impact
the definition of new data structures and models and software tools and
strategies for analyzing complex computerized data settings, such as social
statistics and business. Graduate student research will be supported by this
project. To further the dissemination of research results and support the
training needs of current and future survey statisticians, the investigator will
offer workshops/seminars/webinars in the Washington, D.C.
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Government agencies need timely and finer-grain data
to effectively plan and evaluate different government programs for the public
good. People generally are more concerned about statistics for their own
community, such as the crime rate in their neighborhood last week, than
statistics for the entire nation in the last year. The investigator will develop
a new general integrated model that combines a permutation linkage model with a
small area model to extract maximum possible information from multiple sources
of data available at different hierarchical levels. The model will be
implemented using a frequentist approach. The investigator will explore the
theoretical properties of empirical best predictors and the jackknife estimator
of uncertainly under the integrated model. The methodology to be developed will
be evaluated by extensive simulations and real data applications. During this
project, the investigator will address a number of challenging issues in the
presence of certain linkage errors, including modelling, model diagnostics and
model selection, measuring uncertainty of the proposed estimators, and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.