* 1758508
* Upgrading the Path to Mathematics Teaching by Adding Express and Multiple On-ramps
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Randolph Philipp, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,385,893.00

UPTEMPO: Upgrading the Path to Mathematics Teaching by Adding Express and
Multiple On-ramps is a Robert Noyce Track 1: Scholarships &amp; Stipends project
at San Diego State University (SDSU). UPTEMPO aims to increase the number and
diversity of highly-effective mathematics teachers in high-need California
schools. At SDSU, several impediments prevent high-achieving students from
considering mathematics teaching: (1) women and underrepresented minorities
often feel that they do not belong in STEM fields; (2) those who are STEM majors
rarely engage in authentic teaching experiences that pique their interest in
education; and (3) students who are interested in teaching choose not to pursue
a teaching career because they must complete and pay for a fifth-year credential
program. UPTEMPO activities aim to address each of these impediments. The
project will partner with Grossmont College, a nearby community college, to
attract new candidates to STEM. To attract STEM majors to teaching, UPTEMPO will
create multiple authentic teaching experiences. Experiences will range from
tutoring (in a middle school, high school, or community college) to teaching
labs for undergraduates enrolled in precalculus at SDSU. Additionally, to
support STEM teacher prospects, the project will develop new pathways, also
called on-ramps, to expedite SDSU students? ability to earn a mathematics
teaching credential. Noyce Interns and Scholars will be mentored by SDSU's Noyce
Master Teaching Fellows and other exemplary teachers in partnering school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPTEMPO will support initiatives to attract
(via new on-ramps) and retain (via authentic experiences and research-based
coursework) candidates from Grossmont College and San Diego State University.
The project aims to produce at least 44 new secondary teachers of mathematics by
2023. Thirty-two Noyce Scholars will be enrolled in SDSU's credential program as
post-baccalaureates. The remaining 12 will be undergraduates enrolled in the
institution's new 4-year teacher certification program. All Noyce Scholars will
participate in teaching experiences in San Diego Unified School District or
Sweetwater Union High School District, both of which are high-need school
districts that are partnering with UPTEMPO. Given the lack of a single ?best
way? to attract and retain teaching candidates, UPTEMPO will provide multiple
pathways (or on-ramps) for Noyce Scholars and follow these Scholars through
their first three years of teaching. This sustained interaction will provide the
field with valuable research regarding the efficacy of specific affordances
provided by the different pathways, as well as the ability of these affordances
to meet specific candidate needs. The project will also investigate the process
of supporting mathematics majors to develop caring perspectives toward students.
As such, project could contribute to the diversification of the teaching
community coupled with an ongoing supply of excellent teachers of mathematics
for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.