* 1758499
* Creating Pathways: Building the Region's Capacity to Address the STEM Teacher Shortage
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Caroline Mackintosh, University of Saint Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 104,826.00

This Noyce Capacity Building project at the University of St. Mary aims to
address the well-documented national shortage of qualified STEM teachers by
increasing the local pool of potential secondary STEM teacher candidates.
Project partners will include three high-need school districts, two community
colleges, and Ft. Leavenworth military base in the Kansas City metropolitan
area. With these partnerships, the project will implement a four-pronged
recruitment strategy that will enhance pathways into STEM teaching. Pathways
will be available for students from local high schools and community colleges;
undergraduate STEM majors at the University of St. Mary who have not previously
considered teaching as a career; and second career seekers/career changers,
including military affiliates. The project will incorporate strategies aimed at
attracting women and underrepresented minorities to become STEM teachers. Such
efforts have the potential to diversify the population of undergraduates who
pursue science careers. The expectation is that, with more highly qualified and
diverse STEM teachers, area students will be more likely to pursue careers in
STEM. Such an increase in STEM interest has the potential to boost local and
regional economies, which is relevant to the country's global competitiveness.
The project team will disseminate evaluation results, sharing key findings with
other educational institutions and communities that seek to attract and prepare
high-quality, diverse STEM teachers in schools and districts where the teacher
shortages more acutely affect poor children and children of color. The project
aims to accomplish the following objectives: (1) create a process for
introducing high school students to teaching as a career option; (2) improve
pathways for students transferring from community colleges into the University
of St. Mary STEM majors and secondary teaching certificate programs; (3)
increase the number of University of St. Mary students who major in a STEM
discipline and concurrently enroll in the secondary teacher certification
program; and (4) develop the capacity for ongoing outreach to military-connected
candidates/career changers. Project results have the potential to advance
knowledge and understanding of (i) how to recruit traditionally hard-to-reach
populations, such as military-connected individuals; (ii) how to leverage
existing partnerships, including those with school districts, community
colleges, and military bases; and (ii) strategies that are particularly
effective in attracting STEM students and graduates to careers in teaching.
Findings will be relevant for many communities and educational institutions
seeking to attract more highly qualified candidates into STEM teacher education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.