* 1758463
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the contribution of crustal deformation to the present-day tectonics of convergent margins: the southern Cascadia forearc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Eric Kirby, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 257,524.00

Subduction zones are the sites of the Earth's largest and most damaging
earthquakes. Between earthquakes, the Earth's crust accumulates strain, which is
observed in gradual movement of GPS markers affixed to the ground (geodetic
observations). In addition, the Earth's crust deforms over longer timescales of
millions of years, such as the uplift of mountain ranges. The relationship
between geodetic observations and long-term deformation is not well understood,
especially with respect to earthquake hazards in subduction zones. This problem
is particularly challenging at the southern end of the Cascadia Subduction zone,
offshore of northern California and southern Oregon, where the Earth's crust is
influenced both by subduction and by tectonic plate motion transferred from the
San Andreas fault system to the south. However, the geologic characteristics of
southern Cascadia make this region well-suited for understanding and isolating
the processes that could drive upper crustal deformation and earthquakes. These
characteristics include a combination of high topography, high uplift rates, and
high erosion rates; rocks and deposits suitable for dating; and three potential,
and testable, processes that could generate crustal deformation and subduction
zone earthquakes. The goal of this research is to better understand how
subduction zones work and to anticipate the size and timing of future
earthquakes. In addition to the research objectives, this project includes
partnering with faculty at Hoopa Valley Elementary School to develop geoscience
field and laboratory exercises for sixth grade students. Hoopa Elementary is
located in the heart of the region of scientific focus and serves primarily
American Indian students. Hoopa Elementary School teachers will join the
research team for summer field work. The project's university faculty and
students will join the teachers in developing hands-on activities and field
trips that will enable sixth grade students to practice each step of scientific
research using real data - the results from this research. The research project
would also advance other desired societal outcomes such as full participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in STEM and development of a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce through graduate and undergraduate student
training and support of an early career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
southern end of the Cascadia plate boundary in North America is marked by
transition from Cascadia lithospheric subduction to San Andreas transform
faulting. This complex region of deformation, the Mendocino Triple Junction, is
migratory in space and time. Localized rock uplift and erosion rates, terrace
formation, and river channel morphology have responded to northward movement of
the Mendocino Triple Junction and possibly the Blanco Fracture Zone, which is a
physiographic boundary between the Juan de Fuca plate and its Gorda segment.
Limited understanding of the long-term deformation in the upper-plate of the
Cascadia forearc and its tectonic drivers make it difficult to isolate the
earthquake-cycle signal within observed patterns of present-day deformation. In
particular, overprinting from different geologic signals - migratory differences
in the character of the subducting plate and the propagating wave of crustal
thickening associated with the Mendocino Triple Junction - requires an
evaluation of deformation and topographic change across a range of timescales.
This project is an integrated study of the Late Cenozoic uplift, exhumation and
erosion of Southern Cascadia. By using multiple geochronologic proxies that are
sensitive to different rates and timings of processes (i.e., AHe
thermochronology [rock exhumation &gt;1Ma], cosmogenic radionuclide burial
dating on buried surfaces that are presently uplifted [uplift rate constrained
from ~0-5Ma], and cosmogenic radionuclide-derived basin averaged erosion rates
[averaged over last ~100ka]), it will be possible to develop a record of
exhumation and erosion through time and detect spatial variations in the
southern forearc. The preservation of relict landscape remnants will be
exploited to reconstruct long-wavelength deformation/uplift patterns and to
quantify relief production in the Late Cenozoic. Finally, geodynamic models will
be used to explore the mechanisms driving permanent upper plate deformation, and
address how tectonic deformation of southern Cascadia may impact the signal
recorded in observed geodetic data. This research will aid estimation of
earthquake hazards at subduction zones by isolating and identifying the
contribution of (recoverable) earthquake cycle deformation and of tectonically-
driven, geologic time scale deformation at a site well suited to record ongoing
tectonic deformation and associated strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.