* 1758020
* REU Site:  Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Rolland Trapp, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2021
* USD 278,687.00

The REU program "Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory" aims to further our
understanding in two vibrant areas of mathematics: Differential Geometry and
Knot Theory. In each of three summers, each of the eight participants will be
presented with background material in each of these areas and given the
opportunity to pursue open-ended research problems in the field of their choice.
The unsolved problems presented in the field of Differential Geometry range
widely from determining efficient methods of expressing various sorts of
curvature, to developing their own theories regarding the types of curvature
that one might possibly encounter and even geometrically realizing these
curvatures. The other subject of study is knot theory, or the study of closed,
knotted loops in space. Knot and link complements provide excellent examples of
three-dimensional manifolds, and the field of three-dimensional topology was
revolutionized in the late 1970's and 80's following the discovery of deep
connections with geometry. The revolution was spearheaded by the work of William
P. Thurston on geometric structures, for which he was awarded the Fields Medal
in 1982. The unsolved problems in knot theory will emphasize this interplay
between topology and geometry. As geometric applications to topology are some of
the most subtle and significant discoveries in the last thirty years, these
invariants are part of an active and vibrant area of mathematical research.
Overall, these questions are of interest to mathematicians since they generally
seek to understand the structure of how the universe works, but they are also of
interest to the scientific community because of the potential applications of
our findings.

The Differential Geometry component of this project has two main goals. On any
smooth manifold, the Riemann Curvature Tensor is an object that encodes the
surface's curvature at every poin. It is known that this object can be expressed
as a combination of other types of curvatures, and the aim is to understand the
nature of how different curvature tensors could be expressed according to this
decomposition. Previous results present a deep relationship between this and the
number of extra dimensions one might need to embed your manifold as a subset of
Euclidean space. The second goal aims to collect the known work in a particular
class of surfaces and attempt to unify the work in this area into one theory,
complete with examples illustrating different aspects of this theory. The Knot
Theory component of this project focuses on hyperbolic links-links whose
complements admit a hyperbolic structure. The geometric revolution in three-
manifold theory demonstrated that "most" links are hyperbolic, and Mostow-Prasad
rigidity implies that geometric quantities are topological invariants.
Determining and understanding hyperbolic structures on link complements, then,
becomes an important problem in knot theory. Knot theory projects will focus on
the class of links called fully augmented links-links that have particularly
tractable geometric structures, which can be understood by undergraduates from
many perspectives. Despite their geometric simplicity, fully augmented links are
quite useful since they can be used to construct all links via Dehn filling.
Thus projects will further uncover the geometric structure of fully augmented
(and related) link complements, and apply this knowledge to links in general via
Dehn filling. Overall, both fields are rich with a variety of questions to
explore.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.