* 1758198
* Implementation of "Box Tomography" for high resolution imaging of Target Regions in the Earth's Deep Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 498,962.00

The existence of "hotspot" volcanoes located in the middle of tectonic plates,
such as Hawaii, do not fit within simple plate tectonic theory, which only
explains the presence of volcanism on the borders of such plates. It has long
been proposed that hotspots are the surface expression of mantle plumes,
conduits of hot rock rising from the deep mantle. Such conduits - albeit broader
than expected - have recently been imaged by seismic tomography, and traced down
to the core-mantle boundary under major hotspots under Hawaii and Iceland, for
example. However, these plume images are still blurry, making it difficult to
fully understand their role in the dynamics of the mantle, while the depth at
which others originate, such as under Yellowstone, are still debated. A new
methodology called "full waveform tomography", which aims at utilizing all the
information contained in seismic records, is increasingly gaining interest in
the global seismology and exploration geophysics community, as it holds the
promise of obtaining sharper images of structures in particular in the deep
mantle. However, such an approach is computationally very expensive, especially
at the global scale, as the seismic wave propagation needs to be computed over
very large distances and has to be performed many times during successive
incremental updates of the image. A promising solution is "box tomography"
whereby a target region of study is defined within the Earth's deep mantle and
the complete wavefield from earthquake sources near the Earth's surface to
distant recording stations is computed only once at the beginning, while
successive updates of the model within the target region require wavefield
computations only within the limits of the target region. We will implement this
methodology and apply it to two targets of geophysical significance: (1) the
Yellowstone plume and (2) the root of the Iceland plume near the core-mantle
boundary, which has been shown to contain a patch of extreme material
properties, which may indicate the presence of partially molten rock. Broader
impacts of this project include training of two graduate students in addition to
providing a better understanding of mantle flow in Earth's deep
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of mantle plumes has long been
debated. Broad conduits of pronounced low shear velocity have recently been
imaged tomographically, extending from the core-mantle boundary through most of
the lower mantle, in the vicinity of major hotspots such as Iceland, Hawaii, or
the south-Pacific superswell volcanoes. Better characterizing the details of
these plumes will help improve our understanding of the organization of
upwelling flow in the deep earth, and the contrasted rheology between the lower
2000 km of the mantle and the extended upper mantle transition zone. Also, there
may be different types of plumes, as may be the case for Yellowstone, where a
broad lower mantle plume is not imaged. To address this, full waveform
tomography based on numerical computations of the seismic wavefield is a
promising tool, as it has the potential of improving tomographic resolution by
exploiting the information contained in entire seismograms. However, to attain
the higher frequencies necessary for pushing the limits of image resolution, a
formidable challenge is the increasingly heavy computations involved. Also, not
all regions of the earth are adequately illuminated by the present distribution
of earthquakes and receivers to warrant much higher resolution than is achieved
today. A promising solution is "box tomography", in which a target volume of
limited extent is embedded in a global 3D Earth model, and the imaging is
restricted to that smaller volume, leaving the model fixed outside of it. In
many situations, both sources and receivers are located outside of this volume,
presenting challenges for connecting wavefields to reconstruct complete
seismograms. We have developed a "box tomography" methodology that allows
arbitrary relative locations of sources, receivers and target volume, and can be
applied with any wave equation integrator. A first application to continental
scale upper mantle tomography with stations inside the target volume has been
developed in north America. Here we plan to finish implementing the computation
of the Green's functions necessary to extrapolate the wavefield from the target
region to the external stations and to apply it to two targets of geophysical
significance: (1) confirming the presence of a mantle plume in the mid-lower
mantle beneath the Yellowstone hotspot, and improving its resolution; (2)
improving the resolution of the structure at the base of the earth's mantle,
within the root of the Iceland Plume, where a large axisymmetric ultra-low-
velocity zone was recently documented, and comparing it to the structure at the
base of what might be the lower mantle expression of the Yellowstone plume. This
project will train 2 students on state-of-the art seismological
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.