* 1758385
* Scholarship Support for STEM Teacher Preparation and Induction for Urban High Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Rosalyn Hargraves, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,199,405.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Track 1 VCU NOYCE Phase III project will recruit STEM
majors and prepare them to become secondary mathematics and science teachers.
The project will fund 25 scholarships/stipends/fellowships, including 12 STEM
majors each receiving two years of support and 13 Masters of Teaching students
each receiving one year of support, over 5 years. In this project, Virginia
Commonwealth University will collaborate with Richmond Metro region school
districts to address a longstanding shortage of mathematics and science teachers
and their retention. To address this shortage, VCU Noyce Phase III will
incorporate two recruitment opportunities including a summer camp internship and
a new service learning course designed to provide experiences in classrooms. To
support and retain Scholars in the classroom, the program will offer a two year
induction program that includes monthly support sessions with a school-based
induction mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a Phase III project, the current
effort will build on past success and implement new approaches for recruitment
and retention. This project aims to advance secondary science and mathematics
education by adding knowledge about culturally responsive pedagogy, the impact
of internship models, and the use of induction supports for retention. The
project will produce a collection of materials that can be used to establish
internship programs and to create a process/framework for Induction Mentors.
Four areas of research will be addressed to examine the impact of recruitment
strategies across Phase I to III: 1) the impact of the pre-service MT program on
the cultural competency of the scholars; 2) the adequacy of the induction model
across Phase I to III; 3) the effectiveness of social networking strategies; and
4) the sustainability of the program components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.