* 1758666
* Characterization of Convective Interactions with Easterly Waves, the Caribbean Low-Level Jet and Central American Topography During OTREC
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Yolande Serra, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2023
* USD 410,260.00

This award supports work on the Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
(OTREC) field campaign. The campaign seeks to understand the formation and
development of tropical convective clouds and associated heavy rainfall in the
adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial Pacific and the
southwest Caribbean, along with their evolution over the intervening portions of
Central America and Colombia. The campaign also examines the genesis and
evolution of easterly waves, large westward-moving atmospheric disturbances
(wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean
and eastern Pacific. The full set of campaign awards is discoverable on the
nsf.gov/awardsearch webpage by a keyword search on
"OTREC".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical convection plays a critical role in
earth's climate system and is also responsible for extreme precipitation and
hurricane formation. Easterly waves are of particular interest for weather
forecasting given their tendency to spawn hurricanes. More generally, tropical
convection is an engine of weather and climate worldwide yet poorly understood
and difficult to simulate. Work leading to better representation of tropical
convection in weather and climate models can thus lead to better weather
forecasts and impact assessments, both for the public and decision makers. Aside
from the societal relevance of the science, the campaign includes several
education and outreach activities including support for undergraduates to
participate in fieldwork and production of short documentary videos for use in
classroom teaching and informal science education. In addition, the project
builds international scientific collaboration through partnerships with
researchers in Costa Rica and Mexico. The project also supports fieldwork
participation by three graduate students, and outreach to local students is
conducted through short courses at the University of Costa
Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight week OTREC deployment consists primarily of
a set of 20 flights in the Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained by the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The campaign uses an airport in
Costa Rica for easy access to the equatorial Pacific and southwest Caribbean
study regions, and conditions in these regions are sampled using dropsondes and
a wing-mounted W-band radar. Dropsondes contain the same instrument package as
standard weather balloons, only dropped from an aircraft (in this case from
about 40,000 feet) with a small parachute. The radar determines cloud properties
such as the relative abundance of ice particles versus liquid droplets, and uses
Doppler shift to measure updraft and downdraft speeds in clouds. The aircraft
sampling is augmented by observations collected at ground sites in Costa Rica
and Colombia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this project is
easterly waves, which play a dominant role in the variability of tropical
convection and serve as precursors for hurricane formation. Easterly waves in
the southwestern Caribbean are generally thought to propagate into the region
from West Africa. But it is not clear whether easterly waves in the eastern
Pacific originate locally or reintensify after crossing Central America from the
Caribbean. Some studies suggest that formation or reintensification occurs
through instabilities of strong low-level jets which occur where winds are
funneled through gaps in the Central American mountains. Generation and
intensification could also happen through interaction with convection, either
over Central America or off the Pacific coast of Colombia, regions where a
strong diurnal cycle produces episodes of intense convection and
rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of jet stream instabilities in
generating or reinvigorating easterly waves is examined using data from
meteorological analyses produced using observations from the OTREC campaign
(provided by collaborators at ECMWF). The interaction of easterly waves with
convection over Central America is examined using satellite data and surface
meteorology stations in Costa Rica. These include GPS receivers already deployed
as part of the COCONet network (see EAR-1042906), which record the total
precipitable water vapor in the atmosphere. These assets are augmented with an
additional 10 GPS ground stations and 10 surface weather stations, as well as
two weather balloon launching stations. A key issue to be examined with the
surface stations is the timing of the maxima in precipitable water vapor and
precipitation, as the lag between the two (i.e. whether precipitation peaks
first or precipitable water peaks first) provides valuable information regarding
the organization and vertical structure of convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.