* 1758650
* SBIR Phase II:  User-Centered System for Improved Coordination across the Continuum of Care
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Thaddeus Fulford-Jones, Radial Analytics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2021
* USD 980,899.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on using analytics and technology to
benefit patients who require additional care to fully recover - or simply to
maintain their health - after being discharged from the hospital. Whether
subacute or community-based care, significant opportunity exists to leverage
machine learning, decision science, and advance data mining techniques to better
support patients. State and federal budgets cover the costs of care for millions
of Americans every year. This expenditure is growing faster than inflation,
prompting the development of both optional and mandatory payment reform efforts
that stand to simultaneously reduce costs and improve care outcomes. If
successful, this project will help reduce costs of care for healthcare
providers, payers, and government/society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to incorporate and improve upon user-centered decision science in
healthcare. The proposed platform will combine advanced machine learning
techniques with a patient/family-centered business model. The innovation will
harness multiple streams of healthcare data, such as claims/billing data from
acute, subacute, and community care settings. If successful, this research will
impact the state-of-the-art in healthcare analytics and outcomes
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.