* 1758537
* SBIR Phase II:  Effective Digital Tool for Spanish to English Language Transfer
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Ana Albir, Moondrop Entertainment
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2021
* USD 899,979.00

This SBIR Phase II project will fully develop and market a digital language tool
previously found effective in helping non-native English speakers acquire
language skills. It was found in SBIR Phase I that students using the tool
improved their test scores both absolutely and relative to their peers. Spanish-
speaking students learned more effectively when given native-language
educational tools in multiple subjects. Competing educational tools are not
designed to help those who are natively fluent in Spanish transfer their skills
to a new language. Consequently, more than 40% of non-native speakers drop out.
If successful, this project will bring to a wider market an existing educational
product (created by a small, minority-owned business and already in use
nationwide), and improve the educational opportunities for hundreds of thousands
of non-native English-speaking students in both language arts and the scientific
disciplines core to the National Science Foundation?s mission. Moreover, because
schools face significant financial pressure to improve student achievement and
because the product is competitively priced, it will be shown to be commercially
viable, and a plan will be developed to expand the market for the tool outside
of the state of California where it was initially
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An expanding body of research has shown
that language learners perform better on standardized tests when they can
transfer their ability in another language (Spanish) to the acquisition of
English. However, existing tools have not yet met this market need and focus
instead on English-only instruction optimized for students who already speak
natively. This project proposes to fully develop and market an existing
language-acquisition platform found to be effective during pilot research in a
large California school. SBIR Phase II research will address outstanding
hypotheses suggested by Phase I results, and determine whether the tool can be
easily adopted by stakeholders. Specifically, the impact of assignments chosen
by teachers will be disambiguated from the use of the tool more generally, and
the impact of English-only versus bilingual scaffolding will be studied in more
detail to tailor the product to individual use cases. During Phase II, the
product will also be integrated with existing academic systems and analytical
software, and competitive per-seat pricing will be developed such that it can be
marketed first within California and then nationwide by a network of resellers.
A successful product will be measured by its effectiveness in closing the gap
between native and non-native English speakers, at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.