* 1758495
* Developing STEM Educators with Resilience, Vision, and Expertise for Teaching in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Rod Diercks, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,774.00

This Track 1 Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program project at Doane
University aims to respond to the critical need for highly-effective science and
mathematics teachers in Nebraska by producing twenty-five certified STEM
teachers with the skills to teach effectively in high-need school districts and
persist in their profession. The project activities are designed to: 1) increase
the number of STEM majors and STEM professionals who pursue secondary teaching;
2) improve the preparation of teachers, specifically for teaching in high-need
schools; and 3) increase the number of STEM education graduates who teach and
remain teaching in high-need schools. To accomplish these goals, the project
aims to help the prospective teachers gain in-depth content knowledge, and
participate in independent research experiences. The project also aims to help
prospective teachers to learn specific instructional skills, develop social
knowledge, and gain cultural competencies for teaching in high-need schools. The
project will use evidence-based strategies and proven best practices that
include increased classroom experiences, rigorous STEM research experiences, a
seminar program involving high-need school partners, joint advising, enhanced
mentoring experiences, and support programs for new
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the project, Doane will partner with
high-need districts in urban, suburban, and rural Nebraska, specifically: Crete
Public Schools, Fairbury Public Schools, Lincoln Public Schools, Minatare Public
Schools, Niobrara Public Schools, and Wilber-Clatonia Public Schools. STEM
professionals and undergraduate majors in biology, biochemistry, chemistry,
environmental science, and mathematics will be recruited to the program. The PIs
will investigate how and to what extent increased time in high-need schools,
coursework, and seminars focused on high-need school issues enhance the
preparation of secondary teachers. They will also investigate the degree to
which joint advising, enhanced mentoring, and post-graduate support improve
persistence in teaching in high-need schools. The PIs will disseminate
information about the results of the project and project activities through
publication in peer-reviewed journals and conferences, seminars, and workshops
so other teacher preparation programs can replicate or adapt these activities to
address the unique needs of their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.