* 1758354
* Mountaineer Mathematics Master Teachers: A Networked Improvement Community Building Capacity for Mathematics Teacher Leadership in West Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 12/31/2019
* USD 75,000.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Capacity Building project is meant
to lay the foundation for a secondary mathematics teacher leader pipeline in
West Virginia. West Virginia experiences particularly prominent challenges with
entrenched poverty, economic stagnation, and low educational attainment and
faces lagging student achievement in mathematics due at least in part to a
state-wide shortage of highly-qualified mathematics teachers. At the same time
the state's cultural richness and strong community networks make for a unique
context for research and improvement efforts around mathematics teaching and
learning. The overall goal of the principal investigators (PIs) is to address
the lack of advanced teacher development opportunities and teacher leadership
roles in the state by having stakeholders come together to clarify the need for
mathematics teacher leaders, collectively brainstorm the formal roles teacher
leaders could play in improvement at all levels, and define the ways to best
prepare and support teacher leaders for work in rural, Appalachian contexts.
These efforts will inform the design of a Master's program in secondary
mathematics education, currently lacking in the state, focused on developing
mathematics teacher leaders. By creating a blueprint for a professional
mathematics teaching pipeline from skilled educator to teacher leader without
removing the most effective teachers from the classroom, this project aims to
improve mathematics teaching and learning across the state which in turn may
result in more West Virginia students seeking STEM degrees and entering STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Networked Improvement Communities (NIC)
methodology, this partnership between West Virginia University and Pocahontas
County Schools, with contributions from the West Virginia Department of
Education and a managing researcher from the American Institutes for Research,
the PIs aim to address the pathways and possibilities for mathematics teacher
leadership in the state. The project team plans to focus on the Chartering Phase
of a NIC, which entails developing a deep understanding of the problem, the
system that produces it, and a theory of improvement that articulates a set of
aims and actions for collectively addressing the problem. Feedback from
stakeholders and data on student and teacher demographics, student achievement,
and teacher qualifications will inform these efforts. A Chartering meeting will
involve project staff, higher education faculty, state education leaders,
district and school administrators, teacher leaders, and classroom teachers from
across the state, and be facilitated by a skilled education research consultant.
The meeting should serve as an opportunity to engage multiple siloed
stakeholders in collectively defining a complex problem and coalescing around a
theory of action. Implementation of these improvement efforts will be carefully
documented and analyzed to produce recommendations for fostering and supporting
mathematics teacher leadership in rural contexts which the project team intends
to broadly disseminate through national organizations and scholarly and
practitioner publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.