* 1758273
* Examination of Traditional Approaches to Tropical Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2023
* John Walker, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 247,640.00

Drs. Neil Duncan and John Walker, of the University of Central Florida, will
undertake research in the tropical savanna known as the Llanos de Mojos (or
Mojos) in the southwestern Amazon of Bolivia to better understand the
relationship of plant and landscape domestication by precolumbian farmers. Mojos
has been identified as a primary center of domestication for manioc, also known
as cassava, one of the world's most important crops, which today feeds hundreds
of millions of people. In addition, other important crops such as peanuts,
squash, chili peppers, and lesser known tropical cultivars, such as peach palm,
achiote, and cocoyam, may also have been domesticated in this region.
Precolumbian societies developed sophisticated agricultural systems resulting in
permanent changes to the landscape, in essence these societies domesticated the
landscape along with a diverse suite of crops. These domesticated landscapes
include forest islands and raised fields built over several thousand years.
Archaeological data from Mojos can contribute to modern agricultural development
through an understanding of how densely populated precolumbian societies were
able to produce food on seasonally flooded tropical savanna in a way that was
sustained for hundreds of years. The interdisciplinary research team will
include students from the University of Central Florida and will work with
archaeologists and students in Bolivia. In addition to generating data that may
benefit agricultural development within and beyond Mojos, this project will work
to enhance education and training for students and develop international
cooperation between scientists and students in the US, UK, and Bolivia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators, in collaboration with a paleoecologist
from Northumbria University (United Kingdom), will use strategic landscape
sampling, subsurface cores of lakes and wetlands, and stratigraphic excavation
of both forest island habitations and raised fields in the Llanos de Mojos of
southwestern Bolivia to obtain complementary datasets that will be used to
reconstruct and analyze the long-term agricultural history of Mojos. This
research uses palaeoethnobotany and landscape archaeology to define the history
of combined plant and landscape domestication in Mojos. They propose that
cultivation and adoption of specific crops, such as manioc and maize, drove the
domestication of these landscapes through altered fire regimes, the development
of raised field agriculture and clearance of gallery forests. Forest islands
were inhabited by both farmers and cultivated plants. Later, raised fields were
built to improve conditions for a wide range of plants. It is suggested that
raised fields added flexibility to these agricultural systems allowing more
plants to be grown in more places throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made possible by the SBE-RCUK Lead Agency
Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.