* 1758497
* River Region Master Teaching Fellowships in Environmental Sustainability
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Leslie Duram, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,196,759.00

To help meet the need for highly qualified STEM teachers in Southern Illinois
and surrounding areas, Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIUC) will
implement a Track 3 Robert Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project. The project
focuses on environmental sustainability, with the aims of addressing local
environmental problems and modernizing the STEM curricula, thereby training
secondary school students for college success and living-wage jobs. To
accomplish the project goals, SIUC is partnering with the Carbondale Science
Center and high-need schools and school districts in the region. Participating
schools or school districts include Belleville Township High School West, Cairo
Jr./Sr. High School, Carruthers School, Norris City-Omaha-Enfield High School,
Grayville Community Unit School District 1, Trico Community Unit School District
176, and Steeleville Community Unit School District 138. The project will select
fifteen middle and high school teachers with master's degrees to serve as Master
Teaching Fellows. Selection criteria include performance as educators, content
knowledge, and commitment to enhancing STEM teaching practice through innovative
and effective pedagogy. These Master Teaching Fellows will engage in summer
research experiences and professional development throughout the five-year
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to improve educational
practices of STEM teacher leaders through engaging activities, targeted
mentoring, and partnership with a local community Science Center. Participants
will engage in a five-year program that integrates four core experiences
throughout: content enhancement, research experiences, pedagogy, and leadership.
Through teacher professional development, science literacy enhancement, and
authentic research experiences, Master Teaching Fellows will lead their schools
and districts to improve STEM education for thousands of underserved students in
the rural River Region. Engagement of Master Teaching Fellows in collaborative
efforts to enhance displays and events at the Science Center of Carbondale has
the potential to reach learners in an informal setting and enhance science
literacy in the community. Leadership development will be systematically
incorporated into each year of the program through coursework, through pre-
service and novice teacher mentoring, and through school reform activities.
Program elements will follow a progression of topics through general
sustainability concepts, toxicology/waste management, biodiversity, global
environmental change, and energy. Coursework and authentic research experiences
follow these topics and will culminate in a graduate Certificate in
Sustainability designed specifically for teachers. will take science content
courses prior to engaging in five consecutive Summer Research Institutes that
immerse them for three weeks in inquiry-based and research activities mentored
by SIUC researchers and science education experts. Activities will be designed
to impart problem-solving, inquiry and critical thinking skills to students.
During Summer Research Institutes, Master Teaching Fellows will also develop
sustainability plans specific to their schools, such as reduction of pesticide
loading and conservation of local energy usage. Master Teaching Fellows will
develop and implement classroom activities based upon their coursework and
research experiences. These activities will be NGSS-aligned, assessed through
Action Research, and fine-tuned to maximize student learning. Student outcomes
will be assessed through pre- and post-tests, established attitude and STEM
assessment instruments, and high-quality tests developed by Illinois that are
NGSS-aligned. Master Teaching Fellows will be guided via leadership workshops,
coursework, and mentoring to increase professional knowledge, skills, and
dispositions necessary to lead and bring about positive change in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.