* 1758975
* A Government-University-Industry Partnership and STEM CareerBuilder for the  R&amp;D of an Innovative Computer Forensics Program &amp; an Education-Career Pathway for Girls
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Gang Qian, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 02/28/2022
* USD 830,871.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing and
interesting high achieving middle school students for advanced math courses in
high school and eventually in engineering careers. The University of Central
Oklahoma Strategies project ("STEM CareerBuilder") will engage with government,
business, industry, and community partners to design, develop, implement, and
evaluate an innovative summer program training girls in Computer Forensics (CF).
The project aims to benefit society through the contributions to the future STEM
workforce by better preparing today's digital learners with collaborative
partnerships, innovative learning tools, career exploration opportunities,
skill-acquisition venues, and education-workforce-development models. The
project broadens the STEM participation by underserved population through
strategic recruitment to target girls in Oklahoma where the highest
representation of Native American tribes reside. Partnering with EPSCoR and
TRiO-participating high schools will allow the project team to address the needs
of girls from low-performing schools, low-income families, and underrepresented
ethnic/racial groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to discover what
strategic partnerships and innovative interventions can effectively interest,
motivate, and support female high school juniors and seniors to pursue STEM
degrees and careers. The objectives include implementing interventions,
measuring learner outcomes, and assessing results. The project team will
collaborate with IBM, the FBI, the Forensics Science Institute, the Oklahoma
State Bureau of Investigation, technology centers, and women-owned businesses to
support the CF Program. The CF Program will consist of a summer academy, job
shadowing, mentoring, internships, and research fellowships. This project aims
to contribute new knowledge to ITEST's comprehensive workforce model by
extending STEM learning in simulated and virtual environments. As the learning
space and workplace of the future evolve around emerging technologies, examining
how girls learn, work, and solve problems via immersive human-computer
simulation and information communication technology will offer insights on how
to encourage STEM participation with innovative research that establish the
efficacy of the interventions. Project findings will deepen the understanding
of: (1) the role of business, government, and industry professionals in
promoting student awareness of job opportunities and motivating students to
pursue the STEM education career pathway; (2) effective ways to broaden STEM
participation by recruiting and engaging girls in STEM programs and career-
exploration; (3) engaging girls in STEM interventions with age-appropriate
curriculum and multi-faceted support; and 4) cohesive sets of experiential
learning experiences in the workplace that effectively and efficiently support
skills development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.