* 1758606
* Collaborative Research: Methodological Challenges and Interpretations in Network Analysis of Artifact Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* John Roberts, Jr., University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 91,132.00

Across many fields, scientists increasingly conceive of diverse research
problems as involving networks of some kind, and tackle these problems via
methods for network analysis. Archaeology is no exception. One particularly
fruitful application of the network perspective in archaeology has involved the
construction of networks representing ties between inhabited sites in a region,
with the presence or strength of a network link between two sites inferred from
the observed similarity between the sites' artifact assemblages. For instance,
research on the pre-Hispanic American Southwest has examined the similarity
between distributions of ceramic wares collected at the sites, with micro- and
macro-regional networks of sites derived from these ceramic similarities.
Investigations of these networks, and their change over time, via network
analytic methods provide important insights into social processes that are of
intense interest in archaeology, such as migration, population and depopulation,
and diffusion of ideology. However, this approach also carries with it grave
risks of inappropriate application of network analytic tools. These tools were
developed in other disciplines and may sometimes be ill-suited to the
archaeological context, and the archaeological setting can pose particular
challenges for interpretation of results from these methods. The current
research project undertaken by PI John M. Roberts, Jr. (University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee) and co-PI Matthew A. Peeples (Arizona State University) will involve
an interdisciplinary team working to develop in-depth assessments of the
validity of network analytic tools in the archaeological context, the
implication of methodological choices for resulting archaeological
interpretations, and the investigation of new approaches to analyzing
archaeological network data. This work will be carried out in collaboration with
a graduate research assistant at UW-Milwaukee, for whom the project will provide
in-depth training in network analysis and its application to substantive
research questions. Additional colleagues from the University of Arizona will
participate as consultants, and online tools will be developed to help spread
the project's benefits to other researchers, graduate and undergraduate
students, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address a
number of specific technical issues that are at present inadequately understood
in the archaeological literature, such as measurement of uncertainty in network
measures due to sampling variability in collected artifact data, methods for
creating graphs representing archaeological networks that distill complex
information into accessible visual displays, and comparisons between results of
network-based analyses with those of other analytic approaches to artifact
similarity data. The project will also explore more directly archaeological
questions, including the relationship between the spatial arrangement of sites
and the similarity of their artifact assemblages, and how network change
corresponds to other dimensions of regional chronology. Some data for the
project are derived from the team's previous work on the American Southwest, but
the project will also examine other network data from a wide variety of
archaeological contexts, times, and places. In sum, the project will greatly
improve understanding of the technical and substantive issues surrounding the
current practice of archaeological network analysis, while also creating a
roadmap for new approaches that will yield deeper archaeological
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.