* 1758292
* Collaboration for Excellence in Science and Math Education II
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* John Mayer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,450,000.00

The Collaboration for Excellence in Science and Math Education II project is a
Robert Noyce Track 1 Scholarships &amp; Stipends project at the University of
Alabama Birmingham (UAB). The project joins UAB's Center for Community OutReach
Development, UABTeach, and Lawson State Community College (LSCC), a local
Historically Black College. Through these partnerships, the project aims to
increase the number of STEM secondary teachers in this high-need area of the
country and build a new student pipeline to secondary education STEM careers.
Over the five-year project period, at least 42 undergraduate STEM majors and
STEM post-baccalaureates will receive Noyce scholarships to become STEM
teachers. Support for all scholars will continue through induction efforts
during the graduates' first years in teaching in high-need schools. The project
will also introduce community college students to STEM teaching careers. This
experience will provide developmental support for community college students
through a program of academics and practical experiences that lead to STEM
teacher certification through either a Bachelor of Science degree or a master's
degree with certification in secondary STEM education (MAEd).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the usefulness and success of
three models for preparing STEM teachers: Model Type 1 is a multi-year program
that will engage first and second year students and provide scholarships to
juniors and senior STEM majors; Model Type 2 will engage students in their third
or fourth year in a STEM major, leading to a 5th year MAEd degree with teacher
certification; and Model Type 3 is a one-year program that will engage career
changers who already have a STEM bachelor's degree. Model Type 1 students will
enter the program by taking inquiry-based courses at UAB or LSCC and informal
summer STEM programs for middle school or high school students. Many of the MAEd
students will enter the program by participating as facilitators in UAB's Summer
Science Institute, which will provide them with a taste of inquiry-based
education and in-depth STEM educational experiences. The models will
aggressively recruit students who are currently underrepresented in secondary
STEM education. This project will support the graduates via classroom visits,
Professional Learning Communities, UAB faculty support, and resources via many
Center for OutReach Development programs for secondary STEM education. The
project goal is to create a cadre of excellent teachers who will remain in
secondary STEM education and be committed to teaching and improvising STEM
education in high needs schools and to add to the knowledge base of how and why
these three programs are successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.