* 1758210
* NSF/FDA SIR: Assurance of Cellular Function in High-Shear Three-Dimensional Bioprinting
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Brad Berron, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 11/30/2019
* USD 90,592.00

Despite rigorous testing of drugs and medical devices in animals, many products
fail in early stage human testing. These failed products have the potential to
result in adverse health outcomes for trial participants and billions in lost
capital each year. The manufacturing of artificial human tissue samples is a
potential way of predicting human response to new, regulated products. These
manufacturing processes are being designed to use special bioprinters to print
human cells in three dimensional (3D) constructs. The goal is to use these
synthetic tissues as another screening step to reveal potential hazards of new
medical products before they enter human testing. The eventual goal would be
that only the safest, most effective products reach human testing. The 3D
printing process, however, exerts mechanical forces on the cells and leads to
cellular dysfunction or death. This project is a collaboration between
researchers in biomaterials at the University of Kentucky and cellular
biomechanics and bioprinting experts at the United States Food & Drug
Administration to determine how 3D printing procedures may change the way cells
behave. Changes in cellular physiology and behavior can, in turn, affect the
usefulness of the artificial tissues for medical product screening. As a result
of this work, researchers will be able to better predict if printed cells will
return to their natural function and how long after being printed this function
will be restored. With this new information, researchers will be able to develop
and evaluate new methods to preserve normal cellular function during tissue
manufacturing. During this project, the research team will also develop publicly
available, educational tools that describe the science and engineering concepts
underlying three dimensional bioprinting.

This project seeks to determine how 3D bioprinting affects cellular physiology,
in particular cellular membrane transport. It is known that the high shear
environment of the bioprinting nozzle impacts cellular response; however, the
precise changes in the cells and whether normal function can be recovered within
a range of bioprinting parameters has not been assessed. This gap in knowledge
makes it difficult to determine if a 3D printed tissue actually will replicate
normal (or defined pathological) physiology -- a key feature if such bioprinted
tissue structures are going to be used for pre-clinical assessment of drugs or
medical devices. The scientific objectives of this proposal are to: 1) quantify
the magnitude and timescale of unnatural transport across the cell membrane,
including multiple forms of active and passive transport, following simulated
extrusion bioprinting; and 2) quantify how cellular coatings, which are
hypothesized to protect cells from mechanical damage, affect the extrusion-based
alterations in cellular membrane transport. In addition to measurements of
membrane transport, appropriate assays for basic cell function and viability
will also be conducted for each cell type. Experiments will be conducted using
five cell lines (HepG2 - hepatic; Caco2 - intestinal; H9C2 - myocardial; A549 -
human lung carcinoma; and mesenchymal stem cells), each of which is of current
interest in the biomanufacturing arena. This collaboration will result in mutual
education, with the post-doctoral fellow becoming trained in the area of
regulatory affairs and the PI educating CDRH (Center for Devices and Radiologic
Health) team members at the FDA on emerging technology for encapsulated cell
systems and devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.