* 1758500
* MATH AND SCIENCE SCHOLARS FOR THE INLAND EMPIRE
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2025
* David Polcyn, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 962,913.00

This Noyce Track 1 project, Math and Science Scholars for the Inland Empire,
aims to enhance mathematics and science teaching in San Bernardino City Unified
School District (SBCUSD), one of California's most challenged public-school
districts. This project will address the shortage of well-qualified secondary
STEM teachers in SBCUSD through effective teacher preparation and support. It
will also support long-term capacity building by expanding professional
development activities for master teachers in the district, including training
to effectively mentor new teachers. This project builds upon the success of
prior Noyce grants and seeks to 1) strengthen and expand recruitment of both
mathematics and science Scholars at California State University-San Bernardino,
as well as master teachers in the SBCUSD who will mentor the Scholars; and 2)
build a cadre of teacher leaders in the district who are effective at and
passionate about mentoring both Noyce Scholars and new teacher at their
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to recruit 25 secondary science
and mathematics teachers from a viable pool of STEM majors at California State
University-San Bernardino. The project will provide Noyce scholars with
extensive preparation for teaching, including early field experiences in a high-
need school. Supports from mentor teachers before and after the Noyce Scholars
earn their teaching credentials are intended to assist in retaining these
highly-qualified teachers in high need school districts. A new Early Teaching
Experience in Mathematics and Science component will be introduced at the
institution to improve recruitment of STEM majors, thus growing the pipeline of
future STEM teachers. Additionally, the project will develop an innovative
support network that features campus enrichment activities, an online Noyce
Scholars community, and an extensive mentoring program with in-service teachers
in the area. The project's research agenda includes investigation of the extent
to which the classroom-based mentoring model that will be implemented improves
teacher retention and new teacher preparedness. The overarching benefit of this
project is in its intent to develop 25 well-prepared STEM teachers. The project
also has potential value to other universities and districts that want to
develop successful recruiting and mentoring programs for pre-service
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.