* 1758849
* Chromatic Homotopy Theory: Journey to the Frontier
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Michael Hill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2020
* USD 38,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides partial support for the event
"Chromatic Homotopy Theory: Journey to the Frontier" that will take place May
16-20, 2018 at the University of Colorado, Boulder. This five day event will
consist of a two-day workshop followed by a three-day conference. The goal is to
promote the work of young researchers in the field, while providing an
opportunity for graduate students and early career mathematicians from smaller
and/or underfunded institutions to meet the experts in a friendly and thriving
environment. Confirmed speakers for the conference come from across the world,
including America, Asia and Europe. This meeting will help increase
communication and collaboration among the worldwide topology community. The
event will be filmed and made available on the internet, thereby broadening its
impact. Resources on chromatic homotopy theory are sparse and these videos will
also help increase the accessibility of the field.

Chromatic homotopy theory is a deep and difficult branch of homotopy theory
which has undergone significant computational and conceptual advances in the
recent past. These advances often involve ideas at the interplay of algebraic
geometry, number theory, higher category theory, and even quantum field theory.
The primary scientific aim of this conference is to survey some of these
connections and their impact on the field today. The research of the invited
speakers is on the forefront of new developments in the field. Most of them are
early career mathematicians whose work is influencing the discipline in new and
innovative ways. The workshop preceding the conference will consist of a mini-
course covering some of the background necessary for younger participants to
fully benefit from the conference. Some of the very best researchers in
chromatic homotopy theory will be contributing to the lectures of the workshop.
More information is available at https://sites.google.com/view/chtjourney.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.