* 1758289
* Identifying and Addressing Factors that Contribute to Michigan's STEM Educator Shortage
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Matthew Draud, Siena Heights University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2019
* USD 123,901.00

In this Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Capacity Building project,
Siena Heights University (SHU) will work to identify and address the causes of
Southeast Michigan's STEM educator shortage. Based on that knowledge the
principal investigators (PIs) will start building a pipeline of highly-qualified
secondary STEM educators and share the results with partners in secondary and
higher education throughout the region. Over the funding period, the project
team will develop action plans for increasing retention and graduation rates in
SHU's secondary education program and Michigan Test for Teacher Certification
(MTTC) pass rates for students who graduate. The PIs intend to use the plans as
the basis of a future Noyce Scholarships and Stipends Track 1
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHU will conduct the project in partnership with
Jackson College, a local two-year college, and nearby high-need education
agencies, Adrian, Hudson, Madison, and Morenci Public Schools. Faculty in SHU's
Division of Education and Division of Computing, Mathematics, and Sciences will
assess institutional and community needs and develop collaborative partnerships
to increase the number of high school, transfer, and SHU undergraduates who
pursue careers in secondary STEM education. The project team will work on ways
to recruit more biology and chemistry students into the secondary education
certification program (regionally, the disciplines of highest need), identify
barriers to student retention in these disciplines, and establish action plans
to increase retention, graduation, and MTTC pass rates. Intended outcomes of the
work also include the establishment of pathways for high school and community
college transfer students to pursue secondary STEM teaching careers.
Furthermore, the PIs aim to assess and develop SHU's secondary STEM education
curriculum, advising, and academic support systems. The project team will study
the benefits of web-based, on-demand learning modules, integrated supplemental
instruction in biology and chemistry and develop a 2 + 3 certification pathway
for two-year college students. Results from this study will add to the knowledge
base of effective strategies for guiding students into successful careers as
secondary STEM educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.