* 1758317
* Preparing STEM Master Teacher Fellows in the Greater New York City Area
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Amanda Gunning, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,457,887.00

This Noyce Track 3 project at Mercy College, a Hispanic Serving Institution,
will respond to the critical need for developing highly effective K-12
mathematics and science teacher leaders in the greater New York City area. Mercy
College will partner with Sarah Lawrence College Center for the Urban River at
Beczak and New York University's Tandon School of Engineering. The project will
have an impact on students in high-need partner school districts in New York
(Elmsford, New Rochelle, Ossining and Yonkers), who will benefit by having
highly-qualified mathematics and science teacher leaders from underrepresented
groups. Over a six-year period, the Track 3 project will prepare 14 in-service
K-12 teachers of mathematics and science to become leaders in their school and
district. The project's goals are to develop K-12 teacher leaders, with a focus
on groups who are underrepresented in STEM; improve K-12 STEM instruction;
increase understanding of teacher development for STEM pedagogy; and enhance
understanding of Professional Learning Communities for STEM Faculty. The project
will prepare STEM teacher leaders skilled in student-centered learning tied to
real-world STEM issues and grounded in best practices. As a result, Fellows will
be ready to support student achievement and interest in STEM and lead other
teachers in improving STEM teaching and learning in their classrooms and
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mercy Fellows will engage in an intensive
professional development program that includes STEM education coursework and
professional experiences with partner institutions who have demonstrated
excellence in teacher professional development. Project partners include the
Sarah Lawrence College Center for the Urban River at Beczak, a nonprofit focused
on environmental education and local connections. Partners will contribute
enrichment activities and faculty expertise to the Mercy Noyce project. Fellows
will benefit from faculty mentoring, bi-monthly meetings, funding for leadership
projects, and receipt of salary supplements. These supports will prepare Fellows
to implement high-quality STEM education practices in their high-need school and
school district. The project will enhance teachers' ability to take on STEM
leadership roles within their schools. With frequent contact and mentoring by
STEM and education faculty at Mercy College, project leaders will guide Fellows
through STEM education coursework, leadership projects, and professional
presentations of their work. Project activities will be well-aligned with
hallmarks of effective professional development and experiences to retain
teachers in high-need school districts. A major component of the project is the
vertical Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) that will support standards-
based instruction. Data collected will inform the impacts of STEM pedagogy
training using these communities to develop best practices, including those
designed to recruit and engage traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM.
Faculty collaboration across STEM and education departments and participation in
PLCs will be examined to determine how they can best support STEM education
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.