* 1758455
* Math for America Los Angeles: Elevating Mathematics and Computer Science Instruction through Teacher Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Zachary Dodds, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,999,995.00

Noyce Track 3: Master Teacher Fellowships project seeks to address the problem
of unequal access to quality mathematics and computer science education in high-
need school districts. One reason for this inequity is a shortage of highly-
effective mathematics and computer science teachers in secondary schools. This
project aims to (1) improve access to high-quality mathematics and computer
science instruction in secondary schools in the greater Los Angeles area; (2)
cultivate teacher leaders through intensive professional development; and (3)
conduct research on the relationship between teachers' participation in
communities of practice and their development of teacher leadership. The project
will involve collaborative efforts between University of Southern California,
Harvey Mudd College, six school districts in the greater Los Angeles area, and
the nonprofit Math for America Los Angeles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will fund a total of 34 Master Teaching Fellows over two cohorts to meet varying
critical needs involving mathematics and/or computer science in their school.
Pairs of teachers from the same school will be selected as Fellows. Fellows will
create an improvement plan for their schools' mathematics and/or computer
science instructional needs. They will also participate in monthly professional
development meetings, summer computer science training designed by the
investigators, and academic team teaching with Fellows at their school. In
addition to helping teachers produce sustainable change within their departments
and schools, this project will also explore effective means to support the
integration of computing and mathematics in secondary instruction. In addition,
this project will produce new knowledge about the relationship between teachers'
participation in communities of practice, the development of teacher leadership,
and the development of teachers' equitable and ambitious teaching practices.
Such systemic improvements have potential to produce more equitable outcomes in
STEM instruction in high-need districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.