* 1758513
* The Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection (OTREC) Field Campaign:  Support for Field Activities and Post-Campaign Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2023
* USD 667,101.00

This grant supports work on the Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
(OTREC) field campaign. The campaign seeks to understand the formation and
development of tropical convective clouds and associated heavy rainfall in the
adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial Pacific and the
southwest Caribbean, along with their evolution over the intervening portions of
Central America and Colombia. The campaign also examines the genesis and
evolution of easterly waves, large westward-moving atmospheric disturbances
(wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean
and eastern Pacific. The full set of campaign grants is discoverable on the
nsf.gov/awardsearch webpage by a keyword search on
"OTREC".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical convection plays a critical role in
earth's climate system and is also responsible for extreme precipitation and
hurricane formation. Easterly waves are of particular interest for weather
forecasting given their tendency to spawn hurricanes. More generally, tropical
convection is an engine of weather and climate worldwide yet poorly understood
and difficult to simulate. Work leading to better representation of tropical
convection in weather and climate models can thus lead to better weather
forecasts and impact assessments, both for the public and decision makers. Aside
from the societal relevance of the science, the campaign includes several
education and outreach activities including support for undergraduates to
participate in fieldwork and production of short documentary videos for use in
classroom teaching and informal science education. In addition, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) of this grant incorporate results from the campaign into
their outreach to New Mexico high schools, in part through a class on weather
and climate offered in the Masters of Science Teaching program at New Mexico
Tech. They also develop materials for K-12 classroom teaching in their state.
The project supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral research fellow,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight-week OTREC deployment consists primarily of
a set of 20 flights of the Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained by the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The campaign uses an airport in
Costa Rica for easy access to the equatorial Pacific and southwest Caribbean
study regions, and conditions in these regions are sampled using dropsondes and
a wing-mounted W-band radar. Dropsondes contain the same instrument package as
standard weather balloons, only dropped from an aircraft (in this case from
about 40,000 feet) with a small parachute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
intensive study we lack a satisfactory theory for how environmental conditions
determine when and where tropical convection will form, how long it will last,
how much it will expand and organize, and how much rain it will produce. The PIs
have developed a theory in which deep convection over warm oceans is controlled
by three thermodynamic factors: heat and moisture coming from the underlying
ocean, the "saturation fraction" of the atmospheric column (a kind of bulk
relative humidity), and moist convective instability (with a counterintuitive
association between weaker instability and heavier rainfall). But the theory
assumes uniform atmospheric and oceanic conditions, and this assumption may not
hold in the eastern equatorial Pacific. Instead, the region features a large
north-south contrast in sea surface temperature (SST) accompanied by a narrow
east-west convection band called the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). The
sharp SST contrast provides an alternative explanation for ITCZ convection, as
near-surface winds generally blow across the temperature contrast and converge
over the warmer SSTs. Rising motion where low-level winds converge can produce
convection, but the observed convection does not clearly match expectations
based on SST contrast arguments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further issue involves
the vertical structure of convective clouds, as convective clouds in the eastern
Pacific ITCZ are relatively shallow yet they produce rain rates similar to their
deeper counterparts over the western Pacific. The PIs have an explanation for
the development of heavy rain from mid-depth convection which can be tested
using campaign data. A further mystery is that satellite data from the NASA
Tropical Rainfall Measurement Mission (TRMM) seem to show a large amount of
stratiform rain in the eastern Pacific, even though high stratiform rain
fraction is usually associated with the anvil cloud and decaying cloud plumes
found in regions of deep convection. The PIs argue that cloud features
identified as stratiform rain in TRMM data should instead be classified as weak
cellular convection, thus removing the inconsistency between stratiform rain
amounts and relatively shallow convection. The combination of dropsonde and
airborne radar data should suffice to distinguish between stratiform rain clouds
and weak cellular convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, SSTs in the
southwest Caribbean are quite uniform so convection does not develop from SST-
induced wind convergence. Moreover, mid-tropospheric air over the area is
relatively dry and thus not conducive to convection and heavy rainfall. Yet
convection and heavy rainfall still occur, often associated with the passage of
easterly waves. These waves appear on a weekly basis and sometimes cross Central
America to reach the eastern Pacific. But it is not clear whether the majority
of easterly waves in the eastern Pacific come from the Caribbean or if they form
locally. These issues are also addressed in the
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.