* 1758834
* Conference: Interviewers and Their Effects from a Total Survey Error Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Allyson Holbrook, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2020
* USD 90,000.00

This award provides support for an international conference on "Interviewers and
Their Effects from a Total Survey Error Perspective." The conference will be
held in February 2019 at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The conference will
focus on the study of interviewers as a source of survey error and the
implications of research on this topic for survey practice. It will bring
together up to 50 scholars from the US and other countries. The conference will
produce results important to survey methodology and related social science
fields and will develop a research agenda on interviewer effects, including best
practices for studying and training interviewers. It will further pedagogical
goals by clearly delineating study design and estimation approaches for the
study of interviewer effects, and it will foster the entrance of junior
scholars, graduate students, and new researchers to this important area. By
bringing together established scholars, students, and practitioners from
academia, government, and industry, this conference will permit immediate
translation of findings into survey practice, will build research
infrastructure, and will improve the quality of survey data collected by
interviewers. Conference presentations will be widely disseminated. They will be
made available in a publicly accessible archive, published in an edited volume
from a scientific press, and developed into a short course for professional
associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will come to the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln during Spring 2019 to participate in a three-day
interdisciplinary conference. The conference will include a mix of research
presentations and discussion. The goal of the conference is to provide a forum
for academic, government, and industry researchers and practitioners to discuss
methods, practical insights, and research findings on interviewers. The major
themes of the conference will be synthesizing and expanding knowledge about the
impact of interviewers on multiple error sources, evaluating and disseminating
study design and estimation approaches for studying interviewers, and
integrating evidence from research and practice to produce an agenda for future
studies of interviewers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.