* 1758392
* Michigan Master Teacher Fellows Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Joshua Ellis, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,887,979.00

This Track 3 Noyce project, Michigan Master Teacher Program (MTP), will
investigate a potentially scalable approach that aims to increase the leadership
abilities of middle school STEM teachers in their schools, districts, and state.
The project will include academic training, as well as sustained professional
learning, leadership development, and professional networking experiences. The
project aims to reverse the well-documented trend of U.S. student achievement in
STEM falling behind that of other industrialized nations. MTP will prepare a
cadre of 20 middle school STEM teachers, selected for their potential to lead
local and statewide STEM education reform efforts. MTP may serve as a model for
other national efforts because it has the potential to produce a self-sustaining
professional learning network consisting of teachers who can carry the project
forward with little external aid. The project uniquely builds on an established
statewide network of reform-focused individuals and organizations that are part
of the Michigan Science Teaching and Assessment Reform (Mi-STAR) program. MTP
will focus on the middle school level and emphasize applications of science and
to real-world problems that are relevant to students and their families in
Michigan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To implement MTP, Michigan Technological
University will collaborate with high-need Kalamazoo Public Schools and Saginaw
Public Schools, and with two non-profit organizations: Michigan Science Teacher
Association and Michigan Earth Science Teacher Association. MTP will provide
financial support for two cohorts: ten Master Teaching Fellows with master's
degrees in their field and ten Fellows with bachelor's degrees in a STEM
discipline, who are also enrolled in the institution's Master of Science in
Applied Science Education. Upon completion of the initial professional learning
training, Fellows with a master's degree will move into leadership positions in
their schools and districts and will also serve as mentors for MTP teachers
pursuing a master's degree. MTP will prepare Fellows pursuing a master's degree
to assume increasing levels of leadership in their schools and districts. An
outcome of the project will be its production of teacher-leaders who are
prepared to help other teachers effectively implement "three-dimensional"
instructional practices, which are performance expectations for students in the
Next Generation Science Standards and Michigan Science Standards. By developing
these cohorts of teacher-leaders, MTP has the potential to promote improvements
in students' learning outcomes in high-need schools in
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.