* 1758668
* SBIR Phase II:  Modular Tensioning Cartridge
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Chris Osgood, The Montalvo Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,008,394.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the
design, prototype and testing of a modular tension control device for individual
tension regulation in the composite manufacturing sector. Composites are
increasingly used in mission critical applications where the material and the
product must perform reliably, while at the same time improving productivity,
increasing product quality and lowering cost. By precisely and consistently
controlling tension, there are fewer voids, skips or uneven tows, resulting in a
higher quality product. This is particularly important when safety is dependent
on the structural integrity of the materials. Overall, composite applications
are greener and have a positive environmental impact. Comparably priced but
safer automobiles from composites will be lighter and consume less fuel.
Composites further reduce reliance on fossil fuels, as they are the building
blocks to harness renewable energy. Wind blades, solar panels and underwater
turbines are all made from composites. This is a rapidly growing multi-billion-
dollar market, and the projected share of the targeted tension control market is
in the range of $200 million, growing equally fast, if not faster.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will solve a problem that has plagued the
composites industry since its inception. Tension control is especially difficult
(and yet very important in the composites industry), as multiple materials with
different tear strengths and varying elasticity are combined to make stronger
products. Lack of cost effective tension control has, up to this point, limited
the speed and quality of finished products. Phase II objectives are to prototype
and develop the manufacturing process for the Modular Tensioning Cartridge. The
Phase II Objectives are: 1) Control package design - the goal is to create a
central base station to provide power, communications and a central interface
for the use of multiple Modular Tensioning Cartridge units; 2) Finalization -
all successfully tested components must be assembled into a singular industrial
grade prototype unit and then tested; 3) Product release - upon final prototype
testing, field trials will be conducted to validate and finalize technology
leading to full production. In phase I, feasibility of the individual components
to meet performance requirements was successfully demonstrated. In Phase II,
prototype units will be developed and tested refining the design to meet the
performance expectations of the customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.