* 1758522
* Northern California Math and Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Brandi Aranguren, Chico State Enterprises
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,198,949.00

The Northern California Math and Science Teachers project aims to advance the
national need for preparing and retaining qualified math and science teachers in
high-need schools. This Track 1 Noyce project at California State University
(CSU), Chico, will support the education of 25 students to become highly
qualified teachers who are prepared to succeed in diverse classrooms. The
project will provide scholarships to undergraduate math and science majors, as
well as post-baccalaureate STEM credential candidates. The project will explore
how undergraduate experiential learning opportunities, such as summer
undergraduate research experiences and serving as learning assistants, affect
teacher retention. Reports from the National Academy of Sciences recommend that
student become involved with faculty mentors and professional activities early
in their undergraduate training. The project responds to this recommendation by
requiring each scholar to attend a seminar course focused on research-based
practices that support secondary learners in the northern California region.
These practices include place-based learning, grit, and growth mindset. The
results from this work may provide evidence for improving existing STEM
education and teacher education programs and broaden support for undergraduate
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the impact of
experiential learning opportunities on undergraduate and pre-service teachers
through surveys, interviews, classroom observations, and performance on course
assignments. Specifically, the project will attempt to answer the following
questions: (1) What demographic, educational, occupational variables, or other
information about Noyce scholars predict their behavior throughout and after the
program? (2) What are the most successful recruitment and marketing strategies
for attracting a large and diverse pool of math and science teachers? and (3)
How effective are various retention strategies? To inform and improve practices,
the project team will share findings across departments at CSU-Chico, via
department meetings, newsletters, and evaluations of the undergraduate
experiences. Findings will also be disseminated at regional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.