* 1758017
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Big Data Security and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Mohammad Husain, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 01/31/2021
* USD 287,997.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at California State Polytechnic University, Pomona. This REU Site will host
a diverse group of undergraduate students who will spend their summer working on
cutting-edge big data security research problems in genomic data privacy, secure
multiparty cloud computation, and hybrid data center security. This REU Site
provides students with the opportunities to explore the challenges of big data
security and privacy using state-of-the art tools and testbeds. Security and
privacy issues are magnified by big data, with the diversity of data sources and
formats as well as large-scale cloud infrastructures needed to support big data
applications. As a result, traditional security mechanisms are not adequate and
new mechanisms and policies related to the security and privacy of big data are
needed. The research is led by an interdisciplinary group faculty actively
engaged in cybersecurity research. The site will provide mentoring and other
professional development opportunities that should impact the future academic
and professional careers of the students. The site plans to attract talented
undergraduate students from across the nation, particularly focusing on
recruiting Hispanic and women students, groups traditionally under-represented
in the computing fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects in this REU
Site address new big data security and privacy problems, such as genomic data
privacy protection, accelerated encryption algorithms for genomic data in
acquisition, privacy preserving big data mining, secure multiparty computation
on clouds, security compliance measurement in hybrid data centers, and data
governance in migration among clouds. While these topics can be closely
interconnected, they address security and privacy issues in different phases of
the big data life cycle. The projects will use a new High Performance Computing
Cluster and a student run campus data center to provide research that in both
theory and application in an emerging area of research.