* 1758084
* The Cyclic Rise and Fall of Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Corina Kellner, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 239,556.00

Dr. Christina Conlee (Texas State University) and Dr. Corina Kellner (Northern
Arizona University), along with an international team of researchers will
examine the rise and fall of ancient civilizations to provide insight into how
societies gain power and expand, how less powerful groups adapt and resist, and
what stressors lead to a society's transformation and collapse. The project,
which will be conducted in the desert of Peru, aims to obtain important
comparative data on these topics. Archaeology is unique in its ability to
provide a long-term view of these processes and helps in understanding the
resilience and frailty of ancient and modern societies. In terms of broader
scientific impacts, students will be supported and trained in both
archaeological field and lab methods to further their careers in archaeological
and other scientific endeavors. Cultural outreach is aimed at including the
local community so they remain invested in preserving archaeological sites in
the area. The results of this project will be made available to scholars and the
general public through a digital repository at Texas State University, and
through presentations and written articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the research team is to study the expansion of empires, the process of
colonization, and how provincial people resist imperial control. The team will
also explore the complex processes involved in the collapse of societies, and
the impact of social, political, and environmental factors. The Wari (AD
650-1000) were the first empire in South America, and radically changed the
known world in the Andes. The investigators will research the highland Wari's
relationship with the coastal province of Nasca, including the dynamics between
them that aided the expansion of Wari, resulted in the conquest and
transformation of Nasca society, and ultimately led to the collapse of both. The
investigations will focus on Huaca del Loro, the largest, and best preserved
site of this time period in Nasca. Excavations in residential, ceremonial, and
burial areas will be conducted along with several types of analyses of the
archaeological and human remains. The project will examine what type of site was
Huaca del Loro. Was it a local settlement, a Wari colony, or a site of local
resistance against the empire? The research will also address how and why the
settlement was abandoned and the implications this has for local and imperial
collapse. Varied and innovative techniques and technologies will be used and
include stable isotope analysis to determine the geographic origin and diet of
people buried at the site, Structure from Motion that involves creating high
resolution 3-D images of the site and excavations, and compositional analysis of
various artifacts to understand trade and manufacture of various
goods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.