* 1758353
* Philadelphia Regional Noyce Partnership Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Susan Jansen Varnum, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,449,148.00

The Philadelphia Regional Noyce Scholarship Program is a Noyce Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project at Saint Joseph's University. The project will
address the national need for preparing highly effective secondary mathematics
and science teachers for successful teaching careers in high-need urban
environments. Six colleges and universities in the Philadelphia region will
collaborate to increase: (i) the number of STEM majors that become teachers in
high-need schools in the Philadelphia region and who persist as teachers; (ii)
Noyce scholars' understanding of Culturally Responsive Teaching practices; and
(iii) Noyce scholars' knowledge of Education for Sustainability content and
pedagogical practices. The project will produce new STEM teachers drawn from
biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics majors and post-baccalaureates at
the partnering institutions. Noyce scholars will participate in three years of
learning community work, starting in their final year of pre-service preparation
and continuing for their first two years of teaching. Through the scholars'
participation in these learning communities, they will learn how to build social
networks that will positively support acclimation to the teaching profession.
Scholars will use teaching and learning strategies based on education for
sustainability core standards. Additionally, twenty-four students from a local
community college will take part in a summer internship program with the goal of
increasing their interest in pursuing careers in STEM teaching at one of the
partnering institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will award one-year
Noyce scholarships to 55 undergraduate STEM majors and STEM post-baccalaureates.
The scholarship granting institutions in the partnership are Arcadia University,
Bryn Mawr College, La Salle University, Saint Joseph's University, and Temple
University. They are joined in the project by two additional partnerships: the
Community College of Philadelphia and the School District of Philadelphia. By
bringing scholars from multiple institutions together, the project will create a
regional community of practice that can engage a critical mass of participants,
contribute to the formation of a robust professional social network, and foster
culturally relevant and sustainability education practices. The project will
investigate the degree to which these supports help retain new STEM teachers in
the profession, resulting in addressing the critical need to attract well-
prepared STEM teachers to the Philadelphia region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.