* 1758484
* Rural Appalachian Leaders and Local Youth for STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Chang Liu, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,321,818.00

Inequitable access to quality STEM education is a major barrier to broader
participation in STEM. This Robert Noyce Track II project will support 24
Fellows (2 cohorts of 12) who have undergraduate degrees in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. These 24 Fellows will be prepared to
become effective middle or secondary school mathematics or science teachers
through a one-year master's program and four years of follow-up support. This
project will help meet the pressing need for highly-qualified middle and
secondary mathematics and science teachers in rural schools. The project aims to
prepare teachers who will: 1) be confident in their STEM knowledge; 2) engage
students in the activities and ways of thinking characteristic of STEM
professionals; and 3) develop well-prepared students who innovate, problem
solve, and are proficient technology users. The impact of the project may extend
beyond the local communities. For example, the project will develop and
distribute STEM resources and curricula relevant to rural communities, as well
as findings about preparing STEM teachers for rural schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a one-year Master's with teacher
certification program designed to: (1) foster Fellows' identities as STEM
teachers; 2) develop pedagogical content knowledge; (3) develop cultural
competence and promote culturally relevant teaching practices for STEM
disciplines that meet the diverse student needs of rural Appalachia; and (4)
connect Fellows' STEM content knowledge to grades 4-12 mathematics and science
classrooms. To accomplish these project goals, Fellows will take integrated STEM
courses as a cohort, facilitate community education events with local community
education and service organizations, and create a portfolio of activities that
integrate STEM disciplines and connect to real-world problems. The project will
provide Fellows with five years of financial and other support, including online
and face-to-face mentoring, annual workshops held in conjunction with
professional conferences, and annual summer professional development institutes.
Teaching observations, surveys, interviews, artifact analysis, and comparisons
of student achievement data will be used to assess the impact of the program and
four-year induction support on Fellows' teaching effectiveness, development of
STEM identities and pedagogical content knowledge, and inclusion of culturally
relevant approaches and attributes of STEM practice in their
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.