* 1758433
* Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program for Education of Secondary STEM Teachers in Rural Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Robbie Higdon, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,748.00

This Track 1 project at James Madison University (JMU) aims to increase the
number of highly qualified secondary STEM teachers by providing scholarships to
32 Noyce Scholars over the five years of the award. The project includes a
partnership between JMU, Blue Ridge Community College, Piedmont Virginia
Community College, and Harrisonburg City Public Schools to increase the number
of undergraduates who pursue secondary teaching careers. The project will use
established practices to: expand recruiting efforts across all STEM fields
including transfers from community colleges; support pre-service teacher
identity development; and build induction support structures to help JMU teacher
education graduates become outstanding STEM educators. This induction support
aims to improve persistence among middle and secondary STEM teachers. During the
grant implementation, researchers will study how different elements of pre-
service teacher preparation and early career professional development affect the
development of effective teachers and their persistence in a STEM teaching
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Track 1 Scholarships &amp;
Stipends project are to (1) expand recruiting efforts across all JMU STEM majors
and broaden efforts to recruit from a larger pool of potential students; (2)
support student development as STEM pre-service teachers and identify the most
promising candidates as Noyce Scholars; and (3) build an induction program for
Noyce Scholars that uses best practices to improve retention and to support the
needs of new teachers to become outstanding STEM educators. This project aims to
better understand the factors that most influence students' decisions to enter
the STEM teaching pipeline and become teachers, and to investigate the factors
that impact students' decisions to persist in a STEM preparation program during
their development as preservice teachers. A multi-layered support framework,
beginning prior to licensure, extends through the induction period, and uses
evidence-based practices to support teachers' development as effective
educators. The extent to which STEM students' teaching identities are
strengthened through close mentoring and academic team- building activities
during the two-year induction program, and their ability to implement Three-
Dimensional Learning in the classroom will also be investigated. The project's
investigation of students' long-term development as STEM teachers may help to
identify patterns in the complexity of curricular design and support structures
that are necessary to attract and retain individuals in the STEM teaching
profession. The highly-qualified teachers that should emerge from the program
will further serve to support future graduates as teacher-leaders within their
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.