* 1758285
* The Origin of Controlled Fire Use
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Gilbert Tostevin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 269,145.00

The development of control over fire is widely seen as a watershed in human
evolution. Depending upon the accepted date for this process, the consequences
of the human adoption of fire as a tool for cooking, warmth, protection from
predators, and countless other uses are profound. Yet despite indications from
anatomical, genetic, and primate data that human dependence upon fire evolved
early (~1.7 million years ago), critical examinations of the evidence for fire
in the archaeological record indicate not only that its origins are
significantly later (~1.0 million), but that its use, for all time periods prior
to approximately 45,000 years ago, was only sporadic. This has led to the
hypothesis that human ancestors previous to this period, including the
Neanderthals of Late Pleistocene Europe, were not obligate fire users and did
not have the ability to make fire but only to use the fire they found on the
landscape resulting from natural lighting strikes. This issue could have
contributed to the replacement of European Neanderthal populations by modern
humans from Africa at this time. The multidisciplinary team created by Dr.
Gilbert Tostevin &amp; Dr. Gilliane Monnier, both of the University of
Minnesota, along with colleagues in Montenegro, Serbia, Spain, France, Canada,
and Israel, will test this hypothesis by studying the frequency and context of
fire use throughout one of the longest archaeological sequences in Europe, at
Crvena Stijena Rock Shelter in Montenegro. This project trains 20 students from
all over the Balkans in high-resolution archaeological, geological, and cultural
heritage 3D digital methods. Montenegro in particular needs to train a
generation of archaeologists, since they lost their only archaeology faculty (in
Belgrade, Serbia) when they became independent. The project will both train
professional archaeologists as well as engage in public outreach events, such as
the yearly Dani Nauka ("Days of Science") events run by the Montenegrin
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating Neanderthal control of fire with
extant archaeological data is difficult, since geological processes within sites
frequently erase the physical evidence of fire (through the dissolution of the
ash, charcoal, and burnt sediment which make up hearths). As such, it is hard to
distinguish between a real absence of fire and the mere absence of evidence.
Newer techniques recently made available to archaeological scientists, however,
are able to recognize microscopic evidence for fire even when it is no longer
visible macroscopically. This multidisciplinary project is designed around the
application of these new techniques for the analysis of the context of
Neanderthal use of fire against the 40,000 year occupation of the site before
the appearance of modern humans in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.