* 1758301
* SBIR Phase II:  An End User Authoring Tool for Open and Intelligent Technology-Enhanced Assessments.
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shivram Venkatasubramaniam, Looking Glass Ventures, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,405,068.00

This SBIR Phase II effort will create transformative open tools to enable
affordable access at scale to high quality assessments (problems &amp;
questions) for foundational subjects in secondary and post-secondary education.
The explosion of online student audiences, rapid growth of Open Educational
Resources (OER), and the need to support individual learners are creating an
unprecedented demand for digital assessments. Assessment authoring tools today
are controlled by large organizations, require advanced skills and proprietary
assessment delivery platforms with restrictive collaboration features. This
inequity is particularly pronounced with respect to technology-enabled
assessments (TEAs) which are sophisticated, digital assessments that enable
deeper learning. This effort will democratize the process of authoring and
sharing TEAs through the creation of intuitive end user tools that will enable
educators without advanced technical skills to author and share TEAs. This has
the potential to disrupt the status quo by empowering educators to take charge
of the assessment creation and distribution landscape with ground-breaking tools
that enable easy authoring and distribution of sophisticated TEAs without being
restricted by a proprietary assessment system. Eventually, this will empower
educators at scale by triggering the evolution of a peer-to-peer marketplace
around the need for assessments, and impact hundreds of thousands of learners in
secondary and tertiary education settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will follow through on two principal innovations. The first is an end-
user tool that will dramatically reduce the time and expertise required to
author technology-enhanced assessments. The tool will facilitate intuitive
authoring of TEAs by using symbolic representation of programming constructs.
The second innovation is a new standard for representation of technology-
enhanced assessments that makes them usable in any delivery platform, thus
making the assessments platform-neutral. This effort will also advance the
frontiers of authoring beyond individual assessments to the creation of adaptive
assessment pathways that will provide personalization for diverse learners. It
will explore novel technologies including the representation of TEAs as
intelligent and portable objects that are interoperable with disparate
assessment platforms through application programming interfaces. The research
studies will provide insight into how the proposed innovations can make
authoring of TEAs more efficient while lowering the skills barrier for
educators, and the degree to which such TEAs are effective in eliciting student
reasoning and thinking processes in foundational subjects. This will be achieved
through a combination of usability and validation studies in partnership with
secondary and post-secondary educators drawn from different
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.