* 1758320
* SBIR Phase II:  Laser-Stimulated Phosphor Light Sources for Next-Generation Solid-State Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Kristin Denault, Fluency Lighting Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 913,397.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project are numerous and include commercial, societal,
environmental, and educational impacts. Commercially, an innovation of this
magnitude would enable flexible design illumination, with great control over
light placement, beam shape, stray light, and light pollution, all while
decreasing the size and complexity of the optics and fixtures required. This
will impact the amount of electricity used for lighting, helping to reduce
global energy consumption, preserve our environment, and create economic and
societal benefits. This project will also result in the employment several
technical personnel to carry out the project's technical goals. Educational
outreach will continue to impact the local community, students and researchers
at nearby institutions, as well as visitors through seminars and workshops on
solid-state lighting, materials research, and entrepreneurship. Furthermore, the
technical results may also inform future materials research in the development
of robust materials, components, and device architectures with optimal
properties to advance other areas of solid-state lighting research.

The proposed project is aimed at achieving deployment of laser-stimulated
phosphor technology for illumination in the commercial marketplace. Research in
the field of solid-state lighting is advancing towards the goal of ultra-
efficient and smart lighting. Exploring laser-stimulated phosphor emission could
lead to next generation, energy-efficient light sources, surpassing the
limitations of current lighting technologies. Optical modeling and thermal
simulations will be used to optimize the optics, phosphor materials, and device
architectures to achieve narrow-beam angle, low-etendue, and high color-quality
white light sources, while maintaining efficient operating temperature.
Secondary components will be designed, including the electronics, packaging,
heat sinks; compatibility tested with fixtures and manufacturing processes; and
implementation into a light engine compatible in design and functionality with
customer-specific applications. Regulatory, safety, and performance testing will
be completed to achieve industry-specific standards, by working with regulatory
bodies to test lifetime and durability in operating conditions, implementation
of safety mechanisms, and photometric testing to ensure performance metrics.
Lastly, planning, partnerships, execution, data collection, and reporting of
field trail testing of products in real life conditions will result in a fully
deployed and tested product, ready for implementation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.