* 1758395
* Preparing a Community of Outstanding STEM Teachers for Rural and Urban Northeast Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* William Newton, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,199,157.00

This Track 1 Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program will recruit and prepare
thirty-two students over five years to become secondary physics, chemistry,
biology, and mathematics teachers in high-needs school districts in Northeast
Texas. Counties in this region suffer from a shortage of secondary STEM
educators. Compounding this problem are high turnover rates that are at least
partially caused by the isolation that STEM teachers in this region often
experience. This project will address these problems through three primary
efforts. (i) Potential Noyce Scholars will be recruited with activities that
present teaching as an attractive, first-choice career option and by providing
students teaching experiences early in their academic careers. (ii) Noyce
Scholars will be prepared through teaching tracks that combine their major
courses with teacher certification courses and a dedicated class in each major
which covers discipline-specific pedagogy, education research, and culturally-
responsive teaching. (iii) Noyce Teachers will be supported as they work in
local high-needs schools by individual mentor teachers and a mutually supportive
community of Noyce Teachers, Noyce Scholars, learning assistants, in-service
teachers, and participating faculty. The community will meet regularly and will
foster collaboration and communication between rural and urban
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce
(TAMUC), this project will be a collaboration between TAMUC, the local rural
school districts of Commerce, Caddo Mills, and Royse City, and Region 1
Educational Service Center which serves the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the
rural counties to the east. Over the course of the project, thirty-two STEM
teachers in four cohorts of eight will be prepared to meet the needs of both
rural and urban high-needs schools in Northeast Texas. Towards this end the
project team will follow a three-step process. First, it will raise awareness of
the program and its benefits through a broad advertising campaign. Second, it
will recruit twenty-four freshmen and sophomore students/year into an expanded
learning assistant (LA) program in introductory physics, chemistry, biology, and
math classes. Third, the team will recruit Noyce Scholars from the LA pool and
community college transfer students. Noyce Scholars will have two mentors, an
in-service teacher and a member of the project team. The impact of the LA and
Noyce programs on the teaching practices of new teachers and the impact of the
LA program and the Noyce program on discipline-specific identity, teacher
identity, and career interests will all be measured. Details about the
implementation of the project, materials created through the activities of the
community of practice, and research results will be reported in peer-review STEM
education journals, at local and national conferences, and on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.