* 1758474
* Noyce Ambassadors Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jodi Evans, Molloy College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,450,000.00

The Track 1 Noyce Ambassadors Program at Molloy College seeks to increase the
number of STEM teachers (particularly bilingual STEM teachers) in the Long
Island, New York area. Increasing the number of bilingual and underrepresented
STEM teachers may improve student performance as well as lead to a more diverse
pool of students graduating from high school, pursuing STEM majors, and either
teaching STEM or working in a STEM field. The need for STEM teachers in the
areas surrounding Molloy is expected to increase as a large percentage of
current teachers approach retirement age. Further, bilingual teachers are in
high demand as English Language Learners (ELLs)/Multilingual Learners (MLLs) in
Molloy's nearby counties are a steadily growing subpopulation, accounting for
14% of all ELLs/MLLs in the state. The goal of the Noyce Ambassadors Program is
to produce newly certified STEM teachers, with two-thirds from underrepresented
backgrounds, first-generation college students, and/or bilingual. The Noyce
Ambassadors Program will include a variety of activities to recruit high-
achieving STEM students and inspire them to become teachers in high needs school
districts. Activities include a two-week introductory research boot camp held
for one week on Molloy's campus and for one week on Nassau Community College's
(NCC) campus. At this research boot camp, students will learn from faculty as
well as in-service teachers. Once admitted into the program, the Noyce
Ambassadors will participate in two summer internship experiences, one on
Molloy's campus and another at Molloy's Center for Environmental Research and
Coastal Oceans Monitoring (CERCOM) field station. The CERCOM field station is
dedicated to the captive breeding of horseshoe crabs, exploration of global
coastal environments and nearshore oceans, and interpretation of these
environments through data analysis. These experiences will show the Noyce
Ambassadors how to apply and teach STEM concepts in the context of real-life
problems. During the academic year, the Noyce Ambassadors will complete an
intensive curriculum and school-based field experiences that are tailored to
prepare them to be highly effective teachers. Molloy will also provide
professional development to support Noyce Ambassadors as they complete their
teaching requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Ambassadors Program aims
to produce 18 new STEM teachers, and will recruit students majoring in
mathematics, biology or earth and environmental science. Molloy will collaborate
with NCC to recruit high school and community college students. Through this
partnership, the project aims to form a pipeline of future STEM students and
teachers, as well as potential Noyce Ambassadors. Molloy and NCC will also
collaborate with four Local Education Agencies: Freeport and Uniondale school
districts in Nassau County, and Brentwood and Amityville school districts in
Suffolk County. These agencies will serve as sites for clinical teaching
experiences. This project will conduct a research study to assess effectiveness
of strategies that are intended to sustain each Noyce Ambassador in the
classroom. This research seeks to benefit the STEM teaching and education
communities by providing insight into what supports and activities are most
effective, why teachers opt to leave high-needs teaching settings, and what
academic skills and experiences lead to higher teacher retention in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.