* 1758531
* SBIR Phase II:  Fast Formation Cycling Methods and In-Situ Diagnostics for Lithium-Ion Battery Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Eric Din, Hive Battery Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2020
* USD 883,894.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be in promoting
clean energy technologies. More than half of the United States? greenhouse gas
emissions come from transportation and electricity production. Lithium-ion
batteries are a promising technology to facilitate the adoption of electric
vehicles and renewable power generation that drastically reduce greenhouse gas
emission. However, the high cost of lithium-ion batteries threatens the
commercial viability of clean technologies. This Phase II project will develop
manufacturing process technologies that reduce the capital and operating costs
of the most expensive step in lithium-ion battery manufacturing. Low-cost
batteries will push electric vehicles towards widespread commercial adoption.
Electrification of mass-transit buses will improve urban air quality, especially
for the low-income population located near bus depots. Large-scale battery
systems enabled by low-cost batteries will turn renewable power generation such
as solar and wind from periodic energy sources into on-demand energy sources to
alleviate our dependence on fossil-fuels. This Phase II project will help
lithium-ion batteries become a key technology in the successful departure from
oil dependence, combat of climate change, and the United States? energy
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project addresses the need for deeper understanding of the fundamental
science behind the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer. SEI layer quality
is a key determinant of long-term battery reliability, performance, and safety,
but the underlying electrochemistry that governs SEI composition and evolution
remains poorly understood. This Phase II project will develop novel, in-situ
diagnostics to directly measure the evolution, performance, and characteristics
of the SEI layer as it is formed during lithium-ion battery manufacturing.
Deeper insight into the complex morphology of the SEI layer will advance much-
needed industry knowledge of battery performance, quality, and longevity.
Additionally, there is a sizeable body of work in modeling the degradation of
batteries throughout their lifecycle. With improved cell-level traceability, the
manufacturing insights enabled by this Phase II project will expand the current
understanding of the ?ideal battery? at the beginning of life and complement
ongoing work on how batteries degrade over time. This insight opens the door for
quality control in battery manufacturing based on more direct quality metrics
such as longevity and reliability rather than indirect metrics such as beginning
of life capacity.