* 1758571
* Development of a Simplified Cavity Thermal Ionization Source for Geoscience Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Richard Carlson, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2020
* USD 177,199.00

Improvements in the instrumentation used to determine the chemical and isotopic
composition of materials have provided critical advances across a wide variety
of fields from material science to medicine. Often, natural materials, such as
rocks and environmental samples, prove to be the most difficult to analyze as
they are complex mixtures of every element in the periodic table. The most
distinguishing characteristic of any element is its mass and isotopic
composition. This gave rise to the invention of the mass spectrometer in the
1920's and to the gradual expansion of the capabilities of this type of
instrument so that now a vast array of different types of mass spectrometers
constitute the most widely used instrument whenever chemical, and particularly
isotope, analyses are needed. The sensitivity of the mass spectrometer depends
on how efficiently the element(s) to be analyzed can be turned into electrically
charged ions, termed ionization efficiency. This project will build on basic
instrumentation developments done at Oak Ridge National Laboratory to extend and
expand the use of a cavity ion source for chemical and isotopic measurements
applied to the geosciences. The cavity ion source consists of a narrow (1 mm
diameter) tube into which the sample is placed. The cavity is then heated to
extreme temperatures (up to 3000 C) causing the sample to evaporate. Individual
sample atoms repeatedly bounce against the walls of the cavity on their way to
the cavity opening. Whenever an atom touches the hot metal surface of the
cavity, it has a finite probability of becoming ionized. Once it does, the
electric field applied at the opening of the cavity extracts the ion and
accelerates it into the mass spectrometer. Cavity ion sources have demonstrated
ionization efficiencies 10-50 times greater than that of the conventional
instruments, known as thermal ionization mass spectrometers. The improvement in
ionization efficiency in cavity ion sources will allow analyses to be extended
to sample sizes 10-50 times smaller that currently possible, or allow the
isotopic composition of large samples to be analyzed to much higher precision.
This projects application of the enhanced sensitivity of the cavity ion source
will focus on study of the processes and timescales by which the solid Earth
formed, and how and when it separated into core, mantle, and crust leading to
the habitable environments and concentrating the resources that allow life to
survive and prosper on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will allow
development of a simplified cavity thermal ion source that will dramatically
improve the sensitivity of a type of mass spectrometer widely used for
geoscience studies. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) has been a
critical tool in geosciences for almost a century, on a wide range of topics
that depend on radioactive chronology, isotope tracing, and high-sensitivity
chemical analyses. Cavity thermal ion sources, like those used in nuclear
laboratories, can offer up to a factor of 10-50 increase in ionization
efficiency over conventional TIMS for a variety elements that are useful in the
geosciences (e.g., Cr, Sr, Nd, Pb). Sensitivity improvements of this magnitude
translate to similar magnitude reductions in sample size to make isotopic
measurements at current levels of precision, or alternatively allow much higher
precision isotope ratio analyses for sample sizes similar to those used
currently. The goal of the project is to design a cavity ion source that can be
readily adapted to the type of commercial TIMS commonly used in the geosciences
to provide greatly enhanced ionization efficiencies while retaining the
simplicity, cleanliness, and ease of use of the modern TIMS instrument. Isotope
ratio measurements address many first order questions in the geosciences, from
providing the basis for radiometric geochronology, to tracing of many of the
main chemical processes that act to modify Earth's surface and interior. An ion
source that can offer factors of 10 or more increased sensitivity over existing
sources, but retains the simplicity, ease of use, and cleanliness of existing
instruments would find rapid adoption by the geoscience community and the
commercial instrument manufacturers that serve that community. The project also
will involve the training of an early career scientist who will learn not only
which buttons on the computer to push to tell the instrument to produce data,
but the basic physics of the mass spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.