* 1758043
* CSR: Medium: Salt: combining ACID and BASE in a distributed database
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Lorenzo Alvisi, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 373,823.00

Most large web applications are built using distributed databases. This project
tackles a fundamental question: as these applications grow, leading to more
query and update processing, can we scale application performance without
requiring a massive reprogramming effort. The premise of this project is that
today's two leading database paradigms -- ACID and BASE -- are profoundly
unsatisfying. ACID implementations provide strong properties that make it easy
to develop an application and reason about its correctness, but they struggle to
keep up in performance and availability as the volume of accesses to the
database grows; and while the BASE programming paradigm can meet these needs,
the price is to give up all ACID guarantees, drastically increasing both
development time and the possibility of introducing bugs. This project aims to
develop the new theoretical framework necessary to overcome this impasse and
simultaneously support consistency, availability, and scalability; and to build
a database prototype that implements the mechanisms necessary to support this
new framework. The project introduces a new programming framework that combines
the ease of ACID transactions with the performance of a BASE implementation by
introducing a new abstraction, BASE transactions. The syntax and semantics of
BASE transactions are driven by two goals. First, BASE transactions should
achieve high performance and availability by loosening the overly-tight coupling
between atomicity and isolation of the ACID paradigm, while nonetheless
retaining its ability to express and enforce the atomicity requirements
motivated by a given applications semantics. Second, it should be possible to
surgically transform performance-critical ACID transactions into BASE
transactions without affecting either the correctness or the performance of the
unmodified ACID transactions. To demonstrate this new programing framework, this
project will develop Salt, a database that combines the desirable qualities of
both ACID and BASE paradigms. The project will apply this work to Health Care IT
through a partnership with a 501(c)(3) entity in central Texas charged with
providing health information technology solutions to local health care
infrastructure.