* 1758800
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Living Fossils: Applying advances in single molecule sequencing to decode large and complex genomes of ancient plant lineages
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gloria Coruzzi, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,936,179.00

Darwin first used the term "living fossils" to describe a group of plants that
had apparently survived intact for hundreds of millions of years. During this
time a wide range of environmental conditions occurred, including mass
extinctions, and yet these plants survived. An intriguing question is how the
living fossils were able to persist over millions of years and further, how
their extant relatives diverged and evolved. Belonging to the cone-bearing, non-
flowering group of plants, called gymnosperms, these species with huge and
complex genomes could hold clues to understanding genomic resilience to
environmental change. Advances in sequencing technologies are now available to
answer these questions. Very recently, approaches have become available to
characterize these complex organisms genetically at a reasonable cost. This
interdisciplinary team of researchers compare ancient and more highly evolved
relatives to identify how genomes function, adapt and evolve. The project is
dedicated to training the next generation of scientists and brings analytical
and critical thinking skills to the general public through outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Three of the four extant gymnosperm lineages contain
species which Darwin termed "living fossils." These have been present since the
Devonian Era and have survived an incredible range of environmental conditions.
The genomes of almost all the gymnosperms are extremely large and complex and
have been somewhat refractive to genomic characterization as a result. However,
the development of the Oxford Nanopore PromethION sequencer, which can provide
extremely long reads (greater than 10 kb) at a reasonable cost, will be used to
carry out detailed characterization of the genomes of these plants as well as
their more modern, radiated lineages. In addition, the methylation status of
these species will be analyzed from multiple tissues to understand epigenomic
variability. Specific questions about genome resilience and evolutionary
relationships will be addressed. Advances in single molecule sequencing
technologies from this project will have broad impact across the life sciences.
Educational and outreach programs are designed to improve public understanding
or science through engagement with the New York Botanical Garden, and project
personnel will contribute expertise to developing exhibits at the American
Museum of Natural History. All data and technology advances will be publicly
available through public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.