* 1758437
* Chattanooga STEM Education Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* DeAnna Beasley, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,449,859.00

According to the Teacher Shortage Areas Nationwide Listing, persistent shortages
of secondary mathematics and science teachers exist throughout the United
States. To address this shortage, the Track 1: Chattanooga STEM Education Noyce
Scholarship Program (CSENSP) aims to increase the number and diversity of
undergraduate STEM majors at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC)
who enter the teaching profession. The project will include an intensive,
residency field-based teaching experience in Hamilton County public schools. The
goals of CSENSP include: attracting highly qualified STEM majors to secondary
STEM teaching careers in high-need school districts; encouraging traditionally
underrepresented groups in the STEM disciplines to major in STEM fields and seek
secondary STEM teacher licensure; increasing the number of secondary STEM
educators; and supporting scholars during their first three years of teaching,
with special emphasis on the unique challenges of high-need school districts.
Noyce scholars will receive customized professional development to enhance their
pedagogical and cultural competence skills. Additionally, Noyce scholars will
attend semiannual seminars and receive monthly instructional coaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes partnerships between three colleges
at UTC, the high-need school district of Hamilton County, and Chattanooga State
Community College (CSCC). Through these partnerships, CSENSP will provide 30
two-year scholarships to juniors and seniors majoring in biology, chemistry,
geology, physics, applied mathematics, or computer science. Scholarship
recipients (?Noyce scholars?) will commit to teach for four years in a high-need
school district. Additionally, the partnership with CSCC will enable 44 transfer
students to join the STEM teacher candidate pipeline while at CSCC. These
transfer students will later be eligible to become Noyce scholars. The results
of formative and summative assessment of the project will inform the STEM
teacher preparation community about best practices for STEM teacher preparation
for high-need schools and districts. The students' pedagogical assessment
instrument will provide composite data of knowledge, skills, and attitudes, via
qualitative and quantitative assessments. Project outcomes will include
providing best practices for use of data-driven recruitment to effectively
recruit, advise, support, retain, and motivate students to successfully complete
a STEM curriculum and have an impactful STEM teaching
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.