* 1758459
* The microtubule network and cell wall-based extracellular immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* James Alfano, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

When pathogenic microorganisms infect plants, they respond by having plant cells
release many different substances outside of the cell. In many instances, this
collective response stops microbes from growing in this niche. However, it is
mostly unknown how these substances are released by plant cells and how these
substances stop pathogens from growing. Additionally, the project will identify
substances that are released to the extracellular spaces during a plant immune
response and determine which ones are important for the resistance to pathogens.
The long-term goal of this project is to develop crops that are more resistant
to pathogens. This project will offer camps for high school students within
University of Nebraska, Lincoln's, Nebraska College Preparatory Academy program,
targeting low-income and underrepresented minority high school students from
urban centers of the state. Additionally, the project will offer research
training for high school students within the Young Nebraska Scientist Program.
The topics pursued in this proposal have important ramifications for plant
immunity and plant biology, adding to the broad appeal of both programs to young
scientists and enhancing high school student interest in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant immunity triggers the release of proteins
and metabolites to combat extracellular pathogens, which reside in the apoplast,
the space between plant cells. While many of the products that are secreted or
exported from the plant cell to the apoplast are known, it is not well
understood which are important for resistance to bacterial pathogens or how they
are secreted. A primary virulence strategy of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas
syringae is to inject type III effector proteins into host cells to suppress
plant immunity. Recently published indicate that the HopE1 effector targets
MAP65-1 to perturb the microtubule network. HopE1 also inhibits the secretion of
immunity-related proteins to the apoplast. These findings provide an entry point
to better understand the involvement of microtubules in the secretion of
immunity-related products to the apoplast. Arabidopsis mutants defective in
MAP65-1 are more susceptible to P. syringae, and MAP65-1 over-expressing plants
exhibit enhanced resistance to P. syringae. The overall goal of this project is
to elucidate how MAP65 functions in the microtubule network, to better
understand the involvement of the microtubule network in plant immunity,
identify the apoplastic products that depend on microtubules for their
secretion, and systematically mutate their corresponding genes to determine
their involvement in cell wall-based extracellular immunity. The experimental
methods that will be employed will range from biochemistry, molecular biology,
cell biology and proteomics to newer techniques such as CRISPR-CAS9
mutagenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.