* 1758627
* SBIR Phase II:  Diamagnetically Directed Self-Assembly of Light Emitting Diodes for Fabricating Large Area, Direct View Displays
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Mark Durniak, selfarray
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,213,044.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that if successful, the results of this
project will revolutionize large area LED array assembly manufacturing, leading
to unprecedented growth of the direct view LED display market. Direct view LED
displays, or video walls, are becoming more ubiquitous in everyday life. First
only appearing in sports stadiums, they have gradually started appearing in
retail advertising, and now are starting to appear in cinemas and control rooms.
These types of displays are much brighter, have better contrast ratios, faster
refresh rates, and are more energy efficient than other competing display
technologies. Despite these advantages, rate of adoption is very slow, limited
by the cost and time required to make these displays. Current manufacturing
tools are facing a bottleneck as display resolutions increase. A massively
parallel assembly technology could drastically increase production speeds while
reducing cost-of-goods. Additionally, the knowledge gained by the research into
this self-assembly technology has the potential to unlock new opportunities in
semiconductor packaging including lighting and concentrated
solar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to speed-up the LED
placement process by leveraging the parallel nature of directed self-assembly.
Rather than placing individual LEDs into a grid-array as it is done today, this
technology utilizes confining magnetic fields to quickly and simply arrange
hundreds or thousands of LEDs into a neat and ordered grid-array. The objective
is to achieve assembly speeds at least 5 times faster than conventional tools.
The research will focus on the effects of LED size and geometry on accuracy,
rate, and yield. Additionally,  new magnetic field stages to enhance assembly
precision will be developed. The key anticipated results are (1) a system that
will be able to rapidly assemble thousands of LED die with the precision
necessary for high-resolution displays and (2) a fully operational LED display
panel constructed with this technology to demonstrate the manufacturing
potential of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.