* 1758436
* Closing the Loop: From Student to STEM Teacher for Idaho Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Leslie Atkins, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,198,526.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, Closing the Loop: From Student to STEM Teacher for Idaho
Schools will recruit undergraduate STEM majors and prepare them to become grade
6-12 STEM teachers in high-need, rural school districts. This Track 1 project
aims to fund 65 scholarships over five years. In this project, Boise State
University will collaborate with Caldwell, Jerome, Kimberly, Kuna, and Vallivue
school districts to identify, recruit, and then support students interested in
pursuing STEM teaching careers. During students' first two years of study,
opportunities for support include an on-campus Living and Learning Community and
STEM education summer internships in students' home communities. Students will
complete Boise State University's four-year BS/certification program for the
STEM disciplines (IDoTeach). In addition to scholarship support in their last
two years of study, the project will support their transition into STEM teaching
careers with an induction program that prepares new teachers to be teacher-
leaders. This project aims to prepare teachers to enter the profession with
knowledge of the systemic barriers that limit equitable instruction for a range
of students, so that they are better advocate for the interests and needs of
their increasingly diverse communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal's
merits lie in its efforts to increase the number and quality of STEM teachers
for Idaho's secondary schools. Concomitant with these efforts is the goal to
identify mechanisms that support an increase in the number of teachers,
particularly with respect to the needs of rural, isolated districts. The theory
of action behind this proposal is that explicit attention to students' geography
in recruitment, internship placement, preparation, and ongoing support will
close a loop: Students will be recruited from, prepared to teach within, and
ultimately hired to serve as STEM educators for their rural home communities.
Program evaluation will identify features of the recruitment, preparation and
retention efforts that impact the number of teachers in rural school districts.
The findings have the potential to provide important information about effective
strategies for recruiting and preparing highly qualified STEM teachers to teach
in rural and high-needs schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.