* 1758865
* SBIR Phase II:  Reactive Additive Manufacturing of Advanced Superalloys for Turbine Engines
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jacob Nuechterlein, Sinter Print Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,393,092.00

This SBIR Phase II project will address the lack of high application temperature
materials available for additive manufacturing. Additive manufacturing, often
called 3D printing, provides increased design freedom and complex features such
as part consolidation and conformal cooling channels. The performance and
efficiency of gas turbines and other applications can be increased by combining
design improvements enabled by additive manufacturing with a suitable high
temperature material. Unfortunately, existing materials either do not have
sufficient high temperature performance or are not compatible with high quality
printing methods. This project will develop new nickel superalloy composite
additive manufacturing materials for use with high temperature gas turbine
components. Successful completion of this project will result in more efficient
turbines to reduce energy costs, transportation costs, and carbon emissions. The
manufacturing, power generation, and aerospace industries are expected to be
impacted from this project. In addition, history has demonstrated that new
materials and manufacturing technologies often lead to additional unexpected
innovations. This project will help the country lead in the innovation of high
performance materials technology to address the needs of the $86 billion gas
turbine market and to grow advanced manufacturing jobs in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize
innovative reactive additive manufacturing materials technology to develop 3D
printable advanced high temperature superalloys. During additive fabrication,
high melting temperature product phases will be synthesized in-situ within a
superalloy matrix to significantly improve high temperature performance and
improve printability. This innovative reactive additive manufacturing technology
has been shown to be applicable to a wide range of materials systems including
nickel superalloys in an NSF Phase I project. Metal matrix composites produced
using this technology have demonstrated greatly increased strength, wear
resistance, and high temperature performance relative to comparable traditional
alloys. In addition, this technology has demonstrated the ability to eliminate
micro and macro cracking problems with alloys that had previously been
considered unprintable. This project aims to further develop one or more high
temperature superalloys compatible with laser powder bed fusion additive
manufacturing for use in the hot sections of gas turbines. The scope of the
project includes theoretical and experimental development and evaluation of
novel material feedstocks, additive manufacturing processing conditions, and
heat treatments. Evaluation of printed components will include measurement of
density, hardness, standard and high temperature tensile properties, creep, and
microstructure and phase analysis. Turbine components will be additively
fabricated for pilot studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.