* 1758587
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineering novel pigmented cyanobacteria for the use in the ink, printing and colorant industries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Scott Fulbright, Living Ink Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is developing a safe and sustainable ink for
the global ink industry. Approximately nine billion pounds of ink is produced
annually around the world. Currently, ink is predominantly made of petroleum or
inorganic chemicals mined from the earth. For example, carbon black is commonly
used in traditional ink, which is derived from petroleum, not biodegradable, and
toxic for humans. To solve this problem, nature has produced a multitude of
molecules capable of replacing pigments currently utilized in ink. While many
organisms that produce these alternatives are slow growing and require energy
sources like sugar, photosynthetic microbes, such as cyanobacteria, are capable
of being engineered in an efficient manner to produce pigments in ink
formulations that are safe, renewable, and 100% biodegradable. This ink will be
used by businesses for printing packaging, marketing material, and other printed
products. Developing and integrating these ink products will decrease
significantly the overall detrimental impact of traditional inks on the
environment, and more importantly, human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project proposes to develop sustainable ink formulations using
cyanobacteria as feedstock for producing optically black pigments for printing
inks. This project will also engineer cyanobacteria cells capable of generating
cellular pigments for a color spectrum of cyan, magenta, and yellow. These
colored cyanobacteria will act as pigments that replace mined pigments found in
traditional ink formulations, such as carbon black and cadmium. This project is
developing a unique process in which extraction of pigments/dyes is not
necessary, thus saving energy and reducing cost. Using cyanobacteria cells as
pigments creates a renewable source of biomass for bio-products, as these
organisms leverage sunlight, carbon dioxide, wastewater and land otherwise
unsuitable for conventional agriculture to rapidly generate biomass. In addition
to the development of colorful renewable cyanobacteria strains, this project
will focus on manufacturing thousands of pounds of ink products for testing and
consumer use as well as testing the applicability of these natural pigments to
act as colorants in the food and textile industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.