* 1758507
* Recruiting and Preparing a New Generation of Mathematics, Science, and Computer Science Teachers for High Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Ramon Lopez, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,449,998.00

The nation is facing a critical need for STEM teachers. The shortages are most
severe in high-poverty urban districts and many of these districts are forced to
employ teachers who are less qualified to teach STEM classes. In response to the
STEM teacher shortage in Dallas-Fort Worth (urban) school districts, this Track
1 Noyce project at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) seeks to address
this need for high quality teachers by recruiting, preparing, inducting, and
retaining teachers for secondary science, mathematics, and computer science to
teach in high need schools. Specific project objectives are to: 1) recruit
mathematics, science, and computer science teacher candidates from students at
community colleges and baccalaureate programs, and career changers from local
industry; 2) provide a quality teacher certification program for candidates with
significant faculty mentoring, support, and professional development experiences
integrated throughout the program; and 3) support and promote teacher induction
and retention in the teaching profession, implementing various levels of
guidance from professional educators, school-based Mentor Teachers, and Near-
Peer Mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce project builds upon previous
successful UTA Noyce projects in partnership with the Dallas, Arlington, and Ft.
Worth Independent School Districts. The Tarrant County College is a community
college partner that can assist in expanding the pipeline of new secondary
science, mathematics, and computer science teachers. One new aspect of this
effort is the recruitment of computer science majors to the teaching profession.
This Noyce project seeks to provide scholarships to 50 STEM majors to prepare
and certify them as highly qualified teachers in the shortage areas of science,
mathematics, and computer science. The project intends to provide summer
internships to 40 STEM first year and sophomore students as a strategy for
recruiting teacher candidates. The project aims to give at least 33% of the
scholarships to community college transfer students. Eligible first- and second-
year transfer students will have priority for summer internships. Undergraduate
and post-baccalaureate students will be given scholarships and pathways to earn
teacher certification through UTA's nationally accredited UTeach Arlington
program. Additional project features and supports for Noyce Scholars include UTA
faculty mentors; school-based Mentor Teachers throughout early field
experiences, student teaching, and induction into the profession; a Near-Peer
mentoring program; and Scholar Learning Seminars and conference participation as
continuous professional development. The UTA program's Noyce Scholar Leader (an
experienced retired teacher) will provide sustained guidance through visits and
support induction of new Noyce teachers into the profession. This Noyce project
includes an ongoing research component that aims to measure Noyce Scholars'
learning and transition into teaching, including shifts in self-efficacy toward
teaching, primary teaching practices, and views of the nature of mathematics and
science disciplines. The project also intends collect information on best
practices in the recruitment, preparation, induction, and retention of new STEM
teachers. Results of this research will be presented at professional conferences
and published in scholarly journals. The primary benefit of this Noyce project
will be the new science, mathematics, and computer science teachers produced who
will serve in schools where they are most needed. Other institutions of higher
educations may also benefit from the results from the project's research effort
and project evaluation, which may provide valuable information on best practices
for preparing teachers for high need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.