* 1758248
* Capacity Building to Address Critical STEM Teacher Shortages in West Central Florida - Enhancing Teacher Preparedness and Certification in Biology and Math
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Nancy Cerezo, Saint Leo University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 73,695.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Capacity Building project at Saint
Leo University seeks to address a critical STEM teacher shortage in the state of
Florida. Working with the local Pasco and Hillsborough County School Districts
and nearby state colleges, the project team intends to develop programs to 1)
increase the number of students enrolling in the university's
biology/mathematics major and education minor academic programs; 2) improve
teacher preparedness via innovative courses that address specific STEM teaching
strategies and classroom management experiences; and 3) assist with more timely
and successful teacher certification. Project activities are designed to
increase the number of certified STEM teachers graduating from Saint Leo and may
improve teacher retention via enhanced preparation and support. The project
intends to lay the foundation for a future Noyce Teacher Scholarships and
Stipends (Track 1) proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will use a
four-pronged approach to meet their goals. First, they intend to develop new
curricula, including two new courses aimed at students who wish to pursue
biology or mathematics major and education minor. These new courses are intended
to address specific challenges in teaching biology and mathematics, and one of
the courses will expand the use of innovative software that uses avatars to
model student learning and to simulate classroom disruption. In addition, the
project plans to develop new course modules that are expected to help students
prepare for the comprehensive Florida Department of Education teacher
certification exams, and a program to completely cover exam fees will be
piloted. Second, the project team expects to develop new articulation agreements
with local two-year state colleges so that STEM students can more easily
transfer from these colleges to Saint Leo and complete the STEM major/education
minor. Third, the project team intends to collect data from current and
prospective students, guidance counselors, and staff within local high-needs
high schools. These data are expected to influence recruitment by informing the
improvement of program marketing, teacher preparation and support, and expanding
the university's network of constituencies. Finally, the project seeks to
strengthen existing partnerships and build new ones with local high-need schools
within Pasco and Hillsborough Counties to meet their specific needs for STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.