* 1758543
* SBIR Phase II:  Multifunctional Reconfigurable Antenna Array Technology for Wi-Fi and 5G Small Cell Access Points
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Bedri Cetiner, i5 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,003,626.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its capability to
create a positive impact on current and future wireless systems. Multifunctional
reconfigurable antenna (MRA) technology targeted in this project enables a
single antenna element to dynamically change its frequency band, radiation
pattern and polarization properties, which directly impact the radio-frequency
(RF) coverage, capacity, and quality of service achieved by any wireless
network. Machine-to-machine communications, Internet of Things applications,
satellite communications, radar-based sensing, and tactical military
communications are just a few of the areas that will benefit from the results of
this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop and commercialize MRA arrays for use in
802.11ac/ax WLAN systems and 5G mm-wave systems based on new radio
specifications. 5G systems require exploitation of massive multiple input
multiple output (MIMO) technology with a large number of antennas to attain
significantly improved spectral efficiency, thereby achieving required network
capacities and enhanced connectivity. Massive MIMO is also needed to overcome
severe propagation losses in mm-wave bands, where large swaths of spectrum is
available. If a MIMO system uses legacy dumb antennas with fixed properties, the
resulting complexity and cost figures, and the power consumption associated with
a large number of RF front ends render them commercially prohibitive. The MRA
array technology delivers 3-10 dB higher array gain compared to legacy arrays.
Such gains can be used to improve RF coverage, increase user throughput, and
reduce network costs by lowering the number of RF nodes or reduce the cost, size
and power consumption of access point equipment by lowering the number of
antenna elements. This project will deliver the beta prototypes of two MRA array
modules containing the hardware and control algorithm that can be seamlessly
integrated with WLAN and 5G small-cell modems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.