* 1758487
* Excellence in STEM Teaching in Indiana through Integrating Engineering Practice and Design Principles
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Paul Asunda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,415,500.00

Excellence in STEM Teaching in Indiana is a Track 1 Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program project. It represents a collaboration among Purdue
University, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana, and five high-need, rural
Indiana school corporations. This project will strengthen Indiana's future by
expanding the number and diversity of undergraduate students who pursue a STEM
degree and career in secondary STEM teaching. These students will develop
enhanced knowledge and skills for integrating engineering design into science,
mathematics, and technology instruction. They will complete a rigorous plan of
study with two characteristics. First, their degree will be in a STEM discipline
that leads to state mathematics or science licensure. Second, the degree will
include a concentration that focuses on how to use engineering practice and
design in effective STEM disciplinary education. In this concentration, scholars
will complete a comprehensive suite of four courses and field experiences that
augment their STEM teaching degree requirements. In so doing, they will develop
additional expertise in integrating engineering design into their teaching
curricula. Additionally, the project will support these scholars after
graduation in a three-year induction program that mentors them in their
professional growth and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This teacher
scholarship program will support eight new scholars each year over four years
for a total of 32. Each recipient will be eligible to receive up to two years of
scholarship funding in the form of a forgivable loan. Recruitment efforts at the
campus, state, and national levels will attract talented, high-achieving
undergraduate students in biology, chemistry, physics, earth and atmospheric
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology majors to become secondary
STEM teachers. It will particularly focus on students from culturally,
linguistically, and socioeconomically diverse backgrounds and students with
disabilities. By partnering with Ivy Tech Community Colleges in Indiana, Purdue
University will leverage a single articulation agreement that allows students to
seamlessly transfer between the two institutions. This will increase the pool of
talented, next generation STEM teachers. Ivy Tech Community College is the
largest public postsecondary institution in Indiana. It is also the largest
single-accredited statewide community college system in the United States. In
completing the Noyce program requirements, scholars will be classroom-ready to
plan and implement high-quality STEM instruction. This instruction will
emphasize the variety of conceptual connections among STEM subjects. It will do
so using engineering design as an integrator. This will provide opportunities
for making STEM learning more concrete and relevant to secondary students. This
vision is resonant with current recommendations and reforms in STEM education.
These include the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013),
Engineering in K-12 Education (Katehi et al., 2009), and Principles and
Standards for School Mathematics (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics,
2000).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.