* 1758478
* Next Generation STEM Teachers for Urban Schools: Recruiting, Preparing, and Mentoring Undergraduates for Innovative STEM Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Arlene Russell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Educating high-quality STEM teachers is a national priority that underpins
progress in science, the advancement of national health initiatives, and overall
national prosperity in an increasingly technical economy. Toward that end this
project aims to support and mentor 40 undergraduate seniors who are majoring in
the Physical Sciences, Life Sciences, Engineering, or Mathematics, while
concurrently earning their STEM teaching credentials. During the 5-year project,
these highly qualified, STEM educators have the potential to teach over 10,000
students in high-need urban schools in the Los Angeles area. The project is
designed to (1) develop new approaches to identifying STEM students at a
research-intensive university who are interested in teaching careers and (2)
invite community college STEM transfers to explore teaching through paid Noyce
summer internships. Over the five-year span, this project expects to provide 100
community college transfer students with a classroom internship that may foster
permanent ties and mentorships with exemplary teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of this project is a new pre-credential
summer program that includes a one-week workshop on using data science and
computational thinking as a framework for teaching relevant content, analysis,
reasoning, and communication. Following the workshop, the Noyce Scholars go
through a three-week field experience in which they can observe and participate
in the opening of a new school year without the concomitant challenges of
coursework during their senior year. During the induction year, the project is
designed to provide the Noyce Scholars with (1) a field supervisor, who can
assist, monitor, and support their progress and (2) a cohort community of fellow
first-year science and math teachers. During the second Noyce service-year, the
project aims to continue to provide networking opportunities for the novice
teachers and ensure they are mentored in a district-sponsored Beginning Teacher
Support network. Archived, teacher-quality data from UCLA's previous Noyce award
will serve as a benchmark to rigorously assess the effectiveness of the new
components of Next Generation STEM Teachers in preparing teachers to use
content-rich pedagogy that fosters greater equity and access in classroom
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.