* 1758468
* Striving to Advance Teacher Education in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Anastasia Elder, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 01/31/2020
* USD 71,498.00

This Noyce Capacity Building project at Mississippi State University (MSU) aims
to build the knowledge, community, and partnerships needed to increase the
number of students recruited into STEM teaching. It includes leadership of four
MSU departments and the Starkville-Oktibbeha Consolidated School District, as
well as mentoring by the principle investigator of the University of Kentucky's
Track 1 Noyce program. The project is designed to analyze recruitment
strategies, barriers to program retention, teacher candidates' demographics, and
the characteristics of STEM teachers who have remained in STEM classrooms. By
leveraging partnerships, the project seeks to broaden recruitment efforts, align
positive teaching messages across Mississippi and university courses, and
develop mentoring for undergraduate students from engineering, math, and
sciences interested in becoming math and science teachers. The partnerships have
the potential to enable the project team to reach and recruit a broader group of
students to pursue STEM teacher education. Through research with in-service STEM
teachers, including MSU alumni and other high-performing teachers, the project
seeks to evaluate programmatic components that contribute to retention in the
STEM teacher profession. This project aims to increase the number of students
recruited into STEM teaching, develop a Noyce Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
proposal, and contribute to the literature on effective recruitment and
retention of STEM education students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends
to gather essential information on the successes and challenges faced in
Mississippi, such as recruiting students into STEM education, retaining these
students in STEM teacher education programs, and strengthening the partnerships
of key stakeholder in STEM education. It is a collaborative Capacity Building
project between MSU's Department of Curriculum, Instruction, and Special
Education, College of Education, College of Arts and Sciences, and Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, as well as Starkville-Oktibbeha Consolidated
School District. The project is designed to benefit from a mentoring
relationship with the existing University of Kentucky's Noyce Track 1
Scholarship and Stipends project. Coupling this effort with that of the
University of Kentucky may strengthen the program, so that more undergraduate
STEM majors gain licensure to teach mathematics, biology, chemistry, physics,
and, computer science. This project will gather and analyze baseline data needed
to understand how to foster recruitment and program retention that leads to STEM
teacher certification, while enhancing existing partnerships to study policies,
strategies, and programs for STEM education. New knowledge gained in Mississippi
via this project may serve as a model for increasing STEM teacher education in
southeastern universities, as well as in other universities across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.