* 1758602
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Defibrillator
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jeff Rynbrandt, Medicool Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2020
* USD 671,031.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project lies in its potential to develop a new
mechanism for painlessly terminating atrial fibrillation. Cardiac arrhythmia is
one of the leading causes of death and debilitation. A common means of
terminating harmful rhythms is delivering a shock via an external or implantable
defibrillator. The pain from the shock is the number one concern for patients
with implantable defibrillators, and because of the pain, an implantable option
is not practical for atrial fibrillation. The high-risk, high-reward research to
be conducted under this project will significantly advance the field of
defibrillation therapy and aims to lead to the introduction of a new class of
implantable medical device technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
seeks to develop and evaluate an implantable device that achieves non-
destructive temporary conduction delay in cardiac tissues for the painless
termination, and potentially prevention, of life threatening arrhythmias.
Cardiac arrhythmias are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in the
developed world. More than 1,000 Americans die each day from sudden cardiac
arrest. The team intends to initially target the development of a device to
achieve rapid and painless termination of life threatening arrhythmias to treat
atrial fibrillation. The successful development of the proposed device has the
potential to benefit millions of patients. Additionally, by virtue of its
painless modulation of arrhythmogenesis, the proposed device may well also
terminate incipient arrhythmias. The phase II project will develop and evaluate
a prototype system. It is anticipated that the project will result in a new
implantable medical device that painlessly terminates atrial
fibrillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.