* 1758443
* Preparing STEM Teachers for Urban and Rural School Districts in Northwest Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jill Cochran, Berry College
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,191,705.00

Preparing STEM Teachers for Urban and Rural School Districts in Northwest
Georgia (STEMTeach) is a Noyce Track 1 project at Berry College. This project
aims to address the national shortage of culturally-competent secondary teachers
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). STEMTeach will use
a combination of high-quality teaching approaches and student support to improve
the quality of STEM secondary education available in Northwest Georgia. It aims
to overcome two common obstacles for dual degree teacher certification programs.
The primary challenge is that students rarely regard teaching as a "first-
choice" career in STEM. The secondary challenge is the course and practicum
requirements of completing two degrees. Some STEM majors do not consider
teaching before their junior or even senior year. This late decision-making
increases the time and, therefore, the expense to complete college, which
students with financial need often cannot afford. The project will graduate 25
highly qualified Noyce scholars to teach in high-need rural and urban schools.
Additionally, the project will strengthen Berry's STEM education program. The
centerpiece of these efforts will be the expansion and further development of
outreach and early awareness experiences, apprenticeships with master teachers,
mentoring, and early field experiences. As a result of this project, Berry
College will develop three new STEM-focused education courses. In addition, it
will create activities and supports specifically for these STEM dual majors
following their graduation. Through Noyce support, Berry College will increase
its production of new STEM teachers by 50% annually. It will also recruit
students into the teaching profession from a wider variety of STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEMTeach at Berry College will support a
total of 25 Noyce undergraduate scholars majoring in physics, biology,
chemistry, biochemistry, or mathematics. Scholars will receive a second degree
in secondary education and further complete an ESOL endorsement and 330 or more
hours of field experiences and clinical practice in high-need schools. Berry
will collaborate with high-need school districts in rural Floyd County Schools
and urban Rome City Schools. The program will evaluate and share its Noyce
project findings among stakeholders in Georgia, at national conferences, and via
submissions to peer-reviewed journals. The research will focus on the specific
impacts of the apprenticeship model, including its effect on STEM students'
decision to pursue teaching, their retention in a certification program, and
teacher selection of school placement and in-service retention. By adding this
new knowledge, it will help increase the quality and quantity of life-changing
teachers in high-needs school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.