* 1758149
* Data Corps Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Michael Bailey, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2022
* USD 49,900.00

A workshop will be held in Washington, DC on December 7-8, 2017 to plan for the
creation of a Data Science Corps. The Data Science Corps will help build the
capacity of organizations at the local, state, national and international levels
to utilize data to advance science and to help solve social problems. The Data
Science Corps would offer practical experiences and teaching opportunities to
U.S. data scientists and data science students, who would serve as volunteers
working on data science projects in a variety of venues including, academia,
industry, government, and various urban and rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together a wide variety of
stakeholders to discuss the vision and implementation of such a Data Science
Corps. It will provide the opportunity to define the organizational and
implementation details of the Data Science Corps, and will elaborate upon how
the initiative can best serve the volunteers as well as the program
beneficiaries. The workshop will include presentations by speakers representing
a variety of stakeholders, and will include discussions sessions to help develop
ideas for establishment of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Via the Data
Science Corps, volunteers--including data science professionals as well as data
science students--will be able to offer assistance to real world data science
problems, and will provide data science training to users across a wide variety
of sectors. By providing assistance to projects in academia, industry,
government in communities at the local, state and national levels, Data Science
Corps volunteers would gain practical experience on real world data science
problems, as well as gain experience as data science teachers and
trainers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data Science Corps program can help enhance
existing internship programs at academic institutions by providing a data
science theme and focus. The Data Science Corps would complement existing NSF
programs, including the Big Data Regional Innovation Hubs, Spokes, and Smart and
Connected Communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a program will help with
improved data collection and data analysis across all applications areas,
whether in urban or rural communities, and at the local, state, national and
international levels. As a result, these communities will have greater capacity
to implement data-driven solutions.