* 1758454
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Nonlinear Dynamics of Deep Gravity Waves in the Mesosphere and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Thomas Lund, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 10/31/2018
* USD 40,261.00

Gravity Waves (GW) in the Earth's atmosphere exhibit highly diverse dynamics and
they have multiple effects throughout the atmosphere. These waves are believed
to be the main driver of the Mesosphere and Lower Atmosphere (MLT) region, which
is why they are a subject of active research and debate by the Aeronomy
community in the U.S. The GW also influence a wide range of other physical
processes ranging from tidal and planetary wave structures and dynamics to minor
species transport and plasma dynamics in the ionosphere. Therefore, the need to
describe such effects accurately also has broader implications for modeling
climate variations, responses to variable solar forcing, and space weather,
among others. The main purpose of this three-year project is to investigate in
great detail the three-dimensional structure and dynamics of GW by means of
state-of-the-art numerical simulations. The research project will also provide a
significant research opportunity for a graduate student in Aeronomy. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well established that GW play an important
role throughout the upper atmosphere of the Earth. These waves, however, are
very difficult to model directly due to their small spatial scales. That leads
to the use of GW parameterization in global models. This three-year project will
utilize a finite-volume simulation code to solve the compressible, or an-elastic
three-dimensional non-linear Navier-Stokes equations in simulations of GW. The
project team will investigate numerically the following critical scientific
questions: (i) how does GW's spatial and temporal distribution influence GW's
self-acceleration instability, dissipation, mean forcing, and penetration to
thermosphere ionosphere?; (ii) what role do wave-wave interactions, mean wind,
and stability play in GW evolution?; and, (iii) what are the key dynamics in GW-
tidal interactions influencing MLT and Thermosphere-Ionosphere
dynamics?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.