* 1758368
* Developing Resilient STEM Teachers for High-Need Middle Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Carrie Lloyd, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,198,389.00

Developing Resilient STEM Teachers for High-Need Middle Schools is a Track 1
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship project. The project will address the national
demand for qualified STEM teachers in Arizona. This shortage is a result of two
primary factors: the lack of qualified candidates entering the profession and
the retention of qualified candidates who become teachers and leave the
profession within two years. This Track 1 Noyce project will address this
shortage by implementing a mentorship program to guide the development of new
teachers at Title I schools in two high-need districts in the Phoenix, AZ
region. Arizona State University will support this project through: (1)
preparing 24 new highly qualified teachers (with a bachelor's degree in a STEM
field) to become a certified K - 8 teacher while earning a Master's degree; (2)
retaining middle school mathematics and science teachers through a three-year
induction program; and (3) training teachers in teaching practices that are
known to support STEM career paths for underrepresented groups (minorities and
women). As part of the project, Noyce Scholars will be prepared to use
curriculum materials that incorporate state-of-the-art engineering practices.
Scholars will use these materials in engineering summer camps for middle school
students and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing Resilient STEM
Teachers for High-Need Middle Schools will provide one-year Noyce stipends to
two cohorts of 12 students. The project will produce 24 highly qualified
mathematics and science middle school teachers who can positively impact
students in high-need schools. As a form of teacher development, Noyce scholars
will teach in an on-campus engineering summer camp. Additionally, the project
will include a teacher induction mentorship program focused on improving teacher
quality through professional development. Through placement of expert teachers
in high-need districts, the project has the potential to positively affect more
than 3,600 students each year after the grant concludes. Middle school students
will benefit by receiving a quality education from teachers who are trained to
be leaders in STEM. With a quality classroom experience, students will be more
likely to pursue STEM courses as they progress into high school and to acquire
the knowledge needed to thrive in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.