* 1758775
* Collaborative Research:  Payoff-Belief Separable Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Collin Raymond, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 272,000.00

This project builds a bridge between the frontier of behavioral economics and
mainstream applied economic analysis. The team analyzes and tests a model of
individual economic decisions. In this model, the beliefs of consumers, workers,
and investors directly impact their individual well-being. The research builds a
unifying framework that includes many widely used models from behavioral
economics as specific cases. The team develops testable implications that can be
used to determine whether the models accurately describe individual behavior.
They will use these to test the new theory in a series of laboratory
experiments. The model they propose is an alternative to the standard model of
utility maximization that is almost universally used when economic science is
applied to understand or predict economic outcomes. As a result, the new theory
could bring frontier insights from psychology, decision science, and behavior
economics to wide adoption in mainstream economic analysis. This kind of
analysis is widely used by state and local governments, the US federal
government, and business. As a result, the project could improve economic
policies and the ability of businesses to compete in the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses decision theory to enrich the
study of preferences that depend both on material outcomes and intermediate
beliefs. The team introduces and analyzes a new class of dynamic preferences to
capture a general additively-separable approach to belief-based utility. This
class encompasses many models already developed in behavioral economics. Models
of belief-based utility have demonstrated important implications for the design
of medical tests, the analysis of how investors rebalance portfolios, and other
important applications. Providing new, simple, and testable conditions to
distinguish between different belief-based motivations for economic decisions
will help us to better understand how psychological processes affect economic
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.