* 1758108
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Chronology and Ecology of Late Pleistocene Megafauna at Rancho La Brea
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Julie Meachen, Des Moines University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 31,601.00

The Rancho La Brea tar pits of Los Angeles, California contain thousands of
bones from large mammals --dire wolves, sabertooth cats, coyotes, extinct bison,
horses, and others-- trapped in sticky surface oil deposits during the last Ice
Age. This unparalleled fossil assemblage allows rigorous studies of extinct
mammal biology, especially of carnivores which are rare at most fossil sites.
The La Brea fossils span a critical time in Earth's history (approximately
50,000 years ago to the present) that includes major events such as the end of
the last Ice Age, the arrival of humans in North America, and an extinction that
killed two thirds of the large mammals on the continent. This unique deposit
will be used to investigate relationships between major environmental changes
and evolutionary variation (size, diet, etc.) in large mammals, information that
is critical for promoting the survival of wildlife today. The project involves
significant community outreach in the greater Los Angeles area through the Tar
Pits Museum and will create educational content that will be available online
for high school teachers across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The major
impediment to system-level study at Rancho La Brea is a paucity of radiocarbon
dates and the resulting inability to correlate biotic change with time. This
project will intensively radiocarbon date samples from multiple pits spanning
the last 50,000 years to establish the first detailed chronology for the
entrapment of four extinct species of large mammals, and one extant species. It
will involve the collection and compilation of census data for these species to
track changes in total abundance and diversity, as well as data on morphological
and dietary changes.Â A well-resolved chronology will allow these data on
evolutionary changes in mammals and the Pleistocene megafaunal extinctions to be
linked to existing records of major paleo-environmental changes. This work will
have broad implications for our understanding of extinctions, survival,
environmental variables, and humans on mammalian ecology, which is directly
relevant to modern conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.