* 1758465
* Preparing Highly-Qualified STEM Teachers: Supporting Student-Centered Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Lisa Webb, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,192,415.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Track 1 project at Christopher
Newport University (CNU) aims to help address the national need for effective
STEM teachers. The overall goal of the project is to recruit and train twenty-
four STEM majors to be highly-qualified teachers who persist in their profession
and who are prepared for the challenges of teaching in high-need schools. In
addition to coursework, the preparation program will include early field
experiences and internships at local STEM academies. A yearlong mentoring
experience will be paired with a weekly seminar to provide guidance and support
to teachers in their first year. The project team aims to address teacher
retention by creating a triangular support network between the Noyce Scholars,
their mentor teachers, and their university mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on an existing partnership between CNU and Newport News Public
Schools to prepare twenty-four new teachers who are licensed in STEM
disciplines. Students who are recruited as undergraduates will complete a 4 + 1
master's program to gain licensure. Well-qualified post-baccalaureates in STEM
fields will complete a one-year Master in Education degree. The project team
intends to train the future teachers to use research on student thinking and
learning and reflections on their experiences to develop and refine effective
student-centered lessons. The project team anticipates that this training will
encourage the Scholars to continually improve their instructional practices
after they enter the teaching profession. The project intends to generate new
knowledge by investigating how the unique aspects of the preparation program
(e.g., the mentoring activities and the focus on developing an understanding of
student thinking and learning) affect the preparedness of the Scholars. The
findings from the project will be disseminated via journal publications and
presentations at professional organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.