* 1758699
* SBIR Phase II:  Passive Radio for the Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Aaron Parks, JEEVA WIRELESS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,409,890.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop low-power,
low-cost and small&lt;br/&gt;form factor wireless connectivity solutions,
facilitating the deployment of inexpensive and long-lived&lt;br/&gt;wireless
sensors and devices for a diverse set of applications. For instance, it is
infeasible to place&lt;br/&gt;conventional sensors or wireless connectivity on
low-cost or disposable items due to the high cost and&lt;br/&gt;short battery
life of wireless communication devices. With the successful completion of this
project,&lt;br/&gt;items ranging from consumer packaged goods to medical
consumables and pill bottles could be&lt;br/&gt;connected to the Internet.
Brands and manufacturers could gain previously inaccessible market
and&lt;br/&gt;product insights based on the way products are used, while
consumers could enjoy benefits ranging&lt;br/&gt;from new services and features
(such as automated product reordering) to better-designed
products&lt;br/&gt;which more closely fit their needs. By enabling new use cases
for wireless connectivity, this technology&lt;br/&gt;can prompt innovation
across many industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project introduces a new long-
range&lt;br/&gt;backscatter-based communication technology based on Chirp Spread
Spectrum, a wireless protocol&lt;br/&gt;which can be detected at extremely low
signal levels. The low-power wireless system prior to this&lt;br/&gt;project is
comprised of three elements: A passive backscatter-based radio, a first gateway
device which&lt;br/&gt;provides an illumination signal, and a second gateway
device which receives the resulting&lt;br/&gt;backscattered data and forwards
data to the Internet. In this project, the passive backscatter-
based&lt;br/&gt;radio will be implemented in an integrated circuit form,
realizing the low power and low cost possible&lt;br/&gt;with this technology.
The two gateway devices will be combined into one full-duplex radio device,
to&lt;br/&gt;address the needs of the majority of deployment scenarios.
Techniques to localize the backscatter&lt;br/&gt;radios within the field of the
gateway device will be explored. Finally, security challenges will
be&lt;br/&gt;addressed and the system will undergo extensive evaluation and
testing.