* 1758435
* Building a Dallas-area Mathematics Teacher Pipeline
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Scott Norris, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 100,273.00

This Noyce Capacity Building project at Southern Methodist University (SMU)
focuses on helping to meet the need for secondary mathematics teachers in the
Dallas area. This project aims to build capacity for a future Noyce Track 1
Scholarship program at SMU that will recruit and prepare locally-rooted
mathematics teachers for placement in high-need schools within the Dallas
Independent School District. By collaborating with Dallas County Community
College District (DCCCD), this project seeks to create a dual-enrollment
recruitment program that prepares student scholars for dual degrees in
Mathematics and Educational Studies at SMU. The project includes a collaboration
with staff from the Budd Center, a unit of SMU's School of Education focused on
bringing together educational non-profits in West Dallas. This collaboration
aims to facilitate student immersion in West Dallas throughout the program. The
project will also work with representatives from Dallas Independent School
District to make successful placements and provide ongoing support of the
student scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will work to create a
circular pipeline through which local students attending DCCCD would attend SMU,
participate in a community-focused training program, and then return to teach in
high-need schools in their home communities. As DCCCD has a highly diverse
student body, this project also seeks to enhance the diversity of teachers in
the Dallas-area. The project aims to educate and support the student scholars so
that they will be well prepared to teach in the area schools and be more likely
to stay in those schools. This influx of locally-rooted teachers could fill a
need for committed mathematics teachers, especially teachers of color, in Dallas
Independent School District. This project aims to develop a pipeline program for
developing mathematics teachers that could be implemented in new communities in
the Dallas area that have shortages of well-trained mathematics
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.