* 1758972
* Reconciling extrusion tectonics, rifting, and lithosphere-asthenosphere coupling models for the Central Highlands diffuse igneous province, Vietnam
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Lynne Elkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 413,437.00

The paradigm of plate tectonics represents the most fundamental planetary
process on Earth and is central to understanding geoscience, but key questions
remain about how motion of and stresses in tectonic plates are accommodated in
many regions. Relationships between tectonic plates and the underlying mantle
layer also remain debated, and those relationships are necessary to fully
understand what actually drives plate motion on Earth. Locations like Indochina
are particularly complex, influenced by a number of competing tectonic and
mantle driving forces, and are thus important laboratories for better
understanding how our planet functions as a dynamic, tectonic system. This study
investigates the origins of recent volcanic activity and faulting in the Central
Highlands of Vietnam. The goal of this research is to better understand the
geologic setting of Indochina, particularly what tectonic and mantle processes
drive faulting and volcanic activity. This work benefits society because it
directly promotes scientific progress by investigating fundamental scientific
questions about the planet and processes that shape it. The study contributes to
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by providing support for two early career
women scientists. The project supports STEM education and training of graduate
and undergraduate students, thus contributing to the development of a diverse,
globally competitive workforce. The project will contribute to increased public
literacy and public engagement with STEM supporting outreach events with the
University of Nebraska State Museum to disseminate scientific research and
educate the local community, and through a written report detailing any new
findings regarding potential hazards associated with recent volcanic eruption
timing and newly discovered faults. The project facilitates collaboration
between several U.S. universities, as well as international collaboration
between U.S. and Vietnamese scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, this
project aims to test, develop, and refine a robust, comprehensive regional model
that explains the dynamic origins of faulting and volcanism in Indochina,
thereby increasing understanding of tectonics and mantle dynamics in complex
regimes through the combined approaches of structural geology and igneous
geochemistry. The project rationale is the advancement of scientific
understanding of plate boundary and microplate dynamics and lithosphere-
asthenosphere coupling effects. The central hypothesis for this project states
that tectonic extrusion and coupled asthenospheric flow and upwelling have
driven rotation of the Southern Indochina microplate, including propagation of
strike-slip and normal faulting, and produced voluminous crustal magmatism
without mantle plume involvement. The specific research goals for the proposed
study are: 1) to evaluate age relationships between fault movement and volcanic
activity in the Central Highlands of Vietnam, 2) to gather data to define the
stress field of the Central Highlands and assess whether it is consistent with
an extrusion- or extension-dominated tectonic regime, and 3) to assess the
evidence for mantle upwelling in the same region by identifying mantle source
origins (lithosphere vs. asthenosphere) for lavas erupted over time and with
geographic distribution. These objectives will be achieved through field mapping
of fault orientations and kinematics; isotope dating of volcanic eruptions; and
comparative major element, trace element, and radiogenic isotope measurements in
basalts and mantle xenoliths. The research is expected to trigger a thorough
assessment of relationships between volcanism and faulting, the origin of the
tectonic stress driving faulting, and identification of local magma sources over
time, leading to a reconciled tectonic model for
Indochina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.