* 1758638
* SBIR Phase II:  Impact Bonding of Near Net-Shaped Ceramics to Metals Driven by Hydrogen Produced from Rapid Oxidation of Aluminum
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Peter Lohr, Advanced Hydrogen Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,122,499.00

This SBIR Phase II project will create an industrial process for bonding
ceramics to metals at the molecular level. Attempts thus far have not been
successful in creating robust bonds due to incongruities of the materials being
bonded. The objective of this project is to develop a sophisticated, computer
controlled, automated bonding machine that will rapidly and safely impact-bond
net-shaped ceramic carbides to tool steel in configurations that were previously
not available. An automated bonding machine will allow for a cost-effective way
to rapidly produce high quality near-net or net-shaped parts. It is expected
that as this simple method is popularized, new opportunities for design
configurations will be realized in multiple industries; as single parts can take
advantage of the properties multiple material, such as the strength and wear
resistance of ceramics, with the properties of another, such as the light weight
properties of aluminum. Engineers may incorporate cheaper, lighter, stronger,
and multipurpose material parts into new product designs. For instance, many new
ceramic and metal bonded parts may be fabricated for the automotive, aerospace,
chemical, defense, excavation, and nuclear industries. This project will
ultimately result in the creation of U.S. manufacturing, sales, and engineering
jobs as the mass production of ceramic and metal bonded parts become
commercially available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact-bonding
occurs within a bonding machine and uses a portable and very powerful cartridge
technology recently developed by the PI, an expert in aluminum/water reactions.
The cartridges are initiated in an enclosed chamber with a low voltage, which
causes the disassociation of water molecules and rapid oxidization of aluminum
that generates very high-pressure hydrogen in a safe and controlled manner and
without the use of high voltage, explosives or flammable gun propellants. Key
technological subjects of this research include the impact-energy, generated
hydrogen propulsion, and the post-bond impact-energy absorption. The goal is a
manufacturing process that will produce dissimilar material composite parts with
superior joint strength that will survive impact-fatigue-cycles in harsh
environments such as mining, demolition, excavation, construction, oil gas
drilling, and many more potential industries. Other mechanical methods of
joining ceramics and metals, such as brazing and adhesives, have not sustained
impact fatigue cycling. The superior products are wear resistant and will
benefit several industries to include the cutting tool market, electrical and
thermally insulated components, ballistic armor, and others. This project aims
to produce pioneering publications on impact bonding ceramics and metals and
will also further enhance the knowledge of high-velocity impact bonding
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.