* 1759071
* Collaborative Research: Determining the eco-hydrogeologic response of tropical glacierized watersheds to climate change: An integrated data-model approach
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrew Wickert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 395,163.00

Recent rapid glacier retreat, especially in tropical regions such as the
Ecuadorian Andes, raises important questions about water resources.
Understanding the current effects of glacier retreat on water supply in these
regions can shed light on future water security threats in snow and ice-covered
mountainous watersheds worldwide. Glaciers are the "water towers" of the
mountains: they store ice during wet periods and gradually release meltwater
during dry periods. However, whether groundwater aquifers serve as extended
reservoirs and whether plants also take up significant glacial meltwater remain
unresolved questions. These uncertainties make it difficult to predict the
future reliability of water supply in mountainous watersheds, as glacier melt
first accelerates and then eventually disappears, and as plants move to higher
elevations in response to warming temperatures. This project will develop a new
and general computational watershed model that will incorporate chemical and
isotopic data for tracing water flow source regions, as well as measurements
from innovative low-cost, open-source environmental monitoring technologies.
Results from the model can inform communities that rely on stream discharge from
ice and snow-covered mountainous watersheds about present with regard to future
water resources vulnerabilities, and can facilitate adaptation strategies as
glacier retreat accelerates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The recession of glaciers
will curtail their ability to modulate river discharge and its variability.
Studies of this hydrologic consequence typically classify meltwater and
groundwater as distinct contributors to streamflow, but this oversimplifies the
potentially complex relationships among glaciers, their underlying groundwater
systems, and ecohydrologic pathways. The investigators propose to assess these
relationships using an integrated data-model approach in four rapidly changing,
glacierized Ecuadorian watersheds, two each at Volcán Chimborazo and Volcán
Cayambe. This work will produce a new isotope-enabled watershed model with
reactive transport, to which data assimilation will be introduced in order to
condition uncertain simulations in data-sparse watersheds with robust
environmental tracers. Open-source data loggers and sensors for measuring model
input data will further advance critical-zone process understanding beyond data-
intensive sites to remote settings that are undergoing some of the most rapid
environmental change in the world. This work will shed light on less-studied
volcanic ranges that potentially facilitate greater infiltration of meltwater
through their fractured bedrock, as well as expand the established water-
resources focus on glacier retreat to also consider vegetation shift when
examining the hydrologic response of glacierized mountainous watersheds to
glacier retreat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.