* 1759158
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Creation and Mission Content of Non-Governmental Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Sarah Bush, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 12/31/2022
* USD 88,631.00

This project will examine the creation and mission content of non-governmental
organizations [NGOs] based in the United States. The project will enhance basic
understanding about when, why, and how entrepreneurs make strategic decisions to
enter the non-profit market, and the consequences of these choices for social
welfare outcomes. The project will have a broader impact by assisting current
and potential non-profit leaders to make better decisions regarding when and how
to create new organizations. The research from this project will be disseminated
through targeted publications, a public website, and a workshop. The study will
also contribute to education and research infrastructure. Specifically, it will
develop datasets about NGOs based in the United States that will be made
available to other researchers, including extensive qualitative materials from
several NGO sectors. It will have an important educational benefit by training
undergraduate and graduate students and generating classroom
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and test
theory about variation in NGO creation and mission content. It asks questions
such as: when and why are NGOs created, and for what purposes? Despite the
practical and theoretical importance of non-governmental organizations, scholars
have given little systematic attention to when NGOs are founded and the purposes
for which NGOs are created. This project combines theory from multiple
disciplines to enhance knowledge of organizational creation, examining NGOs over
time and across different sectors. The proposed project offers two key advances.
Methodologically, the project employs experimental and qualitative methods to
complement traditional observational, quantitative approaches to organizational
creation. Theoretically, the project examines mission content and innovation in
NGO creation, building on previous work to examine new outcome variables. The
proposed research involves three principal types of original data collection and
analysis. First, a statistical analysis of coded NGO mission statements will
enable the study of dynamics among a large number of real-world INGOs, promoting
external validity. Second, a survey of NGO practitioners will enhance the
study's internal validity by integrating an experimental component. Moreover, it
will enable the testing of the individual-level observable implications of the
theoretical framework. And third, qualitative case studies of the evolution of
several INGO sectors will explore the processes by which sectors develop and
change. This multi-pronged research strategy is guided by a recognition that the
study of organizations benefits from analyses at multiple levels and using
multiple methodologies. Cutting across all prongs of the research design is a
commitment to studying NGOs in diverse sectors of activity to promote the
study's generalizability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.