* 1759092
* Pathways to Indigenous STEM (Ma:cidag wo:g STEM Wui)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mario Montes-Helu, Tohono O'odham Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,609,528.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
nation's Indigenous students. The "Pathways to Indigenous STEM (Ma:cidag wo:g
STEM Wui)" project at Tohono O'odham Community College (TOCC) directly addresses
these goals by increasing the number and diversifying the delivery mode of STEM
courses and strengthening the academic support for students. Expanding the STEM
curricular offerings and improving the academic environment to better meet the
needs of Native students encourages students to pursue challenging and rewarding
STEM degrees and careers, thus diversifying the nation's workforce and
contributing to our country's prosperity and security. The knowledge gained from
studying the efficacy of the project will contribute to our understanding of
best practices for recruiting and retaining underrepresented students in STEM
and preparing the next generation of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Man in the Maze Education Model" (MiME)
developed at TOCC will serve as a culturally-based framework for curriculum
development and program assessment and will provide an intentional and
systematic approach to Indigenizing TOCC's STEM curriculum and programs. The
project will realize these goals by focusing on four objectives: (1) Application
of a culturally responsive education model that integrates STEM disciplines in a
culturally-responsive manner, (2) increasing the number of curricular offerings
in the Physical Sciences and online STEM courses, (3) promotion of the
professional preparedness of students by engaging them in internships and
research experiences, and (4) increased support for transitioning students from
high school to TOCC and TOCC to other colleges. This project will result in an
assessment and design for STEM instructional improvement that will incorporate
elements of self-determination and culturally-based education within the context
of the current generation of Tohono O'odham students. The project plan includes
unique and innovative instructional strategies that are compatible with the
Tohono O'odham culture with a goal of preparing students to face current and
future challenges using both 21st-century knowledge and traditional knowledge.
Incorporating an Indigenous education model based on the MiME Model represents a
significant contribution toward understanding how to implement and assess
culturally-based education. Although the MiME Model is culturally specific to
TOCC, the model's concepts for integrating STEM into a traditional cultural
knowledge base can be adapted for application at tribal colleges and
universities and other minority-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.