* 1759573
* Collaborative Research: Instabilities and Turbulence in Gravity Wave Dissipation and Formation of Thermospheric Sodium Layers above the Andes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Fabio Augusto Vargas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 837,750.00

This award will fund continued operations of a sodium (Na) wind-temperature
(W&amp;T) lidar at the Andes Lidar Observatory (ALO) in Cerro Pachon, Chile
(30.25 S, 70.74 W, elev. 2530 m) supporting scientific studies aimed at the
dynamics of mesopause atmospheric instabilities and turbulence structures
formation resulting from the gravity wave (GW) dissipation processes for a
spatial region above the Andes where the population of mountain GW events is
abundant. The Na lidar at ALO is a state-of-the-art resonance-fluorescence
Doppler lidar, capable of measuring 3D wind, neutral temperature and Na density
profiles with excellent vertical and temporal resolutions within the 80-105 km
altitude range (referred to as the MLT region) and with high accuracy. Other
possible W&amp;T lidar studies would include the extension of lidar observations
into the lower thermosphere, with wind and temperature measurements up to 140 km
altitude for the somewhat frequent occurrence of thermospheric sodium layers.
The formation of such layers is not understood and will be a significant topic
of research in this award. Another interesting application of the ALO
observatory is the detection of turbulence scale perturbations in the mesosphere
and lower thermosphere temperature and wind profiles that are related to the
formation of atmospheric unstable layers and dissipation of GW
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A point of great interest was how the results of
this research might be applicable to other planetary atmospheres where the same
issues of fluid dynamics come into play because the same energy transfer
mechanism applies to these environments. The details of this mechanism that
transfers translational energy associated with meteorological systems at low
altitudes into a heat source that is significant at MLT altitudes are poorly
understood. This conversion process is known to be related to the decreasing
exponential neutral density. As the GW structure propagates into the upper
region, a conversion process comes into play through dissipation processes that
this award would define by undertaking the comparison of observations with the
predictions of modelling studies centered upon the question of the initiation,
development, and evolution of turbulent structures. Another issue relating to
this award area of study is the opportunity to study the atmospheric effects of
a total solar eclipse that will be happening in 2019 in
Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.