* 1759442
* My STEM Story: Scaling STEM Motivation Through Digital Storytelling and Near Peer Relationships
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jenefer Husman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,203,658.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a novel approach to near-peer mentoring. High school students will use
videography to capture their conversations with undergraduate students about
their academic struggles and successes in science. The goal is for the digital
storytelling videos to bring to life the experiences students from
underrepresented groups have in their pursuit of careers in STEM fields. The
project is based on the premise that interactions between undergraduate students
and high school proteges having similar backgrounds and social experiences have
potential to benefit both students in the near peer mentoring relationship as
well other high school students who view the videos within teacher-guided
settings. The digital storytelling approach is expected to promote positive
attitudes toward science, interests in science disciplines, and intentions to
pursue education pathways to science-related careers. In particular, it is
anticipated that the approach will contribute to broadening the participation of
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM-related education
pathways and career domains. The project will examine the extent to which the
planned creative and reflective video experiences generate interests in pathways
to STEM careers more effectively than traditional, academically focused
approaches. It is hypothesized that the digital storytelling videos highlighting
core themes such as overcoming personal struggles and institutional barriers,
learning from mistakes, dispelling misconceptions about scientists and science
careers, and the reality of being a young person of color interested in science,
can effectively promote positive attitudes toward science and intentions to
pursue STEM-related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is guided by four
research questions: (1) For high school proteges co-constructing digital
storytelling videos, does the project intervention influence students' possible
future selves as well as the proximal outcomes of: (a) Positive attitudes toward
science, (b) Greater interest in science, and (c) Greater intentions to pursue
science pathways? (2) In a broader sample of high school students in science
classrooms, does the project intervention succeed in influencing students'
possible future selves and subsequent proximal outcomes? (3) What are the
themes-both predicted and unanticipated-that are portrayed in the digital
storytelling videos? What are the key elements that students find personally
meaningful or memorable? (4) Do the intervention effects vary as a function of
level of viewer engagement with the digital storytelling videos, specific themes
portrayed in the videos, and/or individual student-level characteristics? And
(5) Is the intervention feasible and usable in schools? Does it show promise for
scaling? The project will begin with intervention design and recruitment of
students and teachers, followed by a feasibility pilot test using a mixed-
methods case study. An efficacy field test will then be conducted using a small-
scale group-randomized design, with schools randomized into one of three
conditions: full intervention, partial intervention without live video-chat, and
partial intervention with informational videos rather than digital storytelling
videos produced by participating students. Outcome measures will be administered
before the intervention, immediately after the intervention, and six months
after the intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.