* 1759178
* RAPID: Preferences and Decisions to Evacuate in the Face of Hurricane Harvey
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Rick Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2018
* USD 40,358.00

This study looks at who decided to leave and who decided to stay in the face of
a mandatory evacuation of citizens prior to the landfall of Hurricane Harvey in
August 2017. Citizens were given ample warnings that Hurricane Harvey was
growing in intensity and was likely to bring record amounts of rainfall. Social
scientists often have studied decisions by citizens to evacuate or remain in the
face of a natural disaster. We find that when people understand their risk, when
they are well informed about the hazards of staying and when they have resources
to leave, they will. However, social scientists do not understand how
preferences about risk, trust in public officials and cooperation with others
inform decisions to leave. Understanding when citizens agree to leave behind
their property at the urging of local officials is something that is not well
understood. Citizens heeding the recommendations of public officials are a
central element of a democratic society. Yet it is well known that a sizeable
proportion of the population refuses to go along with mandatory evacuation
orders. When the natural disaster is severe, those staying behind place enormous
stress on first responders. This research provides insight into what motivates
people to leave or stay. This in turn will help public officials in their
efforts to convince people to evacuate when necessary. Social scientists have
thoroughly explored people's rationalization about whether to evacuate prior to
a natural disaster. Much of this research has looked at individuals after an
event (a flood, a tornado or a hurricane) and asked them to recall their
decisions. These post-event recollections are usually correlated with attitudes
that people hold about disasters. Unfortunately, the recollections, the scope of
the disaster and post-event attitudes are confounded. The disaster alters
attitudes, often in a self-serving manner. People rebuild their own narratives
about what drove them to leave or remain. Our research solves this problem by
leveraging a sample of individuals living in a hurricane-prone area whose
preferences toward risk and loss and attitudes about disasters were measured
between 2009 and 2011. Many of these individuals were part of a three-wave panel
with repeated measures. We will re-contact these individuals and ask them
whether they obeyed a mandatory evacuation prior to the first landfall of
Hurricane Harvey. Our measures are not concerned with their reconstructed
rationale, but rather what they did. Their behavior will then be linked to the
rich set of measures taken well prior to this event. This puts this research in
an unusual position to see if fundamental preferences about risk, loss, time
discounting, trust and cooperation predict basic evacuation behavior.