* 1759645
* SBE-RCUK: The Geopolitical Orientations of People in Borderland States
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 659,994.00

This research project will produce a detailed portrait of the geopolitical
orientations of the populations in nine countries across the post-Soviet regions
of Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia. The investigators will systematically
explain the reasons for such orientations, including pro and anti-Russian and
Western opinions, and they will assess the consistency of these orientations in
the context of significant domestic political changes, regional economic
disparities, sizable population movements and geopolitical shifts, and possible
continuation or spreading of violent confrontations between Russian and Western-
backed forces across the Eurasian region. The project will contribute to
understanding the political dynamics of successor states of the former Soviet
Union as they negotiate imperial legacies, economic interdependence, and dynamic
geopolitical competition and change in the region. In contrast with standard
international relations approaches, which tend to focus on elite politics within
states and large state geopolitical competition over these states and contested
separatist region, the project will focus on enhancing knowledge about the
attitudes and beliefs of ordinary residents of these states. The increased
understanding of the geopolitical orientations of residents along Russia's
borderland states will provide valuable new insights to inform the development
and conduct of foreign policy in the U.S. and other states. Project findings
will help increase on-the-ground knowledge of domestic contexts of foreign-
policy choices in regions at a time of polarization, suspicion, crisis, and
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars, policy makers, and the public have
increased interest in Russia's exercise of "soft power" (the expansion of its
influence through persuasion and attraction rather than military or economic
pressure) and other forms of power. The reaction to these efforts by the
populations in non-Russian regions of the former Soviet Union has not been
comprehensively or intensively measured, however. This project will examine how
the geopolitical crisis that began with the Russian annexation of Crimea has
reshaped the geopolitical outlook of the different populations in countries and
disputed territories of the former Soviet Union that border Russia. Critical to
the future of the region is the relative attractiveness of Russian, the West,
and other states to domestic populations. The project will focus on the
political attitudes and identifications of ordinary people, not state elites.
The investigators who are collaborating in the conduct of this project are
political geographers and political scientists from the United States and the
United Kingdom who are experts in post-Soviet affairs. They will conduct a
simultaneous set of public opinion surveys of nine independent states, four
existing de facto republics in separatist regions, and two contested territories
within Ukraine. The investigators will examine select media outputs across the
former Soviet Union and will conduct two waves of a large public opinion survey
of 15,000 respondents to gauge and understand geopolitical attitudes and
orientations. They will employ a mixed-methods approach that combines the
examination of cultural and news broadcasts in all the study sites and
quantitative analysis of data from a two-wave survey panel. This award is made
under the auspices of the NSF Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences-Research
Councils of the United Kingdom (SBE-RCUK) Lead Agency
Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.