* 1759544
* REU Site:  Scripps' Structure and Function Summer Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Philip Dawson, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 359,756.00

This REU Site award to the Scripps Research Institute, located in La Jolla, CA,
supports the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during each of the summers of
2018-2020. This program integrates cutting-edge research with professional
skills development and cohort building activities. Student research focuses on
the structure and function of macromolecules (e.g., defining proteins in innate
and acquired immune systems, developing databases cataloguing the molecular
components of the cell, integrating computational methods with biophysical
techniques to determine protein structure, developing chemical tools to probe
biological questions, and exploring brain function). In addition to lab
research, students will participate in a bootcamp at the beginning of the
program and attend weekly professional development workshops on topics such as
ethics and responsible conduct of research, and scientific seminars where they
will read current scientific articles, discuss the rationale behind the
experiments, analyze the work critically, and engage in scientific discourse
with their peers. The program will culminate with each student presenting a
poster during campus-wide poster presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities and/or from underrepresented populations, will be trained
in the program. Several factors will be considered for participant selection,
including academic record, letters of reference, student interest in obtaining
an advanced career in science, and diversity. Given the importance of
undergraduate research experience in graduate studies, this program will provide
students with critical opportunities to improve research and communication
skills and prepare to pursue careers in research. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences or as peer-reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of this training program. Students will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting
https://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/careu/index.html, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Dawn Eastmond at eduprgm@scripps.edu) and the co-PI (Dr. Philip
Dawson at eduprgm@scripps.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.