* 1759353
* Collaborative Research: AGeS2 (Awards for Geochronology Student research) Program: Democratizing access to geochronology and promoting interdisciplinary science
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* J Ramon Arrowsmith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 687,836.00

Geochronology is profoundly important in Earth science research. Geochronology
data are required to quantitatively resolve the 4th dimension of time inherent
in Earth science, and are increasingly necessary to conduct modern, cutting-
edge, interdisciplinary research. The growing geochronology need is accompanied
by strong demands to broaden community access to geochronology data, enhance the
ability of laboratories to meet this pressure, and increase community awareness
of how these data are produced and interpreted. The AGeS (Awards for
Geochronology Student research) program provides opportunities for graduate
students to develop the scientific rationale for projects involving
geochronology, and then provides them with hands-on experience actually
acquiring data in labs, all while being mentored by geochronologists. This
project will grow AGeS2 into a wider cross-disciplinary initiative to further
enhance access to geochronology data, promote geochronology training, and
stimulate new synergistic science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AGeS2 is aimed at 1)
democratizing access to geochronology, 2) educating users of geochronology data,
3) promoting synergistic science by fostering new relationships between labs and
other disciplines, and 4) providing strategic, high-quality, scientifically-
valuable geochronology data for projects in which both users and producers of
the data are intellectually engaged. It doubles the annual award funding for
graduate student geochronology projects. A new partnership with the Geological
Society of America (GSA) will allow successful management of this broader
effort. AGeS2 will take advantage of new opportunities for cohort- and community
building afforded by the program's popularity to maximize the educational and
scientific outcomes of AGeS investments. These activities will include regular
teleconferences with each year's AGeS student cohorts and two AGeS gatherings
prior to the national GSA meeting. Ongoing student-lab-advisor interactions will
be encouraged throughout the typical 2 year AGeS project duration to further
promote project success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.