* 1759176
* 2018 World Congress of Biomechanics: Undergraduate Student Support from the Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering and Biotransport (SB3C) Foundation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Jonathan Vande Geest, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 27,421.00

This award will support student activities at the 2018 Summer Biomechanics,
Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C2018) being held in conjunction
with the 2018 World Congress of Biomechanics (WCB2018) in Dublin, Ireland, on
July 6-11, 2018. The SB3C meetings, and their predecessor SBC meetings, are
generally considered the premiere annual meetings for biomechanics. The
quadrennial World Congress of Biomechanics is the world's largest conference on
biomechanics. The primary purpose of the meeting is to promote state-of-the-art
research, collaboration, and international scientific discourse in the broad
field of bioengineering with focus on biomechanics, biotechnology, biotransport,
biomaterials, tissue engineering, rehabilitation and design. The organizing
committee for WCB18 and SB3C2018 is drawn from individuals in academia and the
industry with significant experience in running the previous summer meetings.
The meeting and its precursor meetings have traditionally provided a high-
quality, multidisciplinary biomedical engineering event since the early 90's and
contributed to training many generations of academics and researchers. Notably,
the summer meetings series has, since its inception, prioritized the integration
of students into the meeting to support their professional development and
future connection to the biomechanics, biotransport and bioengineering research
community. For many years, students have made up more than 50% of attendees and
presenters at SB3C meetings. In addition to the direct impact this conference
will have on the mainstream bioengineering community, it serves an important
cross-fertilization role, since attendees are drawn from a very broad range of
disciplines beyond biomechanics . &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of the project
are to sponsor 20 travel fellowships for females and under-represented
minorities; to support a Diversity Mentorship event to connect students from
underrepresented groups with academic mentors; and to sponsor the prestigious
Student Paper Competition by covering the meeting registration costs of the top
20 submissions to each of the BS and MS competitions. Student travel fellowships
will be targeted at students who have just completed their junior year, which
will allow them to network and explore graduate school options. These students
typically have not advanced enough in their undergraduate research to obtain
institutional support for conference travel. Finalists and winners in the
student paper competition can add this information to their resumes, and the
competition provides an opportunity for students to develop as researchers and
is a significant career boost, enhancing retention of the most talented students
and providing role models for all student attendees. Through the technical
proceedings and conference web site, information presented at the meeting will
be available to multiple societies and to the public at large. Further, the
conference has historically had, and is expected to continue to have more than
50 percent of the attendees being students and postdoctoral fellows and more
than 25 percent female attendees. For the second time, the organization
committee has been extended to include a Diversity Chair. Through the travel
fellowships and associated workshops, the PI plans to establish this meeting as
the "go to" conference for female and under-represented minority attendees.