* 1759518
* ABI Development: Improving transcriptome assembly from RNA-seq data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Mihaela Pertea, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 993,407.00

This project aims at improving the efficiency and accuracy of the computational
method for transcript identification and quantification, StringTie. Due to its
unparalleled speed and accuracy, StringTie has become one of the leading tools
in the field and has a rapidly growing user base. Identifying the transcripts
being expressed by a cell is a critical step in studying cell development,
disease, the response to infection, specific gene pathways, and much more. By
producing better models and expression levels for genes and transcripts,
StringTie will, therefore, have an impact on many different areas of research
that study biological diversity in our world. The software developed during this
project will be made available under an open-source license, thereby enhancing
the research infrastructure of the US by enabling the broad reuse of the code
base by other scientists investigating similar research
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The most significant result of this project
extends StringTie's usability to a larger community of scientists interested in
eukaryotic gene annotation by the addition of a de novo assembly method, which
will incorporate genome assembly technology with sequencing coverage information
and optimization techniques. By solving a maximum flow problem on a splicing
graph built directly from uniquely assembled reads, this new assembly method has
the potential to reduce false positives typically associated with methods that
use a de Bruijn graph approach. Furthermore, two additional features will
improve the accuracy of the transcriptome assembly: one will make StringTie
efficiently handle long reads typically produced by third-generation sequencing
technologies, and another one will incorporate annotation of open reading frames
as information describing the assembled transcripts. Both additions have the
potential to significantly improve the transcript structures inferred from
short-read RNA-sequencing data. The results of this project will be disseminated
via scientific publications and the StringTie website:
http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/stringtie.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.