* 1759709
* RAPID: Water quality impacts of hurricane Harvey: Distribution of metals and diversity of microbial communities in greater Houston
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Shankar Chellam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2020
* USD 67,874.00

Proposal: 1759709&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shankar Chellam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
category 4 hurricane named Harvey is the most extreme rain event in our
country's history precipitating an estimated 12 trillion gallons of water over
greater Houston alone. Humans, other animals, and the entire ecosystem have been
exposed to myriad contaminants present in its floodwater and runoff. Hurricane
samples will be characterized to identify different microbial communities to
understand their role in the hydrological cycle. The hypothesis driving the work
is that stormwater runoff mobilizes metals and microorganisms, which contribute
to floodwater and runoff toxicity. Fifty representative elements, transition
metals, and rare earth elements will be quantified. Microbial characterization
will be used to determine any differences in microbial communities due to
hurricane Harvey in an expansive urban environment. The primary objective is to
present a comprehensive snapshot of metals concentrations and microorganism
diversity with reference to microbial composition and prevalence in hurricane
Harvey floodwaters in greater Houston. To this end, 36 samples have already been
collected from 30 different locations representing a variety of urban and
suburban land use patterns including residential, industrial, commercial, and
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since hurricane Harvey is a 500-800
year storm, this represents a rare opportunity to characterize the elemental
composition and dynamics of bacterial community diversity. Also, most previous
floodwater and runoff measurements only considered a small subset of metals,
whereas the PIs are targeting 50 main group elements, transition metals, and
rare earths. Further, this is the first effort towards targeting high-throughput
next generation sequencing to understand hurricane effects (if any) on the
diversity of microbial community structures. Next Generation Sequencing can be
performed long after sampling unlike traditional microbiological methods to
precisely characterize various pathogens or their strains. Through integrated
efforts between a microbiologist and an environmental engineer, a unique dataset
will be created. The data will provide information on contaminant loading into
the ecologically sensitive and economically important Galveston Bay. Knowledge
of microbiological and chemical composition of floodwater and runoff provides
insights into its toxicity. This information can also potentially improve
strategies to manage stormwater in large watersheds. The doctoral student will
obtain a unique perspective and gain valuable interdisciplinary experience
working with a leading microbiologist. The results will be shared with news
outlets including the Houston Chronicle and Public Broadcasting Stations.