* 1759167
* Innovation Challenges for Middle School Mathematics in a Digital Learning System:  Student Participation Impact on Achievement, Affect, and STEM Career Interest
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jere Confrey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,195,719.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase middle school girls and minorities motivations and capacities to
pursue careers in STEM fields. By developing digital mathematics and
engineering-based challenges, the project is designed to motivate students to
pursue STEM fields. Students participate in teams to create and pitch
entrepreneurial ideas. Using a personalized avatar, students will navigate a
learning map, develop a portfolio of work products, ideas and experiences,
identify peer partners and form a team, and collaboratively prepare for an
entrepreneurial start-up competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages an entrepreneurial sprit to explore STEM careers through project-
developed Innovation Challenges. The research component will investigate the
project's effect on the motivation of middle school girls and minorities to
persist in STEM courses with the overall goal to improve the participation of
women and minorities in STEM careers. Specifically, the project will investigate
how engaging underrepresented (STEM) students in carefully designed innovation
challenge tasks that leverage an entrepreneurial spirit will affect student
orientation and achievement outcomes such as self-efficacy, socio-emotional
learning, and academic growth along learning trajectories. The proposed
digitally-based mathematics challenges are framed within two distinct
approaches. First, the project-based STEM activities are connected to
improvement in academic competency. Second, the project uses avatars to
encourage positive student-self-perception and collaboration as well as to bring
the learning experiences closer to middle grades interests. This study has the
potential to strengthen the existing knowledge base on the effect of digital
learning systems on student learning and motivation based on its theoretical
foundation, focus on meaningful measures, and connections to previous STEM
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.