* 1759479
* RAPID:   Study of Landfalling Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Michael Biggerstaff, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 60,910.00

This research is for data collection, quality control, archive and preliminary
analysis of data collected during Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. Hurricane Harvey
was the first major hurricane landfall in the United States since 2005 and is
one of the very few Category 4 hurricane landfalls in the modern weather radar
era. The researchers plan to use the unprecedented observations from these
hurricanes to address questions related to how hurricane dynamics impact wind
and rainfall during landfall. The research has direct relevance to improving
public safety by providing data to forecasters, emergency managers and
engineers. The grant is in response to the NSF Dear Colleague Letter on
Hurricane Harvey research (NSF 17-128). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will begin quality control, archiving and initial analysis of Hurricane Harvey
data and to deploy the dual-polarimetric SMART-R radar and additional surface
instrumentation to the landfall of Hurricane Irma. The focus of the research
from Harvey and Irma will be on the role of Vortex Rossby Waves (VRWs) and
spiral rainbands. The research team will address four topics: 1) Collect
observations to address the coupling between the boundary layer and circulations
aloft during hurricane landfall, 2) Determine the contribution of vortex Rossby
wave-driven rain bands to rainfall during landfall, 3) Provide additional
observations to examine the role of inward propagating asymmetries on the
development and evolution of meso- and miso-scale vortices in the inner eyewall
region of landfalling hurricanes, and 4) Collect observations needed to document
the environment of outer rainbands to improve forecasts of tornadic storms
within landfalling tropical cyclones.