* 1759596
* Flood Risk and Property Rights in Delta Megacities
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Gavin Shatkin, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 197,352.00

This research project will analyze the impact that growing awareness of future
flood risk has on laws, policies, and norms concerning property rights in large
metropolitan areas located in major river deltas. The investigator will examine
social, political, and legal facets of a city that is undertaking massive and
disruptive planning and infrastructural interventions in response to projections
of significant increases in flooding. This project will contribute to basic
understanding of the political and legal debates that emerge in flood-prone
cities between those who argue that property rights need to be constrained to
implement infrastructure improvements and enforce land-use regulations and those
who advocate strengthening property rights to empower community-based efforts at
flood mitigation. The project will inform debates about laws and policies
concerning the terms of eviction and resettlement for flood mitigation
initiatives. The project will also contribute to theoretical debates about the
ways that hazard risk impacts dynamics of urban politics. The findings will
provide new insights for flood-threatened cities in the United States, such as
New Orleans, Boston, and New York, in addition to cities on other continents,
such as Jakarta, Indonesia; Bangkok, Thailand; Manila, Philippines; Lagos,
Nigeria; and Alexandria, Egypt. The project also will help build infrastructure
for research on policy issues related to flooding and risk management in the
United States and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While substantial research
attention has focused on infrastructural and governance questions related to
floods, there has been relatively little attention given to the social,
political, and legal implications of flooding. With increases in the number and
magnitude of major urban floods in recent decades and further increases
projected for the coming decades, however, many delta cities are undertaking
policy and planning initiatives and political reforms that raise fundamental
questions about the distribution of hazard resilience and the costs of
mitigation efforts. Questions of property rights constitute a key element in
debates over flood mitigation, because the interactions among land, water, and
human systems that are under question in these debates are related intrinsically
to the question of who has what rights to use land. This project will focus on
key questions that are central to these issues: How have state actors sought to
redefine property rights in light of flood risk? What strategies have non-state
actors pursued to contest eviction and assert their own claims? What legal and
institutional changes have resulted? What are the implications of these dynamic
interactions for urban politics? In his investigation of a case study of one
major metropolis astride a large delta, the investigator will review documents,
policy reports, and media accounts, and he will conduct interviews with key
actors in order to analyze court cases concerning the property rights of low-
income communities that face eviction under government initiatives to
"normalize" rivers to improve drainage. He will employ a geographic information
system to evaluate the spatial dynamics of eviction accompanying efforts to
increase green space. He also will analyze government reports and plans,
academic studies, media accounts, and information garnered through interviews
with key stakeholders to assess shifting perspectives on property rights
resulting from a major government flood mitigation
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.