* 1759798
* RUI: Development of new polyvalent iodine reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Viktor Zhdankin, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2023
* USD 575,308.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Viktor V. Zhdankin of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at University of Minnesota Duluth is developing new classes of
oxidizing agents. Oxidizing agents are important tools for the construction of a
wide variety of molecules. The approach Professor Zhdankin and his group is
developing utilizes polyvalent iodine compounds because they are efficient and
environmentally more "friendly" that the reagents currently used. The iodine
based systems work because iodine is one of the heaviest elements in the
Periodic Table classified as a non-metal. Hence, these more sustainable reagents
mimic the structural features and reactivity pattern heavy, frequently toxic
transition metals they are being used to replace. It is also important to note
that the reagents are new. As such, they can be used to not only replicate
existing methods, but also to develop entirely new reactions. The project lies
at the interface of organic and inorganic chemistry and it is well suited for
undergraduate education as well as for training of scientists at all levels.
Professor Zhdankin's group has a long history of providing the highest level of
education and training for students underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zhdankin and his group are pursuing a broad
study of new, metal-free, iodine-mediated reactions. In this effort, they are
searching for new hypervalent reagents, and they are exploring the new modes of
reactivity those reagents enable. Specific objectives of this project include
the study of arylbenziodoxaboroles as efficient benzyne precursors, the
development of new carbene precursors based on phenolic iodonium salts, the
study of arylation reactions with phenolic diaryliodonium salts, and the study
of phosphonium-iodonium ylides as reagents for synthesis of trifluoromethyl-
substituted alkenes. In a second effort, Professor Zhdankin is searching for
stable and potentially useful hypervalent iodine complexes with mesoionic
carbenes. The new synthetic methodology based on organohypervalent iodine
chemistry is contributing to environmentally benign methods for chemical
synthesis as it utilizes non-toxic compounds of iodine as catalysts or
recyclable reagents in aqueous solutions. Successful development of this
methodology is having an impact on how the synthesis of molecules relevant to
the pharmaceutical, chemical, and agricultural industries is approached. This
project provides excellent training to students at all levels of education
including those from groups historically underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.