* 1759847
* RUI: Studying Fundamental Electron-Photon Interactions with an Ultrafast Electron Microscope
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brett Barwick, Ripon College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 301,261.00

Over the last decade a new research field has developed by combining electron
microscopy with ultrafast lasers. Now "ultrafast electron microscopes" can be
used to make movies of nanoscale (microscopic) processes that occur too quickly
to observe with standard electron microscopes. This project will use an
ultrafast electron microscope to study fundamental quantum mechanical phenomena
such as the transfer of orbital angular momentum from light to electrons. This
team will also explore how light can be used to compress electron pulses in time
from picoseconds to tens of femptoseconds, and to shape the spatial properties
of electron beams. Undergraduate students will gain research experience
conducting these experiments with a low-energy ultrafast electron microscope,
and this training will help prepare them for advanced studies or jobs in high
tech industry. As another benefit to society, these experiments will demonstrate
novel optical manipulation methods to control electron pulses with nanometer and
femtosecond precision, and this in turn will advance the technical capabilities
of electron microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore new
techniques to efficiently control the spatial and temporal properties of short
pulses of electrons. The first technique will use the Kapitza-Dirac effect to
transfer orbital angular momentum from photons to electrons, enabling quantized
transfer of orbital angular momentum between two different free particles. A
successful demonstration of this experiment will show that light can be used to
manipulate the spatial phase of an electron beam. The second technique that will
be explored is the use of intense standing waves of light to compress electron
pulses from picosecond durations to only a few femtoseconds. Current electron
pulses used for ultrafast electron diffraction and microscopy are limited to
about 100 femtoseconds, which leaves a variety of dynamical processes out of
reach. Electron pulses with durations of a few femtoseconds will provide an
opportunity to follow dynamical processes in structural and electronic nanoscale
systems. In summary, this project will demonstrate control over the spatial and
temporal properties of electron pulses with novel methods that can have an
impact on imaging and quantum control techniques that are needed for physics,
chemistry, and biology.