* 1759041
* Trans-Atlantic Workshop on Public Private Partnerships for Big Data Research and Innovation and Workforce Development
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Christine Kirkpatrick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 72,278.00

The NSF Big Data Innovation Hubs (Big Data Hubs) will organize and co-sponsor a
Trans-Atlantic Workshop on Public Private Partnerships for Big Data Research
&amp; Innovation and Workforce Development in Versailles, France, on November
20, 2017, in conjunction with the European Big Data Value Forum 2017
(http://www.european-big-data-value-forum.eu), and in cooperation with the EU
Big Data Value Association, PICASSO Project, and INRIA, and also work towards
organizing additional workshops to ensure a continuing dialogue among US and EU
researchers and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the first workshop
are to bring together academic and industry actors from the United States and
the European Union (EU) to: (1) discuss effective models and practices for
supporting academia-industry collaborative research programs in Big Data/data
science research and innovation, with particular focus on public-private
partnerships (PPP) in the application domains of smart cities, transportation,
health, environment, and food-energy-water; (2) identify opportunities for
direct bilateral research and innovation collaborations (at the project level
and between individual researchers) and data sharing between the US and the EU,
especially between the NSF Big Data Hub &amp; Spoke projects and the European
BDV PPP Lighthouse projects along the verticals listed above; and (3) discuss
effective models and practices for bridging data science workforce needs with
the developing academic discipline of data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Videoconferencing meetings are planned between US
and EU researchers to discuss priorities in Big Data research and applications
areas, and to plan for potential subsequent&lt;br/&gt;workshops. The lessons
learned from the first workshop will directly influence and determine the
direction and structure of future workshops, after which plans will be drawn up
for those future meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
activity is that it will serve as a platform for bringing the US Big Data Hubs,
European Big Data Value Association, and PICASSO project teams and associated
communities together for sharing their collective knowledge about successes and
pain points in coordinating data science research and innovation activities.
This dialogue will afford a deeper understanding of complementary approaches,
technologies and policies for (1) building effective public-private partnerships
focused on Big Data&lt;br/&gt;research and innovation and (2) establishing data
science curricula that satisfies the needs of stakeholders across domains and on
both sides of the Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity is expected to
have significant broader impact?it represents a critical step in forging a
productive transcontinental relationship around Big Data research and
innovation, facilitating US-EU collaborations and access to international data
sets. In addition, it will highlight overlap and synergies between the US
Federal Big Data Strategic R&amp;D Plan and EU Big Data Strategic Research
Agenda, and will prioritize future and emerging research challenges, which could
inform potential jointly funded strategic trans-Atlantic collaborations in Big
Data/data science research and innovation. The workshop also will allow
participating organizations to explore opportunities for sharing open-source
data collections and industry-relevant curricula of Big Data education programs
that can be used for workforce development.