* 1759372
* Bridging Communities with Student STEM Stories: Culturally-Responsive Strategies for Motivating STEM Engagement in Diversifying Public Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Amy Wells, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing an innovative approach to elementary school STEM education. Young
students will investigate stories from their families and local communities that
help them better understand, appreciate, and become interested in how STEM
knowledge and skills directly impact their lives and could lead to potential
career paths. Utilizing geographic information systems (GIS) and digital mapping
technologies, students in grades 3-5 at two public elementary schools will
conduct multi-modal research projects to illuminate examples of STEM engagement
in their own communities. With the aid of their teachers and university-based
researchers, students will examine the science and mathematics embedded within
the activities and resources of their local communities. Students will interview
family and community members about how they use mathematics and science in their
daily lives, and the focus of their scientific and mathematical inquiries will
vary by grade level to align with the specific science content emphasized across
grades and the developmental levels of the students. Teachers will incorporate
student findings into class-related activities, and students, working closely
with their teachers and researchers, will produce multimedia artifacts that
include an interactive map embedded with student-created pins linking each
student's STEM story project, including visuals, audio files and reports. These
artifacts will be showcased during school-wide presentations to engage parents
and other community members in breaking down racial and cultural divides.
Student research will also be posted on the school websites and shared with
other educators via social media and publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research and development project will examine student, teacher, and community
outcomes associated with implementation of a STEM curriculum model that aims to
frame student home environments as STEM-rich communities. Project research will
be guided by the following question: How do racially, ethnically and socio-
economically diverse elementary school communities' investigation, analysis and
dissemination of students' STEM Stories affect: (a) Elementary students'
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics engagement and achievement
outcomes? (b) Teachers' understanding of STEM and their instructional practices,
particularly as these relate to teachers' diverse students? And (c) Educators,
parents and students intercultural understanding of the ways in which math and
science exist in all students' lives? Researchers will collect achievement data
and conduct pre- and post- intervention interviews with educators, students and
parents to measure changes in STEM motivation and engagement as well as
understandings of the contributions and utilization of science and mathematics
across separate racial and ethnic communities. The overarching goal of this
project is to strengthen school, family, neighborhood, and community ties
through STEM learning and engagement. The project aims to develop student
research and STEM skills, knowledge, and dispositions; to develop and enhance
elementary teacher curricular and instructional repertoires around STEM
concepts; and to enhance and broaden parent understanding of STEM to include the
diverse community contexts that students in these schools call home. The project
will consist of five stages: Inquiry, Community Exploration, Pedagogical
Incorporation, Public Engagement, and Digital Storytelling. During the Inquiry
phase, students will work with teachers and researchers to identify and explore
STEM concepts meaningful to them in their schools, homes, and neighborhoods, and
design a research protocol for the next phase. During the Community Exploration
phase, students will interview key representatives of STEM in the local
community, including family members, community leaders, and neighbors, and
consolidate data on interactive, web-based maps that convey their research
findings. In the Pedagogical Incorporation phase to follow, there will be a
series of workshops to help students develop STEM stories and design
instructional tasks and projects centered around them. During the Public
Engagement phase and the Digital Storytelling phase, students design and share
artifacts related to STEM stories developed by students and analyzed by teachers
and project assistants. A mixed methods approach will be used to analyze
quantitative associated with survey and assessment data and to interpret
qualitative analysis of artifacts and interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.