* 1759320
* Activating Student Potential through Innovation and Real-World Experience
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Lance Bush, Challenger Center for Space Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,126,497.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Challenger Center
will design and develop a new instructional model that will be used by teachers
to enhance student understanding of and interest in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) occupations. Specifically, the project will develop
and pilot problem-based, computer-driven, simulated STEM missions with 1,000
fourth and fifth grade students across Powhatan and Frederick Counties in
Virginia and Washington, D.C. The missions will include ocean science, life
science, and Earth science concepts that align to the Next Generation Science
Standards. Students will engage in role-play that helps them develop teamwork,
communication, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. Elementary
teachers will connect the STEM curriculum to real-world applications and STEM
occupations, while also reinforcing key STEM concepts and enabling students to
develop new skills like communication, teamwork, critical thinking, and problem
solving. The mission will capture student imaginations, engaging students
through their personal involvement in a real-world application of the STEM
subject and exposure to related occupations. The primary goal is to develop and
pilot problem-based, computer-driven, simulated STEM missions for fourth and
fifth grade students that will increase their STEM Engagement, STEM Occupation,
and Perceived Self-Efficacy in Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Challenger
Center model encompasses four innovations beyond other classroom simulations:
(1) integration of simulations and problem-based learning; (2) real-time
assessment of student progress integrated within the technology platform; (3)
strong professional development to ensure teacher understanding of content,
technology, pedagogy, and efficacy; and (4) combined virtual and hands-on
experiences to reinforce learning. Both formative evaluation and an outcome
evaluation will be conducted. The implementation evaluation will assess the
feasibility of implementation in a classroom setting. This will include teacher
feedback through a survey and focus groups.The project will help answer the
question: What culturally-responsive instructional and curricular practices and
models used by teachers enhance student understanding of and interest in STEM
occupations, and what factors influence the outcomes of the practices and
models?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.