* 1759291
* Strategies: Urban STEM Stewards: Expanding Career Interests through Citizen-Science with Community Partners
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Matthew Diemer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,191,860.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
implement an innovative model of citizen-science in which teachers, Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) professionals, and middle-high
school students from groups underrepresented in STEM work together, applying
STEM learning to address environmental issues in their communities (storm water
runoff, energy savings from trees). The civic-science nexus, which links STEM
with civic contribution, offers unique possibilities for exploring STEM career
pathways with students from marginalized communities. Middle- and high-school
students will participate as citizen-scientists in place-based investigations
into urban ecological issues, working alongside teachers and STEM community
partners, to address local environmental issues. Students will develop
hypotheses, collect and analyze data during field investigations, build
knowledge and skills through supplementary classroom activities, take local
stewardship actions, and communicate project results in public forums. Teachers
and STEM partners will participate in the professional development (PD) program
that trains them in facilitating student inquiry-driven, place-based stewardship
projects. They will also share resources on-line, and form a learning community
in the process. The aim of the project is to understand the mechanisms whereby
local place-based inquiry can build interest in STEM and STEM careers. There is
considerable evidence that, for populations underrepresented in STEM, interest
and learning increases when connections are made between STEM learning,
students' personal interests and their community. However, the potential of
interest sparked by these projects may be fleeting unless students are supported
in linking the passion they feel to STEM identity pathways they might pursue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a mixed methods research strategy to:
1) measure changes in students' STEM career aspirations, interests, and beliefs
before and after engaging in environmental work; 2) investigate factors that
influence those changes; and 3) assess the impact of randomized interventions
that emphasize STEM utility for students' civic goals. Measures include
students' pre-post surveys, reflective essays, and observations of each STEM
community partner's field work with students documenting STEM learning and
applications. Three STEM professional partners representing different sectors
(private company, government, non-government organization) will partner with 18
urban middle-high school classes. An estimated 720 students from racial/ethnic
minority groups underrepresented in STEM will participate in the program and
research. The project will disseminate findings via academic venues and by
developing outreach materials focusing on best practices and disseminating them
to formal and informal educator networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.