* 1759914
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Sustaining:  The National Center for Genome Analysis Support
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Philip Blood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 289,203.00

The study of genomes is a critical and rapidly growing component in
understanding the variability of life, biological functions, population
dynamics, and how organisms respond to external influences. Genomics has
qualitatively improved our ability to investigate biological dynamics and to
make important discoveries that are the foundations for understanding topics
such as environmental change, developing and protecting crops, and improving
health outcomes. Genome analysis, however, can be a significant challenge for
the practicing biologist. Many biologists who need to undertake genome science
are not sufficiently expert in the relevant analytical tools, or the complex
workflows required to get from the initial data generated by sequencers to a
biologically-meaningful analyzed result. In addition, many do not have access to
the advanced computing and large-scale storage resources required for processing
and managing genomics data. The National Center for Genome Analysis Support
(NCGAS) addresses these challenges by providing an integrated service comprised
of expert bioinformatics consulting and educational services, hardened and
optimized software available through easy-to-use web-based workflow management
tools, advanced computing systems, and large scale data storage and publishing
facilities. NCGAS services are particularly important in enabling important
contributions from researchers from smaller institutions and other groups with
limited access to their own resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCGAS works through
the following goals to fulfill its mission to enable the biological research
community of the US to analyze, understand, and make use of the vast amount of
genomic information now available: provide excellent bioinformatics consulting
services to biologists doing research in the areas of transcriptome- and genome-
level assembly; deliver genome assembly and analysis software on national
cyberinfrastructure (CI) systems and provide tools for download and installation
on campus CI resources; provide training, education, and outreach programs on
genome analysis; improve the quality and functionality of bioinformatics
software; enable the use of large-memory compute clusters designed specifically
to support genome analysis; and provide mechanisms to store and distribute
genome research data and products. These efforts will enable and accelerate
scientific discoveries by researchers who make use of NCGAS services, lower
barriers for scientists to create, execute, document, and share genomics
analyses, help identify best-in-class genomics analysis software and provide
improved versions of these software to the community, enhance the technology
literacy of practicing scientists, and help grow the bioinformatics workforce.
Outcomes of this project will be made available at https://ncgas.org and
https://github.com/NCGAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.