* 1759528
* Understanding Past Environments and Glacial Processes Through an Analysis of a Newly Discovered Glacial Lake
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Brandon Curry, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2023
* USD 349,019.00

This project will examine the paleoenvironmental and geological history of a
newly discovered, ancient glacial lake. Preliminary data suggest that Glacial
Lake Roscommon (GLR) came into existence circa 24-23,000 years ago and persisted
for over 7000 years, in an area previously thought to be ice-covered until
nearly 16,000 years ago. Research on this lake will refine the understanding of
Midwestern glacial dynamics, thereby improving modeling of ice-sheet thickness
for North America. A better understanding of glacial retreat in this area, and
of past glacial processes in general, will enhance the ability to locate
important natural resources derived from glacial landforms such as aggregate, as
well as sand and clay, and will help model aquifer continuity and hence, improve
present-day groundwater management strategies. Several remnant lakes from GLR
still exist in the study area and may have existed continuously since
deglaciation. Sediment cores from these lakes will be dated and analyzed for
fossil pollen, plant macrofossils, and snail shells, yielding important insights
into the immediate postglacial climate of the region, and providing new insights
into the earliest forms of plant colonization of cold, recently deglaciated
landscapes. The project provides many opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate student training and mentoring, both in the field and in the
laboratory. Results from the research will be broadly disseminated in academic
and non-academic outlets and the work will be the focus of a regional field
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent scientific documentation of Glacial
Lake Roscommon (GLR), offers a rare opportunity to generate new knowledge and
contribute to the rewriting the glacial history of the upper Midwest. The lake
is unique, having developed in the upper Great Lakes region at a time when other
Midwestern glaciers were near their maximum extent. This area was thought to
have been ice-covered until about 16,000 years ago, implying that the sediments
from the lake and its remnants may contain the longest record of pollen and
other fossils in the upper Midwest. Such a long record is exceedingly rare. The
potential of this record will be examined by coring several remnant lakes,
dating the lowermost plant matter in each core using radiocarbon technology, and
examining those data to determine the oldest core. Data on pollen, macrofossils,
and ostracodes from these cores will then be examined to provide an
unprecedented view into the environment at a time when ice dominated the
landscape, and postglacial plant colonization was just beginning. A second focus
of the research is the determination of the geological record of GLR and the
retreating ice margin within it is. This part of the project involves dating of
beach and related sediments, using luminescence technologies. Such data will
help constrain the evolution of the lake and its bounding ice margins, and thus,
add key data for ice-sheet models. Because the lake had at least three different
outlets, constraining the opening and abandonment of these outlets will help
determine the ice retreat scenarios for bounding landscapes. Early data suggest
that ice on nearby landscapes had also retreated, or had begun retreating, far
earlier than is currently thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.