* 1759658
* Rethinking Social Change in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ida Susser, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 375,201.00

In recent years, across multiple democratic nations around the world, a diverse
array of citizens have come together in cities to give common expression to
contemporary anxieties. The focus of their attention varies, but has, at
different places and times, included immigration and the influx of refugees; the
sustainability of public welfare programs; what are perceived as declining life
chances; and a variety of forms of socio-economic differentiations. For social
scientists, multiple questions have arisen around these developments. Is there a
common thread and if so, do they represent new forms of social assortment? Or
are they instead, ephemeral responses to temporary social stresses, with no
long-term consequences? The research supported by this award addresses these
questions. The research is important for several reasons. The first is that
social scientists rarely have the opportunity to study major social shifts as
they are taking place. But equally important, policy makers and others concerned
for the general welfare need to better understand the significance of what has
happened around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue these issues and the
challenges they might represent to democracy, anthropologist Dr. Ida Susser, of
the City University of New York, will explore the social and temporal dynamics
that shape the "Squares" movement, known in the United States as "Occupy," in
two cities of the European Union, Paris and Barcelona. The research will provide
an account of these contemporary efforts at social transformation, analyzing how
conceptions of time might shape political action, the social composition of
activist groups, and the material experiences of occupation. Data will be
collected through participant observation, open-ended interviews, digital
ethnography, and the analysis of primary and secondary materials. Together with
colleagues in Spain and France, the esearcher will follow selected community
organizations and new political parties formed in the aftermath of Squares
actions. They will assess long-term impacts including effects on national
discourse and democratic poiltics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.