* 1759514
* Studies in Moduli Theory and Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Dan Abramovich, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2022
* USD 331,415.00

The area of study of this project lies within algebraic geometry,
the&lt;br/&gt;branch of mathematics devoted to geometric shapes called
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties, defined by polynomial equations. Algebraic
geometry&lt;br/&gt;has significant applications in theoretical physics, where
physicists consider&lt;br/&gt;algebraic varieties as a piece of the fine
structure of our&lt;br/&gt;universe. This is especially true with the first
topic, moduli&lt;br/&gt;theory. This theory studies a remarkable phenomenon in
which the&lt;br/&gt;collection of all algebraic varieties of the same type is
often&lt;br/&gt;manifested as an algebraic variety, called a moduli space, in
its own&lt;br/&gt;right. Thus in algebraic geometry, the metaphor of thinking
about a&lt;br/&gt;community of "organisms" as itself being an "organism" is not
just a&lt;br/&gt;metaphor but a rigorous and quite useful fact. The other topic
studied in&lt;br/&gt;this project is birational geometry, focusing here on
resolution of &lt;br/&gt;singularities, applied in this project to families of
varieties. &lt;br/&gt;Resolution of singularities is a fundamental procedure
where "bad" &lt;br/&gt;points of an algebraic variety are removed and replaced
by "good" &lt;br/&gt;points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abramovich will
continue studying problems in birational geometry, &lt;br/&gt;specifically the
problem of functorial semistable reduction. Here &lt;br/&gt;Abramovich and
collaborators will build on Hironaka's method of &lt;br/&gt;resolution of
singularities in order to resolve singularities of &lt;br/&gt;families of
varieties. Long term goals include extending this effort &lt;br/&gt;to other
geometric categories and to singular foliations. In addition,
&lt;br/&gt;Abramovich will continue to study moduli spaces. The main foci are
&lt;br/&gt;Moduli and arithmetic of K3 surfaces, where one wishes to find
&lt;br/&gt;situations where K3 moduli spaces are algebraically hyperbolic;
&lt;br/&gt;representability of logarithmic moduli, where an analogue of Artin's
&lt;br/&gt;criteria is sought; a quest to describe explicit moduli of certain
&lt;br/&gt;stable surfaces; and completion of a long-term project on the
&lt;br/&gt;logarithmic degeneration
formula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.