* 1759960
* Indicators of Technological Emergence
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Philip Shapira, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 619,144.00

Extensive ways to measure research and development activity exist, but there is
a gap in being able to measure frontier research topics. This project develops
new indicators of technological emergence to support researchers, research
managers, businesses, and others in identifying key topics at the frontiers of
science and technology. Distinguishing cutting edge research and development
activities can inform strategy development and reveal new opportunities. Being
able to measure emergent topics additionally enables sharper research program
assessment. Indicators of which countries, organizations, or individuals are
contributing most to advances in a given domain provide vital competitive
technical intelligence. The project's new technological emergence indicators
focus on frontier contributions to complement general science, technology, and
innovation indicators. We formulate a suite of indicators, develop software
routines to calculate them, and devise reports and visualizations to communicate
to different audiences, including researchers, managers, and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project implements a four-attribute model of
what constitutes technological emergence. Emergent topics should evidence term
novelty, persistence, and accelerating growth, plus show formation of a research
community. The approach extracts records on given science and technology topics
from global research publication and patent databases. The research experiments
with different ways to clean and consolidate those records' topical content.
Then the project devises software scripts to score topics' degree of emergence.
The computational algorithm then scores actors in given research areas, such as
research organizations or countries, based on the extent to which the actors
work on the highly emerging topics. The makeup of the scores and how they behave
is then studied through nine diversified science and technology case studies.
Testing includes a series of sensitivity analyses across fields and time
periods. The testing seeks to validate the emergence indicators by analyzing
their performance in predicting research and development activity in a
subsequent one-to-three-year period. These new technological emergence
indicators will be examined in conjunction with established science and
technology metrics to help assess research and development capabilities and
opportunities. The project will explore ways to apply the emergence indicators,
such as gauging how government funding programs advance cutting edge research
topic activity, or tracking diffusion of topical content from research to
patents to commercialization arenas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.