* 1759048
* Did rhizobia associated with invading legumes escape bacteriophage enemies?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Ellen Simms, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2020
* USD 54,586.00

It is crucial to understand the factors that promote biological invasions
because they threaten valued environmental and economic resources. Many plants
in the legume family are invasive weeds, perhaps because they cooperate with
bacteria called rhizobia to obtain a reliable supply of nitrogen. For example,
the legume French broom and its rhizobia have become invasive in America after
being introduced from Europe. Introduced species might become invasive by
escaping enemies that plague them at home. Like other bacteria, rhizobia are
often attacked by viruses. Did French broom become invasive in America because
its partner rhizobia escape viruses that plagued them back home? To begin
answering this question, rhizobia and associated viruses will be collected from
European (native) and American (introduced) populations of French broom. If
American populations of French broom rhizobia have escaped their enemies, they
should be infected by fewer viruses. However, American rhizobium viruses might
have evolved to infect the introduced rhizobia. To test this idea, rhizobia and
associated viruses will be collected from a native legume and the viruses will
be tested to discover if they can infect rhizobia associated with French broom.
This work will help understand how viruses could be used to manipulate host
populations. A postdoctoral scholar will be trained in research and
communication skills as part of this project.

For release from bacteriophage infection to explain invasiveness of rhizobia and
their partner legumes, bacteriophages must control rhizobium populations in
their home range but not in the invasive range. This pattern requires that
bacteriophages be specialized and more easily infect sympatric than allopatric
rhizobia. As a first step toward addressing this issue, the host ranges of
rhizobial bacteriophages collected from three European and three American
populations of Genista monspessulana will be assessed in vitro by inoculation
onto single-isolate "lawns" of Bradyrhizobium genotypes isolated from these same
populations. The number of bacteriophages isolated from native and non-native
range populations will also be compared. To test whether indigenous American
bacteriophages might control introduced Bradyrhizobium populations, the host
ranges of bacteriophages isolated from bradyrhizobia associating with the native
legume, Lupinus arboreus, will also be tested against Bradyrhizobium genotypes
isolated in the survey described above. This work will test whether the Enemy
Escape Hypothesis applies to an economically and ecologically important microbe
associated with an invasive legume. It will further examine how bacteriophage
host ranges evolve in response to shifts in host population changes. In so
doing, it will enhance scientific understanding of how bacteriophages affect
mutualistic interactions between hosts and beneficial bacterial symbionts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.