* 1759874
* Next generation informatics to elucidate viral ecology and ecosystem impacts in nature
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Matthew Sullivan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,213,539.00

Microbes are now appreciated for their roles in human health and disease, in
promoting plant growth, and cycling nutrients in the oceans and soils. More
recently, it has been recognized that the viruses that infect these microbes
influence both the microbes and their communities through selective killing,
moving genes between them, and reprogramming their host's metabolism during
infection. Because viruses are so tiny, and most cannot be currently grown in
laboratories, we are reliant upon decoding their biology through "reading" their
stories via molecular sequencing techniques. This project seeks to augment
iVirus, a collection of software tools (apps) and databases that leverages the
NSF-funded CyVerse CyberInfrastructure (CI) to help researchers store, read and
interpret these viral stories. Through development of new apps and curation of
existing databases, the project will establish new analyses and features for
researchers, directly train several undergraduate students, graduate students,
and postdocs, and will provide two international training workshops to better
"see" the viruses in their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbiome is
increasingly recognized to drive the nutrient and energy cycles that fuel
Earth's diverse ecosystems, with their viruses modulating these impacts through
killing, horizontal gene transfer, and metabolic reprogramming during infection.
With the recent emergence of quantitative, sequence-based methods to
comprehensively explore virus diversity in nature, the precise roles that
viruses play can be increasingly elucidated. To perform these analyses, the
iVirus platform was established in 2017 as part of the NSF-funded CyVerse
CyberInfrastructure. iVirus currently includes apps, databases, and live
documentation designed to enable researchers to better identify and analyze
virus sequences by integrating and enhancing access to (meta)genomic sequence
datasets and functions in the context of the NSF-funded CyVerse
CyberInfrastructure. This project seeks to significantly augment iVirus in three
ways: (i) aggregate and upgrade current viral ecogenomic capabilities, (ii)
develop an integrated viral ecogenomic analytical pipeline, and (iii) establish
direct connections and inter-operability across key databases and independent
cyberinfrastructure environments. Beyond augmenting iVirus capabilities at
CyVerse, we will actively seek to maximize its impact and utility for
researchers through key partnerships with other existing tools (e.g., DOE Joint
Genome Institute IMG/VR database). We will also continue to collect and be
responsive to feedback provided through the CyVerse and the protocols.io
reporting platforms, as well as collaborator and general user beta-testing and
subsequent feedback on releases. Finally, we'll provide training at all levels
through peer-reviewed publications, talks, and dedicated international workshops
to enable the broader research community. The results of this project can be
found at the iVirus website, http://ivirus.us/ .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.