* 1759461
* RAPID:  Collection and Analysis of Data in Major Landfalling Hurricanes (2017)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Karen Kosiba, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 184,777.00

The landfall of Hurricane Harvey was the first major hurricane landfall since
2005 in the United States, and one of only a handful of Category 4 or higher
hurricane landfalls in the modern weather radar era. The research team that is
funded by this grant made measurements of Harvey from inside the eye, using a
Doppler on Wheels radar truck. An initial look at the data reveals a complex
assembly of small scale, intense wind structures. This award will allow the team
to analyze this data and to deploy to the landfall of Hurricane Irma to make
measurements to compare and contrast with Harvey. The impact of the project
should be a better understanding of the low-level wind structure in intense
hurricanes, which would improve public safety by providing relevant information
to forecasters, emergency managers, and engineers. The project is in response to
the NSF Dear Colleague Letter on Hurricane Harvey research (NSF
17-128).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to improve understanding
of small-scale flow in landfalling hurricanes, with a focus on quantifying the
mean and turbulent properties of the hurricane boundary layer (HBL). Coherent
structures in the HBL such as rolls and streaks were observed in the Hurricane
Harvey data, along with mesovortices and tornado-scale circulations in the
eyewall. Analysis of this data, along with potential data from Hurricane Irma,
will be used to address the following questions: 1) Are HBL features such as
rolls and streaks comparatively more energetic than in weaker storms and hence
contribute more to modulating hurricane intensity? 2) What are the
characteristics of eyewall circulations? What type of environment supports these
eyewall circulations? 3) How do features such as eyewall mesovortices, tornado-
scale circulations and HBL streaks correlate with localized high-end damage?