* 1759130
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Self-Determination, Sustainability, and Wellbeing in an Alaska Native Community
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Michael Koskey, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 29,069.00

Paragraph 1&lt;br/&gt;Self-determining acts are autonomous acts for living a
healthy life that can be practiced at the individual and community level in
support of one's health and wellbeing. Research shows that a lack of self-
determination, either at the community level or the individual level, can
negatively affect one's health and well-being, which includes educational and
economic achievement, as well as the long-term sustainability of social and
cultural systems. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant project
collaborates with an Alaska Native community to explore how Tribal members and
nontribal members use self-determination, either individually or as a group, to
achieve sustainability and wellbeing. A deeper understanding of the relationship
between self-determination and wellbeing among Alaska Native peoples has the
potential to provide insights into the health and wellbeing of other Indigenous
Tribes and minority groups in the United States. This information could be
critical to national interests by informing better education, health, and
economic policies leading to the health and wellbeing of all people in the
nation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the
method of ethnographic futures research to conduct interviews about the future
as envisioned by community members in South Central Alaska. The interviewee
talks about their optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely futures, ultimately
explaining how to get to the most optimistic future. Working with an Alaska
Native community, focus groups and a community meeting will be conducted
following the interviews to talk about the ideas identified in the interview
optimistic scenarios and how to achieve those ideas. The analysis of this data
has the potential to demonstrate what Tribal and nontribal members think the
Tribe can do to improve sustainability and wellbeing, and how to achieve those
goals. The data has the potential to inform others, both Indigenous and non-
Indigenous, by demonstrating how utilizing futures research can engage community
members in self-determining acts through planning, and potentially making
changes, for better outcomes in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.