* 1759729
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Innovation: Quantifying biogeographic history: a novel model-based approach to integrating data from genes, fossils, specimens, and environments
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* John Robinson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 232,218.00

Forest ecosystems cover a third of the land area of the United States and are a
significant economic and cultural resource. Managing forests for the future
depends on knowledge of their historical dynamics. For example, after the last
Ice Age many species, including trees, generally moved north as environmental
conditions became more favorable, leading to large changes in population size
and geographic range. Fundamental biological questions about these shifts
include: (i) how do plants establish in new locations across great distances in
spite of having limited seed dispersal abilities, (ii) to what degree do species
travel synchronously as communities or individually, (iii) which species moved
the fastest and why, and (iv) where did species reside during the last Ice Age?
Traditionally scientists have used one of three types of data to address these
questions: specimens from museums and herbaria matched with contemporary
environmental data, DNA sequences that hold imprints of recent and past changes,
and species' presence in the fossil record including ancient pollen deposited in
lake sediments. However, studies based on single data types have not been able
to fully resolve the aforementioned questions, largely due to lack of
integrative computational methods and infrastructure. This research will develop
methods and software that, for the first time, coherently combine the three main
data types and existing theory to provide a more comprehensive understanding of
species' biogeographic history. Each type of data has different strengths and
weaknesses; utilizing the strengths of each will make best use of the total
information on species' range shifts. The methods developed will provide the
infrastructure needed to leverage "big data" and enable scientific progress on
significant, long-standing questions about species historical dynamics, which
will serve a variety of scientific communities. This work also serves the
national interest, advancing prosperity and welfare by enabling future studies
of natural environments which are an important cultural and economic resource.
Knowledge gained by using these new methods can help inform management of
natural resources (i.e. forests and grasslands) and functioning ecosystems, and
identify geographic regions that are resilient to environmental stress or may
contain unique genetic resources to help species adapt. These new computational
methods will be produced in an open-source, online, documented, and transparent
code development system with which anyone can interact, as well as through two
interactive workshops that will emphasize participant diversity. This project
will also advance science education through broader impacts at multiple
educational levels by i) partnering with an established K-12 educational program
to teach ecological concepts, ii) designing a course-based undergraduate
research experience, iii) producing educational videos and exhibits at two
botanical gardens that collectively reach two million visitors, and iv)
providing training and mentoring to early career scientists and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Despite continued improvements in data
reliability and accuracy, questions about Quaternary species range shifts remain
hotly debated. This debate is fueled in part by known, substantial limitations
and biases of the primary data types used to reconstruct biogeographic history
(i.e., fossils and inferred paleo-vegetation, current and hindcast species
distribution models, and current and ancient genomic data). Conflicting results
from past studies regarding the speed of range shifts and location of refugia
inferred from different approaches have slowed progress in paleoecology for
decades. This project will develop comprehensive, statistically robust
informatic tools to coherently integrate the information content of disparate
and heretofore disconnected data types and models for inferring species'
genetic, demographic, and biogeographic history. The objective of this research
is to build informatic infrastructure that will help scientists leverage
information from multiple sources spanning space and time to (a) better estimate
key demographic parameters, (b) generate maps of species distributions post-
glaciation, and (c) account for uncertainty from each data type. The framework
is rooted in Approximate Bayesian Computation but with additional modules that
will build on the state-of-the-art in biogeographic inference. The informatic
improvements will occur in four stages of increasing novelty and data
integration, with specific outputs at each stage. The informatic advances will
be evaluated for computational efficiency and effectiveness through analyses of
both simulated data and an existing empirical dataset for a foundational tree
species, green ash, Fraxinus pennsylvanica. This research will help scientists
from many fields make the most benefit from the ongoing renaissance in methods
and databases in genomics, environmental modeling, and paleo-data to help
achieve better understanding of past species' dynamics (demographic growth
rates, long distance dispersal, biotic velocities, etc.) at a spatial and
temporal resolution that was previously unachievable. The scientific community
will be involved in model and software design via open source, community
development and coding on GitHub, and two hands-on workshops. Results from this
project can be found online at
https://github.com/orgs/TIMBERhub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.