* 1759715
* Holocene Biogeography of Mangroves Along the Gulf of Mexico Coast: Past, Present, and Future
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2022
* USD 299,262.00

This research project will investigate past and present environmental conditions
and mangrove distributions and provide predictive assessments of the future
distributions of mangroves along the Gulf of Mexico coast. Mangrove expansion in
the Gulf coastal region is a recent phenomenon, and the new insights from this
project will provide a more comprehensive understanding of past environmental
patterns and future expansion areas based on climatic fluctuations. The project
will expand knowledge regarding how feedbacks from human-environment
interactions affect wetland vegetation shifts in a region characterized by
increasing environmental uncertainty. Project benefits to the broader community
will include a better understanding of mangrove expansion to coastal area
residents and communities and proactive water resources management planning by
appropriate coastal federal and state agencies. The project will support science
education in local schools through collaboration with the Coastal Roots Program
at Louisiana State University. The investigators will participate in workshops
with Louisiana school teachers and engage them in communicating scientific
knowledge about environmental changes and mangrove
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mangroves play a critical role in global carbon
sequestration and provide many important ecosystem services. Long-term
quantitative data on the distribution and abundance of mangroves along the U.S.
Gulf Coast have been largely inadequate. This project will produce high-
resolution multi-proxy stratigraphic records from four critical mangrove
habitats to elucidate the changing distribution of all mangrove species along
the Gulf Coast over the last 2,000 years. The investigators will focus on three
core questions: (1) How has the distribution and abundance of mangroves changed
in response to Holocene environmental and climatic variations along the U.S Gulf
Coast? (2) Which environmental variables are most likely to be responsible for
controlling the spatial distribution of mangroves in the U.S? (3) What will be
the northern ranges of different mangrove species by the end of the 21st
century? The investigators will use a combination of palynological, X-ray
fluorescence, and loss-on-ignition analytic techniques and radiocarbon dating to
reconstruct the Holocene vegetation changes and sedimentary history of mangrove
habitats along the U.S Gulf Coast. Cellular automata modeling techniques will be
used to predict the future ranges of different mangrove species by the end of
the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.