* 1759314
* Collaborative Research: Engineering a Community-Family Partnership: Developing a Program Aimed at Making and Design Practices in Home Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Amber Simpson, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2023
* USD 326,575.00

Families play a vital role in children's paths toward STEM careers yet little is
knowns about how this influence works. This project addresses this knowledge gap
by developing, implementing, and refining a program for integrating Making and
engineering design practices into the home environments of families from under-
resourced communities. The researchers hypothesize that an intervention focused
on engaging underserved youth and their caregivers about ways to implement
Making/engineering design practices in their home will enhance their awareness
of and affinity for STEM careers relative to those who do not participate. The
project has 3 specific aims. (1) Investigate features of the intervention that
best support participation and implementation of Making/engineering design
practices in home environments. (2) Investigate changes in each youth's STEM
identity in relation to engaging in Making/engineering design practices with
caregivers in their home. (3) Examine shifts in parental: (a) views of
engineering, (b) support for their child's engagement in engineering design
practices, and (c) beliefs about engineering as a viable degree/career option
for their child.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is unique in that it takes a
rare process look at how students and families engage in home-based STEM
activities. It concurrently assesses families' readiness to support STEM career
awareness and children's engagement in home-based STEM activities. The target
audience is families with children in grades 3-6 enrolled in Title I schools in
Bloomington, Indiana and Broome County, New York. Project partners include the
Boys and Girls Clubs in these communities who assist with recruitment and with
the delivery of the intervention, Family Making Nights. At home, families will
document their design activities as they unfold. Stimulated recall with video
and semi-structured interviews will help the research team understand families'
thinking about what occurred during the activities. The use of a comparison
group allows the team to compare the behaviors and outcomes associated with
"trained" and "untrained" family supports. Grounded in social cognitive career
theory and research on interest, the project's focus on identity development has
potential to inform theories of social learning. As such, the project will
advance the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program's efforts to better understand and promote practices that increase
student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of science,
technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.