* 1759900
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Automated Prioritization and Design of Experiments to Validate and Improve Mathematical Models of Molecular Regulatory Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jean Peccoud, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 361,091.00

Complex networks of interacting molecules control all the physiological
processes that occur in a living cell. It is impossible to deduce the functions
of these networks using intuitive reasoning alone. Therefore, scientists
construct mathematical models of cellular processes that can be simulated in the
computer. Unfortunately, it takes many years of careful study of the scientific
literature and steady, incremental progress to construct detailed,
comprehensive, and accurate mathematical models. This project will create an
integrated computational - experimental framework that will significantly
accelerate the process of mathematical modeling. The project will create several
scientific innovations including (a) novel approaches to searching the space of
model simulations to identify promising predictions, (b) computational
techniques to efficiently plan experiments, (c) experimental methods that use
these plans to rapidly test model predictions, and (d) automatic techniques to
extend and refine the models to accommodate the results of these experiments.
The project will benefit science by applying this framework to develop a
comprehensive, new model that describes how nutrients control the growth of
baker's yeast cells. Long term benefits to society will accrue from the use of
the methods developed by this project to study any complex cellular system,
e.g., those implicated in cell proliferation in cancers, wound healing, and
tissue regeneration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational cell biologists have
constructed detailed, mechanistic, and predictive mathematical models of many
physiological processes in living cells. In principle, such models can predict
the phenotypes of novel combinations of gene mutations. However, this potential
has not been fully realized for three reasons: (a) the number of possible
combinations grows explosively, complicating the search and prioritization of
informative mutants, (b) it is impossible to manually plan experiments to make
and characterize thousands of mutants, and (c) automated techniques that can
resolve contradictions between experimental results and model predictions are
still under development. The goal of this project is to create a unique,
integrated framework that will address these challenges by (a) systematically
generating informative predictions from mathematical models, (b) computationally
synthesizing high-throughput experimental plans to test these predictions, and
(c) rapidly reconciling inconsistencies between model and experiment. The
project will apply this framework to models of cell growth and division in
budding yeast. This transformative approach will streamline and accelerate the
mathematical modeling cycle. The computational approaches developed for
synthesizing experimental plans will be broadly applicable to other organisms,
including mammalian cells, that can be systematically perturbed using siRNA or
CRISPR/Cas9. Because nutrient conditions, metabolic fluxes, energy budgets,
protein synthesis, and cell cycle regulation are central to wound healing and
tissue regeneration, to the engineering of artificial tissues and organs, and to
the expansion and spread of tumors, the methods and models we develop here in
the context of budding yeast cell biology will be of great relevance to
mammalian biology. The educational component of our project will infuse
computational thinking into biology at the undergraduate level and encourage
students with backgrounds in life science, engineering, or computation to
consider systems biology as a career choice. The project will offer a 10-week
summer research institute on 'Computationally - Driven Experimental Biology' to
six undergraduate students, consisting of lectures on project -related topics
and a single collaborative research project. Involving all the students in a
single research project will expose them to team science and give them an
appreciation of how computer science, mathematics, and experimental cell biology
can be seamlessly interwoven to study cellular processes. The results of this
project will appear at http://bioinformatics.cs.vt.edu/~murali/research.html
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.