* 1759196
* Entrepreneurial team formation and its effect on subsequent entrepreneurial outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Rajshree Agarwal-Tronetti, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 362,998.00

Entrepreneurs, investors, and governments have long recognized that an inability
to organize effectively is a primary cause of entrepreneurial failure. However,
we lack systematic evidence on the types of strategies entrepreneurs should use
when forming their teams. This project will investigate how initial team
formation affects entrepreneurial outcomes. To what extent does team formation
determine the level of specialization, coordination, and trust between team
members? Do these processes affect team ability to change direction over time?
Is it better to form teams with family members, or with friends or co-workers?
Does the best strategy change with context, such as different countries or
industries? Findings from this project will provide practical advice to early
stage entrepreneurs helping to increase the survival of young firms, thus
promoting economic development in our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
pairs an archival study with a randomized control trial to evaluate how
variations in team composition affect entrepreneurial outcomes. The first study
follows technology-based startup teams in multiple iterations of a prestigious
entrepreneurship contest. Over a period of eight months, teams seek to pass
three competition rounds that weed the number of teams from 130 accepted teams
to 30 semi-finalists to 12 finalists. The finalists present their ventures to
venture capitalists. Data on team formation and interpersonal dynamics, along
with demographic attributes, are collected through multi-source surveys over
time. The second study, a randomized controlled trial, manipulates team
formation processes to identify causal relationships between entrepreneurial
team formation and outcomes. In a quasi-experimental setting comprised of
multiple sections of an introductory semester-long entrepreneurship course,
students pitch ideas, form teams and then start and run actual businesses. Team
success will be evaluated in terms of actual profits and other measured
milestones. This project will inform the field regarding whether it is
worthwhile to intervene and facilitate team formation processes, or allow teams
to form more organically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.