* 1759808
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Innovation: FuTRES, an Ontology-Based Functional Trait Resource for Paleo- and Neo-biologists
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Meghan Balk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2021
* USD 420,135.00

Physical characteristics of animals can help determine which ones survive and
flourish, especially in a changing environment. These characteristics, also
known as functional traits, include features such as length, height, shape,
weight, growth rate, sex, and reproductive state. Studying these traits provides
insights into how communities of different types of animals come together and
how species and communities respond to changes in their environment over time,
which is critical for conservation efforts. However, very little information
about functional traits is available, and what is available is difficult to
combine with other data. How these traits are influenced by environmental
changes - such as climate change, pollution, urbanization and human predation -
and how they shift over longer timescales are poorly understood, and the need
for this information is outstripping the speed with which scientists can collect
these data. Digitized collections of animals representing life from the past two
million years contain a treasure trove of information about these individuals'
functional traits, but these data are stored in multiple places and in different
formats. Researchers may have recorded dates differently, for example, or used a
variety of terms to describe a single physical feature. Making these data widely
available in standardized formats could help scientists study changes in
functional traits through time, linking their observations of traits of modern
animals to those from fossil and archaeological records. The Functional Trait
Resource for Environmental Studies (FuTRES) project will gather trait data from
digitized records; to engage communities of researchers to make these data
available, standardized, and useable; and to develop a more complete workflow
for using these data in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional trait data
have revolutionized ecology and are transforming paleontology, but acquiring
them requires extensive labor, not only in measuring traits but in managing and
communicating the resulting data. When trait data are lacking, researchers
substitute average values, or other characteristics like behavioral or dietary
categories. These substitutes - assigned at the species level - obscure
intraspecific changes in traits. FuTRES fills the clear need for informatics
tools that give researchers access to existing trait data and a place to store
new data as they are generated. FuTRES is assembling a varied collection of
existing trait data, building a pipeline that converts data to an integrated,
semantically enriched form, and developing an Application Programming Interface
(API) and web platform to serve the data. One of the key innovations of FuTRES
is the use of ontologies, an information science approach that creates computer-
readable definitions of traits and describes the interrelationships of traits,
organisms, collecting events, and other entities. In this way, FuTRES will make
functional trait data searchable through reference to time, space, and
vertebrate anatomy. FuTRES will also provide access to trait data via popular
data portals (e.g., VertNet) and software such as R, opening the data to
scientists in biodiversity and other domains. The toolkit will be tested with
mammalian use cases that leverage the massive scale of the unlocked data. In
sum, newly created access mechanisms and tools will provide novel approaches for
analyses of trait variation across space and time, providing researchers in
disparate fields discovery capabilities for relevant data that would otherwise
have been invisible to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.