* 1759229
* Personalizing Mathematics to Maximize Relevance and Skill for Tomorrow's STEM Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2022
* USD 362,278.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing an intervention system to engage students in meaningful STEM problem
posing and solving and by providing an on-line tool to assist teachers in
guiding the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative project
involving three different institutions to use personalization strategies to
strengthen students' algebraic interest and skills in STEM pathways. The project
will build an environment to support algebra students' learning key content in
the context of their STEM career interests by posing and solving story problems.
The problems posed are based on algebra content, related to STEM career paths,
and embedded in a technological interface. The innovation, of using personalized
problem-posing tasks to entice students to recognize, formulate, and solve
problems, framed by how mathematics is used in STEM careers, is a compelling
strategy to engage students and promote STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine an instructional intervention for high school algebra that
connects course content to the STEM careers to increase students' interest in
those fields. In addition, within the career pathways construct, the study will
investigate the effect of personalized problem posing as well as problem solving
on students' algebra skill development. Specifically, the project will examine
how different scaffolding approaches to STEM career problem-posing (e.g., expert
video vs. examples) affect the problems posed by students and the interest and
knowledge that they gain. The findings of the study have the potential will
build evidence for both personalization and student generation of problem-
solving tasks on improving student learning in algebra and interest in STEM
fields. The study seeks to confirm a taxonomy of three features necessary for
successful personalized learning: content should be personalized so that it
aligns to student interests, problems must be sufficiently granular to more
precisely align to student interests, and students must perceive ownership in
the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.