* 1759629
* Developing Tree-Ring Based Streamflow Reconstructions for Large and Complex River Basins
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 279,672.00

This project analyses the use of tree-ring derived streamflow information as an
alternative technique to develop long-term records of river streamflow in
temperate, complex river-basins. Better and longer stream-flow records will help
improve water resource management in large and complex watersheds experiencing
and anticipating drought and water supply shortages. In places where measured
runoff records are limited, tree-ring based streamflow records can be used to
understand the range of possible variability and to therefore improve water
management planning and modeling. This technique has mostly been used in semi-
arid environments with relatively simple surface hydrology. This project
implements and analyses tree-ring based streamflow modeling techniques in
temperate, hydrologically complex watersheds, to assess its effectiveness, and
thereby improving drought mitigation in those basins. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with local stakeholders, and has the potential to
inform local water management plans, fish conservation, and ongoing negotiations
of water and resource rights. Technical workshops will build capacity for
stakeholders to incorporate these new records into their own decision-making
framework. The project provides field and academic learning opportunities for an
undergraduate student and supports the continuing research program of an early
career female Postdoctoral Research Scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large
temperate watersheds are increasingly susceptible to the impacts of drought, but
their complex hydrology complicates the application of flow reconstruction to
water supply forecasting. To accomplish meaningful tree-ring modeling in these
basins, where multiple, shifting sources of runoff across several sub-basins
mean that water management is reliant on seasonal streamflow information, this
project directly targets drought-season runoff and decomposes the study
watershed basin into independent main-stem and sub-basin reconstructions. This
project will compare a large network of tree-ring chronologies with
meteorological, gridded climate, and instrumental streamflow data from the basin
main-stem and sub-basin gauges. Using these relationships as a guide for
targeted chronology resampling, paleoclimate reconstructions of past summer
runoff and drought will be developed for each basin spanning the last several
centuries. During the summer season a combination of snowmelt, air temperatures,
and rainfall determine streamflow and each of these factors is also linked to
radial tree growth. The reconstructions will be statistically compared against
independent estimates of past hydro-climate variability, model simulations, and
independently developed climate fields to determine whether recent droughts have
been exceptional in the last several centuries, and whether medium- and long-
term internal hydro-climate variability contains a forced anthropogenic signal.
Updated chronologies will permit examination of a recent extreme drought event
and estimates of the probability of similar-magnitude droughts in the future. By
targeting one of the most complex river basins in the world, the Fraser River
Basin (FRB), this project provides a sound framework for enhancing water
management in temperate watersheds in the United States and around the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.