* 1759694
* A Fieldweek Approach to Determine the Drivers of Forest Stress in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem: Absaroka Mountains, Wyoming July 2018, 2019, 2020
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Bryan Black, Indiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2022
* USD 199,144.00

The North American Dendroecological Fieldweek (NADEF), is an annual ten-day
field-based activity that teaches the tools of dendrochronology, provides
networking opportunities for students and professionals, and expands the
benefits of dendrochronological records to forest managers. Support for NADEF
will catalyze new activities focusing on understanding the mechanisms behind the
increases in global forest mortality, which has become more widespread than has
been documented in preceding centuries. Understanding the mechanisms behind this
forest mortality is critical for the development of intelligent, timely, and
science-driven management responses to these mortality events. The field weeks
will provide professional development for approximately 120 participants over a
three-year period while educating participants about management information
needed to sustain these forests. The field week will continue its strong record
for broadening gender and ethnic diversity among scholars in dendrochronology.
Opportunities for undergraduate scholarships will be provided to students from
underrepresented groups, and graduate research fellowships will help educate and
train students in professional presentation of the findings from the field
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NADEF has a 25-year history of bringing together a
diverse group of scholars to learn cutting-edge dendrochronology science for the
continuous improvement of research in the forestry sciences and the better
management of forest resources. For this series of field weeks, participants
will engage in five research projects that will focus on completing a fire
history, insect-outbreak reconstructions, climate reconstructions, analyses of
stand-age structure across an elevational gradient, and sclerochronology, which
is the examination of annual rings in bony structures such as those found in
clams and the ear bones of fish. Field week researchers will use innovative
research techniques to examine quantitative wood anatomy (the examination of
individual cells of growth in the tree rings) along with stable isotopes to
tease apart relationships among climate, fire, and insect outbreaks on forest
mortality. These research activities help participants to better understand the
direction that these forests are naturally trending so that future conditions
for these forests can be predicted more accurately and more effective forest
management strategies can be implemented. Beyond these learning experiences, the
field weeks provide networking opportunities for students and professionals and
expand the benefits of dendrochronological records to forest
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.