* 1759802
* ABI: Innovation: Analyzing Neuroglial Cell Dynamics in their Natural Environment with Video Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Scott Acton, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 629,258.00

Microscope videos of brain and nerve cells provide scientists unprecedented
access to these cells as they develop, interact with each other, and respond to
injury, disease, or other changes in their environment. However, these videos
frequently contain dozens or hundreds of cells, behaving in complicated ways not
easily discernable to a human viewer. This project hosted at the University of
Virginia is innovating computer-based processing to pick out these cells and
analyze their movements automatically. By simplifying these tasks, this software
will permit studying large quantities of data for meaningful patterns and rules
governing these cells' behavior. A front-end interface and back-end modules will
enable scaling these capabilities from single videos to enormous databases,
limited only by available computing power. These new capabilities will help
scientists uncover new insights about these critical cells, leading researchers
closer to understanding similarities and differences in cell behavior among
animals used to study diseases and disorders that affect millions of Americans.
By bringing together biologists and engineers, this project also provides
exciting new experiences for students to learn about the future possibilities at
the intersection of these fields. Training high-school teachers in image
processing and its applications provides this well-rounded experience to even
more students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help neuroscientists observe the
behavior of neurons and glia in their native setting, this software will
automate the processing and analysis of complicated movements and interactions
among dozens or hundreds of cells in high-resolution microscope videos. The
interface will be both scalable and efficient, permitting rapid application of
video enhancement, segmentation, and tracking software to large databases of
microscope videos. The content-aware enhancement will suppress clutter while
preserving cell features. Time-series segmentation will identify both cell
bodies and ramified processes as they move between video frames and slices of
the z-stack. Transport theory will enable tracking cell movements and other
changes without having to construct a complicated model that could bias the
results. Plugins under development for common packages like ImageJ and Vaa3D
will allow scientists to integrate these tools with existing workflows. A
modular design will facilitate expanding and refining the capabilities of this
software over time. These software components can track how cells such as
microglia and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells react to their environment and
how these behaviors change during infection. Microscopy videos of mice,
zebrafish, and other animal models will reveal insights not currently accessible
due to the complicated behaviors of these cells. The collaborative nature of
this project will provide valuable experiences for students embedded in the
investigators? laboratories to learn more about image processing and biological
applications. Training high school teachers on biological image processing
during the summer will enable these teachers to share these experiences with
students at schools across central Virginia and beyond. The software and
research products will become available online at https://pages.shanti.virginia.
edu/Neuroglia_Image_Toolkit/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.