* 1759163
* Examining a place-based and technology driven curriculum that focuses on systems thinking among students.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Juliette Rooney-Varga, Council for Opportunity in Education
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,217,770.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by studying the outcomes
of a new out-of-school program. The project will examine whether early high
school student participation in an out-of-school, place-based curriculum
focusing on systems thinking can increase student interest in STEM fields, self-
efficacy, and motivation to pursue STEM degrees or careers. The proposed project
includes three major components: (1) an introduction to systems thinking
concepts and a simulation with system thinking modeling in a summer program, (2)
an academic year follow-up continuation component, and (3) a spring, student-led
Community Summit where students will present their capstone projects. The
project also provides for extensive professional development (PD) of the staff
at participating sites. The curriculum will feature project-based, hands-on use
of computer assisted modeling and simulation tools combined with the
presentation of student models to the community. The summer and after school
curriculum is specifically designed to increase STEM engagement, efficacy, and
course and major field choices among high school students from traditionally
underrepresented groups. Participant activities will include student modeling
experiences; simulation and role play with an interactive curriculum on climate
science, a place-based project on a local concern; and a capstone presentation
at a community summit. The technology will allow students to gain a deeper
understanding of systems thinking and to make better decisions through hands-on
exploration and learning in a risk-free experiment while learning how to use
(and master) new software, increasing student STEM interest and career
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Few studies have sought to address the potential
impact of systems thinking with low-income and first-generation college
students, and fewer studies have sought understanding of its potential impact in
increasing STEM interest and careers. Research in systems thinking suggests that
thinking critically and applying critical thinking skills to systems of personal
and community interest has the potential to promote greater academic success,
including comprehending algebraic concepts and developing problem solving
skills. The technology-driven curriculum and associated professional development
will be piloted, tested, and improved over three cycles of implementation at
four TRIO Talent Search and Upward Bound college access program partner sites.
The research plan will compare outcome measures between students who
participated in the project curriculum compared to students who did not.
Research instruments will measure student motivation and interest with respect
to their use and understanding of systems thinking, their comfort and open
interest in STEM, and their identity and capacity to see themselves in a STEM
career. Project research and resources will be widely disseminated in
professional journals, conference presentations, professional development
workshops, and online distribution of the project
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.