* 1759793
* Why Bottom-Heaviness of Vertical Motion Profiles Varies during Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection (OTREC)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Larissa Back, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2023
* USD 373,702.00

This award supports work on the Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
(OTREC) field campaign. The campaign seeks to understand the formation and
development of tropical convective clouds and associated heavy rainfall in the
adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial Pacific and the
southwest Caribbean, along with their evolution over the intervening portions of
Central America and Colombia. The campaign also examines the genesis and
evolution of easterly waves, large westward-moving atmospheric disturbances
(wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean
and eastern Pacific. The full set of campaign awards is discoverable on the
nsf.gov/awardsearch webpage by a keyword search on
"OTREC".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical convection plays a critical role in
earth's climate system and is also responsible for extreme precipitation and
hurricane formation. Easterly waves are of particular interest for weather
forecasting given their tendency to spawn hurricanes. More generally, tropical
convection is an engine of weather and climate worldwide yet poorly understood
and difficult to simulate. Work leading to better representation of tropical
convection in weather and climate models can thus lead to better weather
forecasts and impact assessments, both for the public and decision makers. Aside
from the societal relevance of the science, the campaign features several
education and outreach activities. These including support for undergraduate
participation and production of short documentary videos for use in classroom
teaching and informal science education. In addition, the PI performs science
outreach through the Expanding Your Horizons program, which conducts a one-day
conference for about 300 middle school girls, giving them the opportunity to
explore careers that use math and science. The project also provides support and
training for two graduate students, thereby providing for the future workforce
in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight week OTREC deployment
consists primarily of a set of 20 flights in the Gulfstream V research aircraft
maintained by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The campaign uses an
airport in Costa Rica for easy access to the equatorial Pacific and southwest
Caribbean study regions, and conditions in these regions are sampled using
dropsondes and a wing-mounted W-band radar. Dropsondes contain the same
instrument package as standard weather balloons, only dropped from an aircraft
(in this case from about 40,000 feet) with a small parachute. The radar
determines cloud properties such as the relative abundance of ice particles
versus liquid droplets, and uses Doppler shift to measure updraft and downdraft
speeds in clouds. The aircraft sampling is augmented by observations collected
at ground sites in Costa Rica and Colombia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
intensive study we still lack a satisfactory theory for how environmental
conditions determine when and where tropical convection will form, how long it
will last, how much it will expand and organize, and how much rain it will
produce. Over the eastern Pacific tropical convection occurs in a narrow east-
west strip a few degrees north of the equator, in a region where near-surface
winds come together in an intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). There are
convincing arguments that rising motions associated with heavy rainfall in the
ITCZ should have a bottom-heavy vertical profile, meaning that the bulk of the
rising motion in clouds occurs in the lower and middle troposphere. But the idea
of a bottom-heavy profile is contradicted by satellite observations (from the
NASA TRMM mission) which appear to show a large fraction of stratiform
precipitation. Such precipitation typically falls from upper-level clouds in
regions of widespread convection characterized by a top-heavy profile of rising
motion. In this project OTREC campaign data is used to resolve the vertical
profile contradiction and test an alternative interpretation of the satellite
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further issue is the extent to which convection in
the ITCZ is driven by the near-surface wind convergence in the region. Some
argue (see for example AGS-1758603) that convection in the eastern Pacific ITCZ
is largely due to thermodynamic factors associated with stability and energy
balance, with near-surface convergence playing a secondary role. Here the PI
hypothesizes that the thermodynamic arguments are not sufficient and the wind
convergence plays a dominant role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.