* 1759819
* Collaborative Research: SBP: Broadening participation: Reducing the consequences of subtle discrimination in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Jenessa Shapiro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 117,210.00

Broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) is a critical goal in the staffing, management, and
effectiveness of the U.S. workforce. Indeed, African American and Hispanic
people comprise less than 10% of the STEM workforce. The overarching goal of the
proposed research is to increase the recruitment, retention, and preparation of
Hispanic and African American students for STEM careers. We focus on the subtle
yet significant messages that minority students encounter in STEM contexts that
undermine their success. We uniquely consider the ways that allies, or majority
group members who strive to end oppression toward, and advocate on behalf of,
minority group members, can effectively address subtle discrimination, and thus
ultimately support the STEM interest, efficacy, achievement, and workplace
success of minority students. In summary, the findings from this work will serve
as an impetus for scholarship on minority stress interventions and ally
engagement. Additionally, it will offer immediately applicable strategies for
retaining African American and Hispanic students in STEM, a necessary step for
increasing the representation of racial minorities in the U.S. STEM workforce.

This research pursues the overarching goal of developing and testing strategies
that enhance the retention of African American and Hispanic students in STEM
careers by identifying and evaluating ally behaviors that reduce the detrimental
consequences of subtle discrimination. One explanation for this shortage is the
subtle differences in students' formative college experiences. In so doing, we
build and test a conceptual model that uniquely integrates attributional
ambiguity and stress and coping theories with emerging insights about the
influence of allies. We advance robust logic based on evidence from the fields
related to the organizational science to propose that the ambiguity of subtle
discrimination depletes cognitive and affective resources necessary for
achievement in STEM. This reasoning reflects the first thorough analysis of why
and how subtle discrimination is problematic and points directly to ambiguity
reduction strategies as powerful theory-driven buffers of these effects. We
blend complementary methods of experience sampling and laboratory experiment to
build theoretically meaningful and practically useful knowledge. This work will
provide specific, evidence-based strategies to support African American and
Hispanic college students, thereby enhancing their STEM interest, efficacy,
motivation, achievement, and ultimately career choice and success in
organizations. In particular, we focus on the previously unexamined role of
motivated observers--allies--in reducing the consequences of subtle
discrimination for its targets and thus catalyze new diversity science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.