* 1759807
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Innovation:  Algorithms for recovering root architecture from 3D imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* David Letscher, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,048.00

Roots, the "hidden" half of the plant, play many critical roles in the plant's
development such as the uptake of water and nutrients, providing anchorage, and
stabilizing the soil. These functions, in turn, are closely associated with the
root architecture. Quantifying root architecture is not only a fundamental
aspect of plant science but is a critical component in crop breeding for
sustainable agriculture. Recent advances in 3D imaging (e.g., CT and MRI) have
made it possible to capture 3D root structures in natural growing environments
and monitor their growth over time. Unfortunately, the potential of the imaging
techniques has been largely held back by the lack of effective computational
tools for interpreting the images and distilling biological insights. This
project, to be conducted by a group of computer scientists, mathematicians, and
biologists across three institutes in the St. Louis region, aims at developing
efficient and robust computational methods for automated analysis of root
architecture from 3D images. The research looks a step ahead of the current
cutting edge phenotype data collection, to how we will derive accurate
representations of growing root systems, and therefore gain insight into the
plant phenome. The team is committed to providing training to more than ten
students over the course of the project, leveraging the existing NSF REU
programs at two of the institutes. The team will pursue outreach activities not
only within the research communities but also locally in the St. Louis area with
a focus on grade schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deriving root architecture from
3D images involves a number of technically challenging tasks, including
inferring individual roots from a segmented image, reconstructing their
branching structure, and tracking the architecture in a time series of segmented
images. This research draws from, and extends upon, methods from computer
graphics and computational geometry to address these tasks. Specifically, the
research will develop three novel classes of methods. Given a noise-ridden root
segmentation, the first class of methods produces a curve skeleton that captures
the topology and branching structure of the root system. The second class then
uses the curve skeleton to automatically infer architectural components such as
the root hierarchy and types. The third class improves the accuracy of the
algorithms in the 1rst two classes by utilizing a sequence of segmentations and
further annotates the root architecture with a time function. These algorithms
enable the extraction of detailed root traits for root phenotyping, and both the
algorithms and traits will be evaluated by a suite of representative real-world
imaging data.&lt;br/&gt;Besides the design of automatic algorithms, a graphical
software will be prototyped that offers fast and interactive means to inspect
and edit the results produced by the algorithms. The software will be tested by
biologists in the team and freely distributed to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.