* 1759445
* EAGER: Non-integrative transient delivery of reagents into plant cells via the type IV secretion system of A. tumefaciens
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Thomas Clemente, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,006.00

Innovations developed through public sector investments over the past few
decades have translated to technologies that have benefited U.S. agriculture
productivity significantly, for example, reducing agriculture inputs through
precision application of water, nutrients, and pesticides. Genetic technologies
have led to better predictive models for plant breeding and introduction of
novel traits into crops that could not be added by conventional means. However,
the ability to introduce novel traits using biotechnology is often hampered by
low efficiencies. This project seeks to improve the efficiency with which
Agrobacterium tumefaciens can serve as a tool to introduce novel traits into
crop plants by exploiting the bacterium's ability to secrete proteins into plant
cells. The transient delivery of these proteins will impact both the ability of
the plant cell to detect and fight off the bacterium, and the ability of the
plant cell to regenerate a new plant once it has been altered. To meet this
goal, a multidisciplinary approach will be taken that brings together expertise
in genetics, microbiology and molecular biology. Importantly, the underlying
biology of the project will be communicated through outreach efforts to the non-
science community on all aspects of food production and on how innovations in
agriculture help maintain the U. S. strategic advantage through its capacity to
produce a plentiful and safe food supply.

The research to be conducted in this project lays out an innovative set of
studies to design and test novel Agrobacterium tumefaciens strains that can help
mitigate two major inefficiencies of plant transformation: the competency of the
cell to receive a genetic reagent and the ability of that same cell to lead to
germline transmission of the induced genetic change. Pseudomonas effector
proteins that suppress the plant innate immune response will be transiently
expressed to improve the efficiency of gene transfer from bacterium to plant
cell. In addition, plant morphogenic proteins will be transiently expressed to
improve the efficiency of regenerating plants from transformed tissue culture
cells. The results of these studies will also provide insight into the size
limit of a protein that can be shuttled through the Agrobacterium type IV
secretion system. Overall, this project should lead to A. tumefaciens strains
with enhanced transformation capacity across a broader array of genotypes within
a plant species and that are easily transferable to the plant science community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.