* 1759964
* ABI Innovation: Taxonomically intelligent data integration for a new Flora of Alaska
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Campbell Webb, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 496,495.00

The plants of Alaska are a dynamic mixture of arctic, boreal and temperate rain
forest species, assembled during millenia of migration between Asia and North
America. They are also on the front lines of climate change, experiencing more
rapidly changing conditions than plants elsewhere in the United States,
resulting in rapid range shifts and local extinctions. The last comprehensive
Flora of Alaska was completed fifty years ago, meaning that vast amounts of
digital data and new taxonomic work remain poorly integrated; this is a major
barrier to tracking the changing distribution of native Alaskan plants and new
arrivals. This project will build the digital infrastructure to integrate names,
herbarium specimens, images, citizen science observations, and taxonomic
histories and descriptions. It will be innovative in using "taxon concepts" to
weave together the data resources. Taxon concepts offer a level of information
precision beyond that of scientific plant names alone, but have yet to be used
in a multi-resource database such as this; a sub-goal of the project is to
promote and facilitate the use of taxon concepts more widely. As the data
infrastructure is developed, the database will be populated with existing
digital and scanned-paper information about the plants of Alaska, and with new
data (keys, taxonomic accounts) to be generated through the collaboration of
stakeholders in a new Flora of Alaska. The project will also engage the wider
community of plant enthusiasts to expand contemporary species occurrence data by
incorporating iNaturalist observations. Project staff will give training
workshops, and travel to Alaskan villages to work with teachers, thus involving
Alaskan youth in the vital process of monitoring shifts in plant distributions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build an online resource that integrates
the most important information about the vascular plants of Alaska. It will link
the new checklist of Alaskan plant names, a product of years of research by
staff of the Herbarium of the University of Alaska (ALA), and the Alaska Center
for Conservation Science (ACCS), to online flora resources (the Pan-Arctic Flora
and the Flora of North America), and to information digitized from Hulten's
Flora of Alaska, which is the standard reference work but now nearly fifty years
old. This database will link taxonomic entities to data about the physical
specimens in the herbarium and in other herbaria around the world, and to geo-
referenced observations of plants throughout the state, showing images of
digitized specimens and of plants in the field (via iNaturalist). The project
will also engage in cutting-edge deconstruction of text descriptions in its
constituent floras, parsing out data on phenotypic characters of each taxon, and
presenting these data in the form of identification resources and contributions
to plant knowledge-bases. At the core of this data integration will be
informatics infrastructure based on taxon concepts, which capture not just the
names of plants, but also the historical sense in which those names were used:
the hypotheses of taxonomists. To populate this taxon concept data layer, we
will develop and participate in a workflow for taxon concept mapping among names
used in a core set of Alaskan flora publications. Project staff will actively
engage with the community of Alaskan botanists in the development of a new Flora
of Alaska. Data generated by stakeholders (including taxon reviews and
occurrence data) will be incorporated into the project data platform. Beyond the
contribution of significantly advancing our knowledge of the plants of Alaska,
this project will benefit the university and society by training graduate and
undergraduate students in biodiversity informatics and taxonomy, and engaging
with training of K-12 teachers in rural villages of Alaska. Project information
can be found at http://alaskaflora.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.