* 1759594
* A Socioecological Investigation of the Impacts of Uneven Exurban Development and Sea-Level Rise on Socioeconomically Differentiated Communities.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Nik Heynen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 288,652.00

This project investigates how the interconnected socio-ecological processes of
uneven exurban development, growing urban-rural connections, and potential
increased flooding due to sea-level rise interact to transform land-use and
vulnerability in coastal environments. The investigators will analyze how
historical landscape modifications increase the vulnerability to flooding of
marginalized coastal communities, and how that vulnerability impacts current
economic development strategies intended to increase rural community resilience
amidst increasing exurban development pressures. A coupled socio-ecological
approach will be used in to understand the dynamics of regional population
growth and the possible impacts of sea-level rise on coastal landscapes and
communities. Despite widespread recognition, the uneven ways that the history of
racial inequality has raised vulnerability for some while decreasing it for
others continues to be absent from much of the research that is explicitly
socio-ecological, and this project seeks to add this aspect. Findings from this
research project will improve planning along vulnerable coastlines by providing
relevant information to state and local government managers. Additionally, the
research will create educational, training, and engagement opportunities for
diverse scholars, undergraduate, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the broader importance of uneven exurban development on differential
communities and the impact of sea-level rise through interconnected
interactions, the theoretical framing of this research will integrate insights
from, and contribute to theory on, political ecology, Long-Term Socio-Ecological
Research, and geographic studies of race relations. The investigators will use a
mixed methods approach for data collection and analysis including archival
research and ethnographic methods as well as land-use and land-cover change
analysis along with hydrologic mapping. Through a case study of Sapelo Island,
Georgia, this project asks three specific questions: (1) How did racialized
agricultural development and population dynamics drive changes to Sapelo
Island's drainage ditch network across antebellum, postbellum, and State-owned
periods? (2) To what extent does the contemporary drainage ditch network
increase the likelihood of vulnerability to flooding driven by future sea-level
rise? (3) How will African-American economic development strategies be impacted
by the coupled dynamics of socio-demographic change and sea-level rise
inundation? The investigators hypothesize that the same ditches that current
African-American residents'ancestors built as slaves could now worsen sea level
inundation and prevent those same communities from realizing their economic
development objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.