* 1759360
* Collaborative Research: Adapting and Implementing a Geospatial High School Course in Career and Technical Education Clusters in Urban Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2023
* USD 772,521.00

This is a collaborative project submitted to the Successful Project Expansion
and Dissemination (SPrEaD) strand of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program (Program Solicitation NSF 17-565) to
advance efforts to better understand and promote practices that increase student
motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology,
engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The goal is to expand and disseminate
strategies to support spatial thinking at the high school level by adapting and
implementing the previously developed Geospatial Semester (GSS) one-year, dual-
credit course focused on developing geospatial problem-solving skills and
applying those skills to student-selected problems. GSS consists of introductory
exercises to develop students' basic skills in using Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) for analyzing spatial problems, supporting students in framing a
meaningful problem from a spatial perspective, identifying and organizing
relevant spatial datasets, analyzing their spatial data as evidence for
proposing solutions for their problem, and making a public presentation of their
results. GSS is currently taught in high schools in Virginia in partnership with
James Madison University. At the core of GSS is the development of spatial
thinking skills, which are strongly predictive of achievement, persistence, and
attainment in STEM fields, even after accounting for other relevant variables,
such as mathematical and verbal aptitude. Thus, the central purpose of the study
is to adapt and implement the GSS high school course in six Career and Technical
Education (CTE) clusters in the Chicago Public Schools (CPS). The project will
select participants from identified groups currently underrepresented in STEM
occupations. Through the GSS course, students will engage with relevant STEM,
social science, and CTE topics that cut across multiple disciplines, and engage
in relevant practices, including scientific data collection, analysis, modeling,
and interpretation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adopt and adapt the
core elements of the GSS for the context of Chicago CTE programs using a design-
based implementation research (DBIR) approach. The study will use a framework of
spread and scale to investigate the strategies for expanding and disseminating
the course and the ways in which contextual factors influence the likelihood of
success. It will address two research questions regarding whether, and how, the
GSS can be adapted to the needs of a large, urban district teaching a variety of
CTE-related skills: (1) How can large urban school districts develop the
necessary infrastructure to implement GSS without the direct support of the
developers?; and (2) Can we develop classroom-based assessments of spatial
reasoning that have convergent validity with the research-based measures used in
past research? To address the former, the project will partner with the City
Colleges of Chicago to provide the dual enrollment credit, and engage in co-
design with teachers to develop an implementation model that is tailored to
CPS's CTE curriculum and supported by continuing professional development
practices. To answer the latter, the project will engage in co-design with
teachers to develop classroom assessments of spatial thinking and validate the
extent to which they correlate with research-based measures. The project will
use these assessments to investigate whether the adaptation of GSS in Chicago
provides outcomes that are comparable to those of the established GSS
implementations in Virginia. Data sources will include classroom observations,
ratings of student work products, teacher interviews, student demographics, and
growth in student performance on pretest and posttest assessments. A debriefing
routine will be used to interpret what has happened and plan prospective events
for the next implementation phase. A mixed-method approach will be employed to
incorporate quantitative analysis of student learning. As DBIR research, the
project will (a) form partnerships between researchers and practitioners focused
on persistent problems of practice from multiple stakeholders' perspectives; (b)
focus on the importance of spatial reasoning as foundational for STEM practice
through a multi-stakeholder partnership of GIS educators, psychologists,
implementation researchers, a large urban district and community college; and
(c) develop capacity for sustaining change in systems through GSS teacher
leaders and new courses in GIS at City Colleges of Chicago. The project will
develop new co-designed curriculum materials through (a) pilot testing of
materials (years 1-2); (b) field testing of materials (year 3) with emphasis on
professional development, implementation research (to examine the extent to
which the program is successfully implemented across a variety of school
contexts), and analysis of field-test results; and (c) testing the integration
of the professional development and course implementation into the CTE
operations, including analysis of the validity and quality of spatial-thinking
classroom assessments. The main outcome of this effort will be a high school
GIS-focused CTE curriculum prototype developed through co-design processes, as
well as DBIR focused on geospatial problem-solving. An external advisory board
will provide ongoing, independent, and critical reviews of the implementation of
the program to evaluate progress, both formative and summative.