* 1759127
* Controls of Pore Fluid Pressure on Fault Slip Weakening and Fracture Energy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Melodie French, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 264,839.00

In the past 15 years, measurements from the fields of geodesy and seismology
have revealed that large faults along the boundaries of tectonic plates
regularly slip at rates slower than earthquakes, but faster than the tectonic
plates. These intermediate-rate slip events influence earthquake hazards through
their potential to cause an earthquake on an adjacent segment of the fault or to
control how big a future earthquake may become. Although the cause of these slip
events is still debated, they are consistently observed in regions where the
fluids filling pores in the rock are thought to be at very high pressure.
Motivated by previous and preliminary laboratory observations that faulting
becomes slower and more stable with increasing pore fluid pressure, scientists
at Rice University are quantifying the effects of fluid pressure on the physics
of faulting. This study is designed to provide inputs into models of regional
seismic hazards, including along the San Andreas Fault and in Cascadia, where
these slip events have been observed. This research is supporting the
development of a laboratory by an early career researcher and the education of
one graduate student and several undergraduate students. The researcher and
students will incorporate this work into lectures and teaching activities on
natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research quantifies an experimental
observation that is not explained by current models for faulting and, given the
abundance of evidence for elevated fluid pressures in fault zones, has direct
implications for the cause and characteristics of slow slip. Specifically,
previous experimental observations show that the slip weakening distance and
fracture energy of faulting increase with fluid pressure. Physical models for
fluid pressure stabilization through a process known as dilatant hardening
cannot predict the magnitude of this effect or the apparent monotonic decrease
in failure rates with increasing fluid pressure. The purpose of this work is to
(1) determine the processes that cause stabilization and (2) develop
constitutive relations that include the effect of fluid pressure, which can then
be incorporated into models of faulting. To this end, researcher and a graduate
student are using experimental rock deformation to quantify the slip weakening
distance and fracture energy of faulting as a function of pore fluid pressure
magnitude and effective stress magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.