* 1759583
* Collaborative Research: Tracking the Exsolution and Migration of Volatiles in Shallow Magma Reservoirs
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Denton Ebel, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2022
* USD 269,497.00

The exsolution and migration of magmatic volatiles have a profound influence
over the chemical and physical evolution of magmas. More specifically, the
presence of a discrete volatile phase (gas bubbles) affects the transport of a
wide variety of metals in and out of magma bodies leading to ore deposit
formation and controls the likelihood of an eruption as well as eruption
dynamics. Unfortunately, erupted volcanic deposits or exhumed magma bodies have
lost most traces of their volatile cargo; so, information about the timing of
exsolution and the efficiency of volatile migration in active magma reservoir
remain therefore elusive. The proposed study addresses this gap in knowledge
with a combination of field work, mechanical models and laboratory experiments
focusing on the behavior of volatiles in shallow magma reservoirs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main challenges that prevent a better understanding of
the dynamics of shallow magmatic volatiles in magma reservoirs are (1) the lack
of understanding of the dependence of the solubility of complex magmatic fluids
(magmatic volatiles) on pressure, temperature and magma composition -thus
requiring new experiments- and (2) the lack of understanding of the physics of
deforming three-phase magmas (vapors composed of exsolved volatiles, viscous
silicate melts and crystals). The work proposed here will not only address the
gap in knowledge of magmatic systems described above, it will also push the
boundaries of our understanding of the thermodynamics of complex magmatic fluids
(with direct application to the chemistry of metallic ore-forming fluids), and
multiphase fluid mechanics. This project will generate a massive, systematic
volatile solubility data set for 3 melt compositions; these data are required
for future expansion of extant thermodynamic models on volatile and fluid
behavior in felsic magmas. This project also features a new collaboration which
will provide a postdoc and a graduate student with an opportunity to work with
and learn from an interdisciplinary research team at different institutions. The
PIs have a record of incorporating diverse and under-represented groups within
their research and education programs. For example, women and members of other
under-represented groups will participate in Earth science teacher-student
training events at the AMNH and in an organized field excursion to the Sterling
Hill Zinc Mine and Museum, NJ. The PIs from Brown University will participate in
the Leadership Alliance SR-EIP summer program, which brings 1st generation and
under-represented minorities undergrads to STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.