* 1759657
* SBP: Conference: Broadening Participation and Building Bridges
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Rebecca Torres, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 09/30/2019
* USD 39,500.00

This award will support the conduct of the 2018 Race, Ethnicity, and Place (REP)
conference. REP is a biennial meeting that has brought together diverse groups
of scholars to facilitate research on race and ethnicity in geography and has
provided a critical gathering place of support and collaboration for
underrepresented scholars. REP will catalyze new activities focusing on
geographic, racial, and ethnic dimensions of social science research. More so
than any other conference or community-wide activity in geography, REP
explicitly brings together scholars who are members of underrepresented groups
as well as scholars whose research involves the study of socioeconomic,
cultural, and other dynamics within communities populated by people who are
underrepresented in STEM fields. REP also will involve scholars from sociology,
anthropology, and other related fields. REP will focus on building collaborative
relationships among participating scholars to foster a broader range of
activities that engage more students and other early-career professionals in
STEM research. As such, REP will provide a test-bed for advancing scholarship on
race, ethnicity, and place that requires participants to engage in discussions
about different epistemological approaches and issues that can hinder or advance
scholarship on this topic. Explicit efforts will be made to engage more scholars
from underrepresented groups and to help them form stronger research networks to
help enhance and improve their future capabilities. Through explicit attention
to building bridges across research approaches and by providing active, ongoing
intergenerational mentoring, REP will encourage more effective research on
racial and ethnic dimensions of social science research in geography and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversifying the involvement of individuals engaged
in all types of work and activity remains a major challenge in higher education.
To directly address this challenge in geography and related fields, the 2018 REP
conference will be held in mid-October at the Mexican American Cultural Center
(MAC) in Austin, Texas. The conference will integrate new participants through
active recruitment and engagement; by designing strategic panels and keynotes to
attract a broader audience, and by offering a post-conference mentoring and
professional-development workshop for early-career faculty and advanced graduate
students from underrepresented groups. Special emphasis will be given to
examining complex issues of race and ethnicity through cross-disciplinary
collaborations that integrate a range of theoretical, ontological,
epistemological, and methodological approaches across multiple scales of
analysis. This award will support early career researchers from underrepresented
groups to participate in the 2018 REP Conference and thus integrate new
generations of scholars into the meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.