* 1759454
* Leadership through Equity and Advocacy Development in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Chauvot, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,825,430.00

Leadership through Equity and Advocacy Development in STEM (LEAD-STEM) is a
Noyce Track 3 Master Teaching Fellowships (MTF) project at the University of
Houston. LEAD-STEM will focus on the acute shortage of effective secondary
science and mathematics teacher leaders in America's urban high schools. It will
also capitalize on reports that the Greater Houston area's current demographics
reflect the future demographics of the United States. The project will develop,
mentor, and retain STEM teacher leaders in high-need school districts in the
Greater Houston area. To this end, LEAD-STEM will emphasize incorporation of
culturally responsive teaching (CRT) in secondary STEM curricula. The project
activities will equip the LEAD-STEM MTFs with the knowledge and skills needed
to: mentor secondary STEM preservice teachers in the teachHOUSTON Program; work
collaboratively with in-service teachers throughout the district and state; and
serve as change agents at the local, regional and national levels. Additionally,
project activities will focus on: 1) the combined roles of technology, inquiry-
based instruction, and CRT in supporting the development of STEM concepts in
secondary, underrepresented students; 2) the refinement of MTFs' instructional
practices specific to CRT; and 3) the development of teachers' leadership
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with the National Math and Science
Initiative (NSMI) and the Greater Houston high-need school district (among the
country's largest in population and area), this project will recruit and prepare
30 secondary science and mathematics teachers to serve as teacher-leaders on
public school campuses with high enrollment of underrepresented students. LEAD-
STEM MTFs will earn a Curriculum and Instruction master's degree with an
emphasis in STEM Education. They will participate in summer professional
development experiences and instructional coaching guided by project leaders.
The experiences of designing and delivering professional development locally
will help the MTFs transition to leadership at the national level, through the
partnership and support of NMSI. The combination of grounding STEM instruction
in culturally responsive pedagogies and using this knowledge to address equity
and learning disparities in STEM education may produce a generalizable model of
instruction. This project may also serve as a model for other teacher leader
development efforts across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.