* 1759991
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patent Policy Changes in the Court: A study of Heterogeneous Impacts on Business Models and Firms' Participation
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Elie Sung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 31,472.00

The need to accommodate new technologies at an increasingly fast pace has led
the judicial branch to become a key source of changes in patent policy in the
United States. Since the 1980s, within a relatively static framework set by the
two other branches of government, courts' rulings on legal disputes have
continuously changed the strength of patents in the US. Meanwhile, there is
still controversy regarding the impact of the strength of patents on innovation.
The debate has been stymied by difficulties in understanding the effect of
various facets of patent policy. This project offers a solution to advance our
understanding of how courts shape the patent system by (1) distinguishing three
aspects of strength in the analysis: patentability, breadth and ability to
exclude and (2) examining the heterogeneous impact of these court decisions on
the rate and direction of firms' innovative activities. The research answers the
following three questions. First, what influences decision-making for patent-
related Supreme Court decisions? Second, do firms react to decisions in the
direction expected by the Court? Lastly, do firms benefit from participating in
policymaking? As a result, the project also provides new insights on the
policymaking process by the courts, focusing on the constraints and external
influences in decision-making, including firms' incentives to advocate for their
position. In addition, this project provides an understanding of the aggregated
effect of apparently disjointed cases on the overall rate and direction of
innovation.

The first part examines the policymaking process in the court based on all US
Supreme Court patent cases over the period 2000-2015 to provide an understanding
of the effect of participation of stakeholders (as party in a case, amici or
through lobbying) on the decisions that change patent strength. The second part
provides theoretical and empirical insights on the long-debated relationship
between patent strength and innovation. It challenges the view that weaker
patents lead to fewer innovations. To confront theories in the existing
literature predicting changes in firm strategy leading to both increases and
decreases in innovation, mixed methodology is used by combining the analysis of
court documents with quantitative estimations of the impact using a panel data
set of patent and firm data to examine the mechanisms behind patent policymaking
and firm strategy. Lastly, the third part examines whether firms participating
in patent policymaking obtain benefits reflected in their performance. For all
three parts of the project, strong empirical evidence is provided regarding the
mechanisms behind patent policymaking and firm strategy. An original research
design is used to estimate the impact of a patent policy change on firms'
behavior while controlling for competing explanations for the effects. The
project also relies on unique data, an exhaustive panel data set matching
patents with time series firm-level data on the entire population of French
firms, based on unique identifiers, over the period of 1995-2014. Such data
allow novel insights by distinguishing impacts on propensity to use patents from
intensity of engagement in innovative activities and identifying population
level evidence on firm formation and first-time involvement in innovative
activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.