* 1759879
* Connecting Hydrology, Biology, and Geochemistry in a Coastal Wetland: Feedbacks between Ecosystem Processes toward Predictive Understanding
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Holly Michael, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 374,175.00

Coastal marshes play a critical role in the carbon cycle because they store vast
amounts of carbon and regulate its movement between land, ocean, and atmosphere.
Given their position at the land-sea margin, tidal marshes are threatened by
rising seas, changing climatic conditions, and human pressures, which may
release previously stored carbon and reduce their ability to store carbon in the
future. The resulting impacts on the carbon cycle will depend on how changes in
marsh hydrology affect the movement and chemical form of carbon, but these
impacts are currently unknown. This study explores the impacts of changing
hydrologic conditions on marsh water chemistry and links these to changes in
carbon movement between tidal marshes and the coastal ocean. The research
improves predictions of how carbon budgets may change in the future and enables
managers to better protect the carbon storage potential of these fragile coastal
ecosystems. The project also enhances education opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, and enables the development of the St. Jones National
Estuarine Research Reserve for course instruction and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries and marshes are globally important
reservoirs of carbon and the critical points of interaction between land and
oceans where carbon and nutrients are cycled. Despite their importance, the
hydrological controls on biogeochemistry and, in turn, carbon dynamics of these
ecosystems are relatively understudied, limiting the capacity to predict
feedbacks with climate change and sea-level rise, to value marsh ecosystem
services, and to manage human activities in these fragile landscapes. This
project incorporates field, laboratory, and modeling approaches to elucidate how
carbon dynamics in coastal marshes are driven by the spatially and temporally
complex hydrology through interactions between physical and biogeochemical
factors. This research (1) delineates the marsh based on hydrology, subsurface
geochemistry, and biological activity, (2) establishes mechanistic linkages
between changes in biological, geochemical, and hydrologic factors, and (3)
combines mechanistic information with hydrological modeling to gain insights
into longer timescale impacts of hydrologic change on redox zonations and
associated carbon dynamics. Field analyses are conducted in a mid-Atlantic tidal
marsh at the St. Jones National Estuarine Research Reserve in Dover, Delaware.
This work fills gaps in the understanding of the hydrologic impacts on marsh
biogeochemistry and identifies specific factors controlling carbon dynamics and
fluxes between marshes and the coastal ocean. This integrated study promotes
development of new conceptual and quantitative models to predict feedbacks
between biogeochemistry and hydrologic change in coastal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.