* 1759537
* RAPID: Houston in Hurricane Harvey (H3): Establishing Disaster System-of-Systems Requirements for Network-Centric and Data-Enriched Preparedness and Response
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Ali Mostafavi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 49,915.00

This RAPID study will collect and analyze time-sensitive data from Hurricane
Harvey in Houston in order to document the needs, challenges, and required
capabilities for enhanced management, decision-making, and situation awareness
in disaster system-of-systems (interdependent processes, operations, and systems
involved in disaster preparedness and response). The management success and
efficiency of disaster system-of-systems depend on the ability to integrate
individual systems and processes and communicate information in a network-
centric manner. The outcomes of this study will include: (1) A research roadmap
and ontology specifying the requirements and characteristics for disaster
system-of-systems in order to improve situation awareness, risk reduction, and
decision-making during preparedness and response to extreme weather events; (2)
An automated multi-modal data analytics framework integrating multiple
heterogeneous datasets for improved situation awareness of community risks,
events, and activities; and (3) A network analysis providing a guide for where,
to whom, and how to utilize smart technologies and systems to enable network-
centric and data-enriched Disaster SoS. These outcomes will provide important
understanding and guide for researchers and practitioners towards creation and
implementation of smart technologies and data analytics systems that enhance the
resilience of communities to extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing robust and resilient disaster system-
of-systems (SoS) is essential to protect communities in extreme weather events.
However, the current knowledge lacks important elements related to the SoS
requirements and characteristics (e.g., architecture, technologies, and
integration) to augment human processes, interactions, and decision-making. To
address this knowledge gap, this study aims to collect and analyze perishable
and time-bound data from the 2017 Hurricane Harvey in Houston to: (1) Map
Disaster SoS elements, relationships, needs, and challenges through in-depth
interviews and participatory workshops with elected and appointed officials,
infrastructure managers, emergency responders, and decision-makers, as well as
household surveys; (2) Examine the utility of cyber informatics and social
sensing technologies to better integrate social media infrastructure with
Disaster SoS for improving the community situation awareness; and (3) Map and
analyze community networks to model communities by their activities, events, and
communication in order to determine opportunities for utilizing smart
technologies for network-centric preparedness and response processes. The
outcomes of this project will have significant societal benefits that will build
new smart and connected communities that are more resilient to extreme weather
events. To attain the societal benefits, the project outcomes will be
disseminated through three avenues: community engagement workshops, scholarly
publications and presentations, and a project webpage.