* 1759947
* Understanding and Removing Faculty Barriers for the Adoption and Implementation of Proven Interventions
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Jessi Smith, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,249,830.00

This study will investigate the factors that facilitate or hinder STEM
undergraduate instructors from implementing strategies that have demonstrably
positive impacts on student outcomes. The research will specifically focus on
the study of one such intervention called the Utility Value Intervention (UVI),
which has been shown to have a positive impact especially on students who are
first generation college students or who are from racial and ethnic minority
groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields. The UVI helps students to
discover connections between science topics and their lives, and to make
connections between STEM topics they are studying and their goals. Making these
connections helps students appreciate the value of the work, leading to a deeper
engagement and involvement which, in turn, enhances career motivation and
performance. The proposed research focuses on understanding why faculty decide
to adopt intervention strategies such as the UVI or not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is framed by organizational theories of
diversity resistance and social psychological theories of decision making. The
project team will collect data from over 800 undergraduate biology instructors
from a nationally representative sample. This will be complemented by interviews
with 40 introductory biology instructors and field experiments with 624 biology
instructors to understand attitudes toward adopting or resisting diversity-
focused interventions. In later years of the project, the investigators will
conduct a randomized controlled trial testing the optimized intervention
delivery methods with a new nationally representative sample of 200 biology
instructors. This project is supported by the Education and Human Resources Core
Research Program, which funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.