* 1759535
* Topics in Complex Fluids and Biophysiology: the Energetic Variational Approaches
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Chun Liu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 12/31/2021
* USD 409,931.00

Complex fluids are important in both physical and biological sciences. The
microscopic structures associated with the materials give rise to many intricate
properties and fascinating applications. These include various polymeric
materials, viscoelastic fluids and liquid crystalline materials in chemical
engineering, magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) in energy and power industry, electro-
kinetic and electrorheological (ER) fluids in soft matter physics, as well as
ionic solutions and electrolytes in cellular biology and physiology. The study
of these materials and their specific properties require state-of-art multiscale
and multiphysics theories and techniques. For example, biology and physiology
have shown that almost all biological activities involve the transport of
charged particles and ions. This project aims at transferring some of those
conventional empirical and phenomenal descriptions into modern quantitative
models. The general framework of energetic variational approaches (EnVarA),
motivated by the seminal work of Rayleigh and Onsager, has been proven to be
with great advantages in studying the complex fluids, such as charged ion
transport in biological environments. The main theme of the research is to
employ the general energetic variational approaches to derive and study the
dynamics of various complex fluids with the applications. These real life
problems also provide formidable challenges and great motivations for the
development of new mathematical theories and techniques. The project will
provide many opportunities for students and junior researchers to have
multidisciplinary research experiences in mathematics, bioengineering, and
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to make progress
in the study of several physical and biological complex fluids. It focuses on
the underlying energetic variational structures of the models, which capture and
predict specific physical and biological properties. The investigator will
continue the study of the coupling and competing effects from different spatial
or temporal scales. One focus is on the diffusion dynamics of various materials
in different environments, such as particles with size effects and electric
Coulomb interactions, solutions with high concentrations in heterogeneous
environments. All these are crucial in the study of dynamics of ion channel
proteins in neurophysiology. Energetic variational methods have shown promises
for the study of such multiscale multiphysics problems. Often the existing
analysis and numerical methods are inadequate for these complicated problems of
non-ideal materials, especially with couplings between fields and structures.
The investigator and his collaborators will work on both the analysis issues
arising from these studies, developing corresponding numerical algorithms and
verifying with the experimental results. They will work with biologists on the
study of several specific projects, such as the sensoring mechanism in voltage-
gated channels. Self-consistent dynamic models will be derived, which include
the flow field, dielectrics, hydration, and conformational changes in proteins.
The group will also carry out analytical and numerical studies on projects such
as nonlocal diffusion, various dynamic boundary effects, and thermal effects.