* 1759756
* Re-Examining Southern California Lake Sediment Cores with Environmental DNA to Revolutionize How We Study the Past
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Robert Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2021
* USD 207,023.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS) PROGRAM&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1759756&lt;br/&gt;Wayne,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;University of California-Los Angeles (No
subs)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the human-
environment relationship from the late Pleistocene era (approximately 120,000
BP) to the present in order to provide new understanding of the environmental
dynamics prior to the arrival of humans in North America. The investigators will
use environmental DNA (eDNA) to provide new insights for addressing long-
standing questions of past human-environment relationships and biodiversity
dynamics resulting from environmental change, fire, and human activities. The
project will engage Native American communities in order to shape the procedures
ancient eDNA studies take with regard to obtaining information about their
ancestral activities. The investigators will build partnerships through this
Native American network to initiate eDNA citizen science projects and virtual
eDNA learning content. Through these activities, the investigators will offer
educational and research opportunities to these underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental DNA (eDNA) is a new methodology used
for biodiversity monitoring. DNA shed by plants, animals, and other organisms is
sequenced and evaluated, thereby allowing scientists to inventory the community
at a location. Previous studies using eDNA on paleosoils and sediments have only
been done in colder climates. This project will develop eDNA methods suitable
for inventorying paleosediments in warmer climates by focusing on southern
California, an area with a diverse history of environmental and landscape change
over the timespan characterized by continuous human presence. The investigators
will recover DNA shed by plants, animals, and microbes from well-dated,
environmentally sensitive lake sediment cores, and they will use these data in
combination with other paleoecological proxies. Using DNA techniques involving
metabarcoding and hybridization, the investigators will inventory the flora and
fauna of the past at low and high elevations levels and with different
temperatures. Outcomes of this research will provide the scientific community
and the public with the appropriate mechanisms to interpret ancient eDNA
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.