* 1759252
* NSFGEO-NERC: Latest Pleistocene-Holocene incremental slip record of the Kekerengu-Jordan fault system, northern South Island, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* James Dolan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 379,246.00

The standard model for rupture of large earthquakes along strike-slip faults is
that the slip that generates the earthquake occurs on a single surface. The
November 14, 2016 Kaikoura, New Zealand, magnitude 7.8 earthquake shook up this
thinking about fault slip behavior. In what initially seemed to be an event
resulting from slip along a single fault, turned out to be more complex with
slip jumping from one fault to another within a network of faults called the
Marlborough fault system. In this project, a research team from the University
of Southern California, United Kingdom, and New Zealand will use a variety of
cutting-edge methods to reconstruct the slip and paleo-earthquake history of one
of the Marlborough fault system faults, the Kekerengu-Jordan fault system, which
experienced about 12 meters of slip in the 2016 event. Data collected in this
project would be used in conjunction with data from other faults in system to
better understand earthquake recurrence rates and, more importantly, the
temporal and spatial linkage between these faults, something that was clearly
not well understood before the Kaikoura earthquake. Understanding the threat
from major earthquakes to an increasingly urbanized American population is of
critical importance for facilitating proactive and efficient measures to reduce
future loss of life and property. Yet understanding of what to expect in terms
of the occurrence of large earthquakes in time and space remains severely
limited by the current lack of information about how entire systems of inter-
connected earthquake faults store and release seismic energy in large,
potentially damaging earthquakes. Comprehensive data sets, such as those that
will result from this project will reveal how the major faults in a fault system
interact with one another to generate potentially damaging earthquakes. These
kinds of observations will, in turn, allow for better forecasting of what to
expect from similar fault networks in the United States, particularly in
earthquake-prone California, but more generally for all of the major faults that
underlie large parts of the country. The project has potential to benefit
society or advance desired societal outcomes through full participation of women
in STEM, increased public scientific literacy with STEM through outreach
activities, improved well-being of individuals in society by better
understanding of fundamental processes underlying earthquakes that would improve
the capability to model earthquake hazards, development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through graduate student training, and increased
partnerships through international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary aim is to advance understanding of the collective behavior of regional
fault networks, particularly the importance of emergent phenomena such as
earthquake clusters and strain transients that may not be expected in the
current understanding of earthquake physics and that are not accounted for in
current seismic hazard assessment strategies. Mounting evidence suggests that
the occurrence of large earthquakes on both single faults and fault systems is
not a random process, with increasing observations of temporal and spatial
earthquake clustering, changes in incremental fault slip rates, variations in
fault loading rates, and potentially coordinated waxing and waning of slip on
mechanically complementary faults in regional fault systems. Although a thorough
understanding of both the causes and generality of such phenomena is of basic
importance for fault mechanics, earthquake physics, and more accurate assessment
of seismic hazard, evaluation of the importance of these behaviors has been
severely data limited. In particular, there are too few comprehensive paleo-
earthquake and incremental fault slip rate data sets to fully assess the
collective behavior of major plate-boundary fault systems in time and space.
This study focuses on the Pacific-Australia plate boundary in northern South
Island New Zealand in order to document a complete latest-Pleistocene-Holocene
(15 ka-present) record of incremental plate boundary slip encompassing all major
structures in the system. The research team will build on previous work by
developing robust records for the Kekerengu-Jordan fault system, an 85-km-long,
oblique reverse-dextral fault system, which is the fastest-slipping fault in the
onshore part of the plate boundary at 25-30 mm/year. Slip on the Kekerengu-
Jordan fault system generated most of the moment release in the 2016 Mw=7.8
Kaikoura earthquake. The new post-IR IRSL225 luminescence dating protocol will
be used at key sites on the Kekerengu-Jordan fault system, and at additional
sites located with the new post-earthquake high-resolution lidar data collected
by the New Zealand government. This new luminescence dating technique provides
precise and reproducible dating of carbon-poor sediments typical of those in the
study area with precision roughly equal to that of radiocarbon dating. Combining
incremental fault offsets and trench observations with post-IR IRSL225 dating,
and carbon-14 analysis will yield detailed fault slip rates and earthquake ages
along the fault system spanning individual ruptures back though several dozen
earthquakes. In conjunction with existing data sets from both the onshore and
offshore faults, including the subduction megathrust that underlies the
Kekerengu-Jordan fault system, the research will facilitate a comprehensive,
system-level analysis of plate-boundary strain release through time and space
during latest Pleistocene-Holocene time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.