* 1759825
* Developing Methodology for Commensuration Bias Detection in Grant Application Peer Review
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Elena Erosheva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 259,982.00

Through its six federal grant agencies, the United States invests billions of
dollars annually to promote science, technology, and engineering research at
colleges and universities. The long-term goal of this public investment of money
and trust is to improve our nation's health, economy, and social policies. In
order to determine which researchers and projects will receive funding, grant
agencies employ a process of peer review in which expert researchers evaluate
the merits of submitted proposals. This longstanding social technology -- of
relying on expert evaluation to inform determinations of merit -- empowers grant
agencies to make funding decisions based on a fuller understanding of the social
and scientific excellence of each project. As such, it is critical for grant
agencies to employ rigorous and fair peer review processes in order to recruit,
retain, and fund the best minds. This project builds on a growing scientific
literature that studies how grant peer review works with an eye towards
identifying ways of improving its effectiveness. More specifically, grant
proposal review procedures commonly require reviewers to score applications
along multiple dimensions -- for example, a proposal's approach, innovation,
versus significance -- as an intermediate step in determining the proposal's
overall score. When procedures are left unspecified for how reviewers should
combine individual scores (along multiple dimensions) into overall scores,
evaluators might arrive at overall scores in ways that subtly advantage and
disadvantage grant proposals submitted by applicants from different social
groups. Any such difference is what we call commensuration bias. This research
identifies and evaluates approaches for measuring commensuration bias by
analyzing peer review data from applications submitted to an ongoing intramural
collaborative biomedical research program that utilized the independent peer
review services of the American Institute of Biological Sciences. This project
aims to offer concrete, efficient policies that ensure fair review for any grant
agency that requires scoring of applications along multiple criteria, including
the National Institutes of Health, which is the world's largest public funder of
biomedical research in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no
established methodology for detecting commensuration bias. The availability of
criteria and overall scores from individual reviewers makes it possible to
examine how individual reviewers evaluate multiple criteria simultaneously and
how they unconsciously combine criteria scores to arrive at overall scores. In
addition to hierarchical linear models that assume overall application score is
an additive function of criteria scores, this study uses Bayesian regression
trees to model non-linear decision processes and multivariate analyses to model
the distribution of criteria scores. This range of statistical approaches allows
this study to avoid making strong assumptions about the nature of commensuration
and provides tools needed to inform two main types of potential policy
recommendations: (a) those that focus on the restructuring or modification of
programmatic review procedures as a whole and (b) those that focus on the
monitoring of unusual peer review scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.