* 1759736
* ABI Innovation: Scalable and Agile Analysis of Mass Spectrometry Experiments
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 846,529.00

Mass spectrometry is a diverse and versatile technology for high-throughput
functional characterization of proteins, small molecules and metabolites in
complex biological mixtures. The technology rapidly evolves and generates
datasets of an increasingly large complexity and size. This rapid evolution must
be matched by an equally fast evolution of statistical methods and tools
developed for analysis of these data. Ideally, new statistical methods should
leverage the rich resources available from over 12,000 packages implemented in
the R programming language and its Bioconductor project. However, technological
limitations now hinder their adoption for mass spectrometric research. In
response, the project ROCKET builds an enabling technology for working with
large mass spectrometric datasets in R, and rapidly developing new algorithms,
while benefiting from advancements in other areas of science. It also offers an
opportunity of recruitment and retention of Native American students to work
with R-based technology and research, and helps prepare them in a career in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of implementing yet another data processing
pipeline, ROCKET builds an enabling technology for extending the scalability of
R, and streamlining manipulations of large files in complex formats. First, to
address the diversity of the mass spectrometric community, ROCKET supports
scaling down analyses (i.e., working with large data files on relatively
inexpensive hardware without fully loading them into memory), as well as scaling
up (i.e., executing a workflow on a cloud or on a multiprocessor). Second,
ROCKET generates an efficient mixture of R and target code which is compiled in
the background for the particular deployment platform. By ensuring compatibility
with mass spectrometry-specific open data storage standards, supporting multiple
hardware scenarios, and generating optimized code, ROCKET enables the
development of general analytical methods. Therefore, ROCKET aims to democratize
access to R-based data analysis for a broader community of life scientists, and
create a blueprint for a new paradigm for R-based computing with large datasets.
The outcomes of the project will be documented and made publicly available at
https://olgavitek-lab.ccis.northeastern.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.