* 1759421
* Peer-learning communities to develop rural, African American girls' computer science knowledge and career awareness
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 813,394.00

This project tackles the urgent need to encourage and support young, African
American women to pursue studies and careers in computer science (CS). The
researchers will design year-long activities that include workshops and an
online peer learning community to immerse 120 female African American high
school students from Alabama in computing content and career awareness. The
program begins with an intense summer experience that prepares students for the
College Board's Advanced Placement CS Principles (CSP) course. Online and face-
to-face interactions continue throughout the academic year, and students will
learn advanced computing concepts through culturally-responsive instruction,
project-based learning, and by connecting new learning experiences to their
personal lives and career aspirations. African American women constitute a mere
3% of the computing workforce. The project's learning communities are designed
to address the challenges faced in helping young women of color realize their
potential for participation in computer science and other STEM-related
occupations. This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and
promote practices that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue
careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions examine how participation in
the program: (1) increases self-efficacy and competency with computer science;
(2) improves attitudes towards computer science and lead to academic choices to
strengthen their proficiency; (3) raises awareness and desires to pursue
computer science careers, and; (4) reduces social and cultural barriers that
might reduce students' likelihood of pursuing CS and related professions.
Findings from this research will be disseminated through journal and conference
publications, presentations, and social media to benefit the national computer
science education community. The generated knowledge and research will
illuminate factors central to promoting interest in computer science among young
women of color from rural and other settings and cultivating their persistence
in pursuing computer science and related STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.