* 1759615
* The Extreme Gravity Dynamics and Gravitational Waves of Generic Compact Binary Inspirals
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Nicolas Yunes, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,839.00

Gravitational wave astrophysics has entered a new era of discovery and
exploration, with the Nobel-Prize-earning, first detections of gravitational
waves by the advanced LIGO and advanced Virgo ground-based observatories. One of
the key missions of LIGO and Virgo is to test Einstein's theory of General
Relativity where it has never been tested before: where the gravitational force
is enormous and violently changing. Gravitational waves encode invaluable
information about this extreme gravity regime, especially in the waves produced
when black holes and neutron stars collide. The main objective of this award is
to develop ready-to-use models to extract and interpret gravitational waves
emitted in eccentric and precessing collisions, so that these models can be used
to study astrophysics and test General Relativity with future observations. This
research will be integrated with broader impact activities aimed at changing the
attitudes of K-12 students and the general public toward physics and science
through activities that will be developed in the eXtreme Gravity Institute at
Montana State University, a fertile training ground for the next generation of
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at (i) the development
of analytic, ready-to-use models for the orbital dynamics and gravitational
waves emitted in the late inspiral of generic compact binaries (black hole and
neutron star binaries with arbitrary spin and eccentricity), and (ii) the use of
these models to analyze and interpret current and future ground-based
gravitational wave data to study astrophysics and experimental relativity
implications. The gravitational wave models used currently are restricted to (at
most nearly) quasi-circular inspirals with (typically) spins aligned/anti-
aligned with the orbital angular momentum (or to simple-precession-like
approximations). Such models are sufficient for the detection and
characterization of current GW observations, but as advanced LIGO is upgraded to
reach design sensitivity and third-generation detectors are constructed, more
accurate models will be needed. Not only will these models prevent the biasing
of parameter estimation due to mis-modeling systematics, but the additional
information they encode will allow for more accurate parameter estimation and
the extraction of new information from the data. This new information, such as
the orbital eccentricity and the spin vector components, can inform
astrophysical population models, as well as allow for new tests of General
Relativity in the mostly-unexplored, extreme gravity regime. The proposed
research includes the implementation of the ready-to-use models in data analysis
studies to determine the astrophysics and experimental-relativity information
that can be extracted from current and future gravitational wave data. This
research will be integrated with broader impact activities aimed at changing the
attitudes of K-12 students and the general public toward physics and science.
"The Art of Physics" activity is an art competition and residency program in the
Department of Physics at MSU, in which undergraduate students will be educated
in cutting-edge physics and create art works that convey its concepts. The art
pieces will compete at a juried exhibition, with the winning artist becoming the
resident artist in physics for the next year. The "Learn to Fail" activity is an
art installation in which Montana State University faculty will share their
failure stories with the MSU student population and general public on camera
while contrasting their biggest achievements. Through this juxtaposition between
failures and successes, the installation will generate an honest dialogue about
the role and meaning of failure in academia. "eXtreme Gravity for Middle School?
are fully-formed, standards-aligned lesson plans for middle school teachers
aimed at supporting them in learning how to deliver content on topics including
gravitational lensing, neutron stars, black holes and gravitational waves to
middle school students. Other activities include a black-hole themed bout for
the local roller derby team, public talks given by the PI, and continued STEM
mentoring for middle-school students from local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.