* 1759023
* Elucidation of roles that protein acetylation plays in mediating plant-pathogen interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Justin Walley, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Crop loss due to pathogens threatens global food security and represents a major
source of economic loss. A thorough understanding of how pathogens cause disease
and how plants defend themselves is crucial for addressing food security
challenges. How pathogens manipulate their host to enable infection and how
plants counteract the pathogen are major outstanding questions in the field.
Pathogen infection triggers complex molecular changes within host cells that
result in either resistance or susceptibility. One emerging widespread
biochemical modification to proteins is acetylation, which can change activity
of the protein and can be measured globally using mass spectrometry. This
project aims to determine the extent of and the role of pathogen triggered
changes in protein acetylation state in the model plants corn and Arabidopsis.
The results of these studies may provide a novel approach to engineering plant
disease resistance via mimicking or blocking the ability of particular proteins
to be modified (acetylated). The project will provide cutting edge training in
functional genomics to undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students,
including underrepresented minorities through the George Washington Carver
Internship Program at Iowa State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal of this project is to understand the molecular regulatory events mediated
by protein lysine acetylation that govern the interplay between plants and
microbes, using maize and Arabidopsis interactions with Cochliobolus
heterostrophus and Botrytis cinerea as prototypes. Comprehensive -omics
profiling will be coupled with directed biochemical and genetic experiments to
define the molecular roles of lysine acetylation underpinning plant biotic
stress responses. Sequencing of DNA enriched by chromatin-immunoprecipitation
will define promoters that exhibit histone hyperacetylation and/or recruitment
of transcriptional regulatory proteins following pathogen infection or effector
treatment (HC-toxin). These data will be coupled with genome-wide profiling of
mRNA and protein abundance, in several genetic backgrounds, following pathogen
challenge to identify genes directly regulated by ZmMYC2 and REL2. Functional
characterization of ZmMYC2 and REL2 will establish how acetylation of these
proteins modulates their transcriptional regulatory activity. Analyses of
acetylome profiling data generated from pathogen-infected maize and Arabidopsis
plants will define how widespread dynamic lysine acetylation is during plant-
pathogen interactions. Altogether this research will assess the impact of non-
histone protein acetylation during plant-pathogen interactions and will compare
and contrast the contributions of histone and non-histone acetylation in shaping
the immune response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.