* 1759934
* ABI Innovation:  Deep learning methods for protein bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jianlin Cheng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 624,247.00

Protein sequence is a language of a living system, which encodes protein
structure and function critical for the survival of any organism. Therefore,
understanding how protein sequence describes function and structure is a
fundamental problem in biological research. Yet, the traditional interpretation
of protein sequences is 3ased on either manual identification of sub-sequence
patterns or some arbitrary dissection of a sequence into subsequences of fixed
size; neither approach can accurately recognize all of the semantic components
in a protein sequence that are relevant to its structure and function. In this
project, powerful artificial intelligence methods, based on deep learning, will
be designed such that they can automatically map protein sequences into high-
level semantic features that are meaningful when related to protein structure
and function. This will not only improve the accuracy of predicting protein
structural and functional properties, but also provide a new way of representing
and interpreting proteins biological function, transforming how protein data are
interpreted. The impact of the basic research will be broadened through open
source software dissemination to other researchers, seminars on deep learning
and bioinformatics, student training, involvement of minority and female
students, publications, presentations, workshops, and outreach activities for
high school students, as well as thoughtfully crafted communication with the
Missouri state legislature, and other members of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the research, novel deep one-dimensional
(1D), 2D, and 3D convolutional neural networks will be developed to translate
protein sequences or structures of arbitrary size into high-level features under
the guidance of improving the prediction of multiple residue-wise local
structural/functional properties (secondary structures, solvent accessibility,
torsion angle, disorder, contact map, disulfide bonds, beta-sheet pairings, and
protein functional sites) as well as global properties such as folds. The 1D
convolutional neural network for interpreting protein sequence data will also be
supplemented by the long- and short-term memory networks. The comprehensive deep
learning models will be trained by innovative multi-task learning and transfer
learning to enhance prediction performance. The 1D, 2D and 3D convolutional
networks will be further integrated to improve the accuracy of analyzing protein
sequence, structure and function. The 1D and 3D convolutional neural networks
are completely original, and the new 2D convolutional architecture is more
comprehensive and versatile than existing approaches. In addition to advancing
the classic protein prediction tasks through the novel deep learning
architectures, the hidden features automatically extracted by the deep learning
models will provide a new semantic representation of proteins, which will likely
transform various protein bioinformatics tasks such as classification,
clustering, comparison, and ranking. The URL of this project is:
http://calla.rnet.missouri.edu/cheng/nsf_deepbioinfo.html
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.