* 1759540
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Characterization of Microbial Community Structure and Fecal Contamination of Floodwaters Generated by Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Terry Gentry, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 9,996.00

1759542 (LaMontagne) and 1759540 (Gentry). Floodwaters generated by hurricanes
and other extreme weather events may contain dangerous levels of microbial
pathogens, associated with sewage and human waste contamination, and toxins. To
determine the source of fecal contamination of floodwater and the impact of this
floodwater on receiving water quality, the investigators will collect water
samples at stations surrounding an estuary between Houston and Galveston.
Samples include those already drawn before and also immediately after Hurricane
Harvey deluged Houston. Analysis of early samples shows that microbial
contamination is present post storm. The investigators will apply quantitative
modern molecular biology methods to determine the source of the microbes that
contaminated these floodwaters and will continue sampling weekly until the
microbial community, as assessed by the modern methods, returns to pre-storm
conditions.

Little is known about the risk associated with exposure by contact to
floodwaters or the impact of these floodwaters on receiving water quality. Fecal
indicator bacteria (FIB), used to assess contact risk for recreational waters,
do not determine the source of microbial contamination and assessing the health
of receiving waters remains challenging. Quantitative PCR and metagenomic
analysis can help track the source of microbial contamination but few studies
have conducted these analyses, particularly with pre-flood samples for
comparison. Further, few studies have applied next-generation sequencing
methods, which have the depth and coverage to identify microbes that reflect
fecal contamination and the overall microbial community diversity and structure.
This work will allow the determination of the source of fecal contamination of
floodwaters generated in this event and could lead to an improved understanding
of the health risks associated with exposure to floodwaters in future events and
the impact of hurricanes on the health of coastal systems.