* 1759811
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Improving the stability, usability, and speed of the RevBayes platform for phylogenetic analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* John Huelsenbeck, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 546,766.00

All species are related to one another through an unknown genealogical tree: the
`Tree of Life.' Genealogical trees for small parts of the Tree of Life are
called `phylogenies' by biologists; there is more interest in phylogenies today
than at any time in the past. Phylogenies are crucial in fields such as
epidemiology where they are used to track the spread of infectious disease and
molecular biology where they are used to understand how molecular pathways
developed. The `Tree of Life' can be discovered by comparing the characteristics
of different organisms. Traditionally, phylogenies were reconstructed by
comparing anatomical traits across different species. More recently, DNA
sequence information from individual genes, or even full genomes, are compared
to estimate phylogenies. This project will continue the development of the
RevBayes computer program that biologists use to reconstruct phylogenies. The
program takes as input the comparative information from the organisms of
interest. The output of the program is the probabilities of the best phylogenies
that explain the comparative data. Specifically, the project will improve the
speed, usability, and reliability of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RevBayes
is the successor of the MrBayes program which is widely used by biologists to
estimate phylogeny. However, the RevBayes program represents a significant
departure from MrBayes. The RevBayes program implements an R-like language to
describe statistical models. The model is represented in computer memory as a
graph in which the vertices of the graph are the parameters and the edges
represent the dependencies between parameters. RevBayes uses Markov chain Monte
Carlo to approximate the posterior probability distribution of parameters. This
project will improve the RevBayes program in several signficant ways: (1) unit
and integration testing will be implemented to improve the reliability of the
program; (2) computational resources, such as multiple cores or GPUs, will be
taken better advantage of, to improve the speed of the program; (3) a cross-
platform graphical user interface will be developed to improve the usability of
the program; (4) output will be bundled to improve the reproducibility of the
program; and (5) the program will be made to work with other software programs,
to improve its interoperability. Finally, several workshops will be hosted by
the participants in which phylogenetic theory will be described with emphasis of
application of the theory to real-world problems using RevBayes. The source code
can be found on the Github site at
http://revbayes.github.io/about.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.