* 1759134
* HSI Conference Grant: PROMISE: Providing Resources and Opportunities for Minorities in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Agnes Flores, Laredo Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions called
for projects to support conferences that would identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. Laredo
Community College (LCC), Texas A &amp; M International University (TAMIU), Texas
A &amp; M University-Kingsville (TAMUK), and University of Texas Permian Basin
(UTPB) responded to the call by proposing a conference to bring together key
stakeholders in undergraduate STEM education at two and four-year public and
private Texas HSI colleges and universities in order to inform the design of
NSF's Hispanic-Serving Institutions Program. The rationale for the proposed HSI
PROMISE: Providing Resources and Opportunities for Minorities in STEM Education
conference is based on the great need as well as the great potential to generate
new knowledge on effective programs and strategies to recruit, to retain, and to
graduate Hispanics in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
be held in March 2018 in Laredo, Texas, through the Texas Hispanic Serving
Institutions Consortium (TxHSIC), an organization which unites such entities.
The conference will convene faculty and administrators from over 83 public and
private colleges, universities, community-based organizations and business
entities. Media announcements and pre-conference meetings will secure at least
100 attendees from institutions in Texas and at least 100 virtual participants.
Sessions at the HSI PROMISE Conference will primarily focus on undergraduate
STEM Education and will provide a networked conduit to provide input to NSF.
However, to reap the broader benefit of this effort, students must be empowered
to become leaders and partners in STEM innovation. The voices of students
currently enrolled in STEM disciplines will be included through focus groups
both live and via teleconference with MAES (Latinos in Engineering and Science)
LCC and Texas chapters and TAMIU, TAMUK, and UTPB Noyce Scholars. As part of the
assessment, the conference will include participation from researchers from the
Center for Research and Policy in Education at the University of Texas at San
Antonio (UTSAP). For broader national input and impact the 12 community colleges
in the NSF funded, HRD#1450661 KickStarter project with Science Foundation
Arizona have been invited to participate via teleconference. A major output of
the conference will be a report which will include a list of potential
actionable solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices and
a policy brief through Center for Research and Policy in Education at UTSA. A
major outcome will be the continued collaboration of Texas HSIs to secure
funding and the optimization of impact from NSF support.