* 1759204
* Colloidal membranes and assembly of heterogeneous 2D materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 345,603.00

Non-technical: Amphiphilic molecules consist of water loving and oil loving
components that are permanently linked to each other, thus frustrating bulk
separation. When added to water these molecules self-assemble into membranes,
thin flexible sheets with remarkable properties that play an essential role in
biology, physics, and material science. It is commonly believed that the
antagonistic nature of the amphiphilic molecules is an essential requirement for
membrane assembly. In this proposal PI will study a fundamentally different
method for assembly of colloidal based membrane-like materials. Assembly of the
novel colloidal membranes takes place in a simple mixture of chemically
homogeneous filamentous viruses, which have the shape of billiard cues, and
polymers, which resemble billiard balls. Besides providing fundamental insight
into universal aspects of all membrane-like materials, results will also
describe a new and easily scalable process for assembly of rod-like
nanoparticles into novel nanostructures that could act as efficient photovoltaic
devices. The PI's research and education plans are seamlessly joined together
through their mutual emphasis on visualization techniques and an
interdisciplinary approach to science. Specifically, the PI will continue to
build upon existing successful collaborations with The Discovery Museum in
Action, in order to organize biannual visits to the museum for hands-on
demonstrations of various concepts in optical microscopy and materials science.
The PI will also extend connections with the local elementary and middle schools
by participating in Science Fairs, by organizing class visits, and hosting
students in his laboratory. Finally, the PI will continue to provide
opportunities to undergraduate students to pursue research projects and will
continue to build upon existing local and national connections in order to
recruit students form groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields.

Technical: Colloidal membranes are comprised from a one-rod-length thick liquid-
like monolayer of aligned rods that is held together by the osmotic pressure of
the enveloping polymer solution. The goal of this proposal is to elucidate the
fundamental laws that govern the assembly processes of colloidal membranes and
to use colloidal membranes as a basis for engineering of a new generation of
spatially heterogeneous, shape-changing functional materials. The PI will first
use colloidal membranes as a robust platform for assembly of well-defined
mesoscopic clusters and macroscopic 2D materials with predetermined
heterogeneities. In parallel, the PI will devise new methods to measure the
mechanical properties of colloidal membranes, and use this knowledge to engineer
shape-changing 3D materials. Colloidal membranes are interesting in their own
right as they offer a unique opportunity to organize complex 2D materials on
micron scales. Furthermore, although distinct on molecular scales, the continuum
deformations of colloidal monolayers and lipid bilayers are described by the
same free energy expressions. Thus they provide a unique opportunity to gain
insight into universal membrane processes that are mainly determined by the
fundamental symmetries of the system.