* 1759448
* Riverside Air Monitoring Project
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Cecilia Cheung, Riverside Unified School District
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,195,447.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing an innovative and locally-relevant air quality curriculum for high
school students. Representatives of a public school district, a state
university, a college of engineering, and a center for environmental research
and technology will collaborate in designing, implementing, and examining the
impacts of the curriculum on student understanding of air quality, health risks
associated with reduced air quality, and pathways to careers in air quality
monitoring and management. The project is located in an area where air quality
is a significant environmental concern, and where there are opportunities for
students to gain direct experiences with emerging technologies associated with
air quality monitoring and mitigating environmental impacts. Over a two-year
period, the project will implement 18 new air-quality lessons developed by
teachers within existing high school science courses. The project will also
engage participating teachers in related professional learning opportunities
focusing on research and culturally responsive teaching during summers and
through weekly meetings during the academic year. The project will be guided by
an Advisory Board that includes representatives of local academic institutions,
industry partners, and government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of
this project are to: (a) Enhance a high school science curriculum by
incorporating newly developed lessons focusing on air-quality monitoring, (b)
Evaluate the effectiveness of the new curriculum and associated teacher
professional learning opportunities in promoting student understanding of the
impacts of air quality on their everyday lives, (c) Identify intra-personal,
inter-personal, and cultural influences on the effectiveness of the new air
quality curriculum intervention, and (d) Raise awareness among students of
possible career opportunities with environmental industries locally and
globally. The 18 new lessons being developed by the project will be tested
through a randomized control research design involving a minimum of 30 science
teachers across five comprehensive high schools of a large metropolitan school
district. Approximately 2,100 students in grades 10 and 11 will be engaged in
the classrooms of the study, with 15 teachers and 1050 students involved in the
treatment groups, and in the comparison groups. Teachers in the treatment groups
will participate in a summer research experience where they learn to use the
technologies and procedures associated with air quality monitoring, and during
the subsequent school year they will develop lessons on air quality monitoring
that will be incorporated within their standard classes. Teachers in the
comparison group will conduct business as usual and implement the regular
science curriculum. The guiding questions for research are: (a) How can
experiences with emerging technologies effectively enable diverse populations of
students to gain familiarity with relevant competencies and what factors might
influence learning experiences? (b) What factors and key experiences may
effectively promote awareness of STEM careers, motivation to pursue a STEM
career, and persistence in undertaking education pathways to those careers? (c)
What culturally responsive instructional and curricular practices and models
used by teachers can enhance student understanding of and interest in STEM
occupations? And (d) In what ways do business/industry workforce members
motivate students from diverse underrepresented populations to become aware of,
interested in, and prepared for careers in the STEM workforce-how do they
support teachers in promoting STEM workforce awareness and
interest?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.