* 1759860
* ABI INNOVATION: Physical Bioinformatics Tools for Measuring Translation Rates from Next-Generation Sequencing Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Edward O'Brien, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 687,883.00

Translation is the process by which the genomic information encoded in a
messenger RNA is converted into a protein molecule. The rates associated with
translation determine the time scales of protein synthesis, influence the
abundance of protein molecules in cells, and have recently been shown to
influence the structure and function of the protein produced. These rates are
difficult to measure across the transcriptomes of organisms. The purpose of this
project is to develop and apply physical bioinformatics analysis tools to
measure translation-initiation and -elongation rates from experimental data
generated with the next-generation sequencing technique Ribosome Profiling
(Ribo-Seq). Physical Bioinformatics brings a physical-science perspective to the
field of bioinformatics and permits more information to be extracted from big
biological data sets than previously possible. New analysis methods will be
created to measure absolute rates of translation initiation and elongation from
Ribo-Seq and other data, making it possible for experimentalists to measure
these quantities. This project will advance knowledge in molecular biology by
determining the contribution of the elongation phase to translation control at
both the global and single-gene level and whether changes in evolutionarily
encoded translation-elongation kinetics modulates chaperone binding. Webinars
and workshops will be held to introduce bioinformaticians to the theory
underlying the methods developed in this project, running the analysis
pipelines, and interpreting the results - thereby enhancing research
infrastructure. These events will be recorded and publicly archived for future
use by the community. As part of outreach to underserved K-12 communities, this
project will introduce minority high school students to scientific research in
Bioinformatics through Penn State's Upward Bound Math and Science program, which
arranges for these students to engage in university research experience over the
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Translation initiation and elongation rates are
difficult to measure across the transcriptomes of organisms. The purpose of this
project is to develop and apply physical bioinformatics analysis methods, rooted
in the fields of chemistry and physics, to measure translation-initiation and
-elongation rates from experimental data generated with the Next-Generation
Sequencing technique Ribo-Seq. To be sure, qualitative measures of these rates
utilizing heuristic or simulation-based approaches have been reported in the
literature. However, these methods often do not yield absolute rates nor are
they guaranteed to provide optimal solutions. Knowledge of absolute rates is
essential because they are the actual rates in the system, and by knowing them
their impact on other co-translational processes can be determined. Translation
involves molecules and chemical reactions, meaning that analysis methods
consistent with the laws of chemistry and physics are more likely to yield
accurate results. Utilizing the interdisciplinary expertise in theoretical
chemistry, physics, and bioinformatics, the PI's lab will develop methods in
this project that: (1) optimally identify the location of the ribosome's A-site
on ribosome-protected fragments generated from Ribo-Seq experiments - the first
step towards measuring absolute rates; (2) measure the average codon translation
rates from ribosome run-off experiments by treating translation as a form of
discretized fluid flow; (3) measure individual codon translation rates from
steady-state Ribo-Seq experiments; (4) measure initiation rates through a
combination of Ribo-Seq, RNA-Seq and polysome profiling data. The methods will
be applied to answer fundamental biological questions: To what extent is
translation control of gene expression determined in the initiation versus
elongation phase of translation? Do evolutionarily encoded translation-
elongation kinetics that correlate with chaperone binding causally influence
chaperone binding? Answers to these questions will provide insight into
fundamental issues concerning how gene expression is regulated at the stage of
translation, and may open new avenues for treatment when gene expression goes
awry in some diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.