* 1759714
* Rail Transit, Residential Mobility, and Income Segregation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Isabelle Nilsson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 347,407.00

This research project will investigate how public investments in rail transit
impact levels of income segregation in urban America. The investigators will
analyze how a public investment like rail transit affects land values,
residential location decisions, and neighborhood changes in ways that influence
metropolitan-wide patterns of segregation, with special emphasis given to the
movements of lower-income residents. The project will enhance basic
understanding of fundamental theories regarding residential sorting. It will
help fill an important gap in the current state of knowledge of gentrification
processes by modeling where potentially displaced residents move. The project
will help identify motivating factors that influence decisions to stay or leave
a neighborhood impacted by new transit development through community-engaged
scholarship that focuses on the perspectives of local residents and that
connects residents, researchers, and key stakeholders and decision makers. Given
widespread investments in rail transit, project results will provide information
and perspectives that can be used to address social and public policy issues in
many communitiesacross the United States and elsewhere. The project also will
promote technical literacy and education by engaging students and community
partners in an applied, mixed-methods geography course where they will examine
the issue, participate in surveying residents, perform basic analyses on the
collected data, and map and measure segregation trends following the
implementation of a new rail transit line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the
recent scholarship examining relationships among rail transit investments,
displacement, and gentrification has emphasized how land values and aggregate-
level neighborhood outcomes are impacted by transit. This research project will
focus on the movement of lower-income residents in response to transit
investments by addressing the following research questions: (1) Are lower-income
residents more likely to move out of neighborhoods following the placement of
new transit stations than other residents? (2) Do lower-income residents
relocate to neighborhoods with lower socioeconomic composition? (3) What are the
motivating factors that affect relocation decisions both into and out of transit
neighborhoods? (4) Where and for which income groups do residential economic
segregation trends change following the establishment of a new transit system?
To gather quantitative data about residential movements and to understand the
rationale behind these locational decisions, the investigators will employ a mix
of multi-scalar methods. They will analyze an individual-level, longitudinal
dataset collected as part of the Panel Study on Income Dynamics to trace
residential movements of individuals in and out of transit neighborhoods
throughout the United States since 1970. They also will conduct a complementary
qualitative analysis in neighborhoods along a new transit line in Charlotte,
North Carolina, that will involve interviews with key individuals at both the
city and community scales as well as surveys and focus groups with neighborhood
residents in proximity to stations of the new line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.