* 1759430
* Strategies: Leveraging the U.S. Army Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Program to Develop a Regional STEM Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Susan Hinton, Mobile County Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 03/31/2022
* USD 971,580.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. The Mobile County Public School System (MCPSS), in
partnership with STEMWorks, LLC and the University of Southern Mississippi
(USM), will leverage two existing programs- a local Junior Reserve Officer
Training Corps (JROTC) and a workforce development organization to increase the
interest and competency of grade 9-11 students in pursuing STEM careers. The
project's main intervention will be a one-week long summer residential academy
where cohorts of students engage in physical conditioning, JROTC activities,
site visits, and STEM projects. A major goal of the project is to study the
short-term and long-term effects of participation in the JROTC STEM Leadership
Academy. Another goal is to formalize a JROTC-centered STEM workforce
development summer academy model that can be replicated regionally and across
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study the effects of
participation in the JROTC STEM Leadership Academy using Social Cognitive Career
Theory (SCCT) as a framework that will be applied to organize and measure the
relative effect of different factors on student choice. The project will utilize
a mixed methods comparison group design to investigate the effects of
strategically situating STEM learning and workforce experiences within a
traditional JROTC summer leadership and fitness camp in order to increase the
number of high school students in the STEM pipeline. The research includes
Brinkerhoff's Success Case Method, sampling a subset of students who chose a
STEM trajectory to develop in-depth stories of the student's experiences before,
during and after the intervention in order to identify the internal and
environmental support that lead to choosing a STEM
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.