* 1759865
* ABI Development: Building advanced numerical simulation technology for the lake ecology community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Paul Hanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 476,934.00

There are millions of lakes on Earth, many of which are used for recreation,
fisheries, and tourism. To effectively manage these lakes, resource managers and
scientists must be able to recreate and predict complex physical, chemical, and
biological interactions. Computer models are a means of transforming
observational data into useable output that recreates historical changes and
informs lake and reservoir management. Future scenarios of landscape and
atmospheric changes can also be tested to provide forecasting of water quality.
Using an open-source computer model, scientists and managers from around the
world, students in the classroom, and lake-associations can visualize complex
physical and biological data and communicate the relevance of environmental
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the General Lake Model-
Aquatic EcoDynamics (GLM-AED) model, which has been used by specialists in
science and management applications, into robust, easy to use software that
meets the demands of the broader ecological community for research, education,
and outreach. Currently there is a gap between training and adoption, due to the
excessive time investment needed to setup and run a GLM-AED simulation. This
project will overcome these obstacles by developing new documentation and
datasets, tutorials, and user tools, as well as module development and a multi-
platform test harness. GLM-AED development will be linked to two research
initiatives that showcase how GLM-AED can advance our biological understanding
of lakes and reservoirs. These are the modeling of lake ice duration across the
continent of North America, and modeling of phosphorus retention across a series
of lakes in the Midwest and Northeast of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.