* 1759949
* ABI Innovation: Data Driven Model of Polymerase Activity
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Robin Dowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2022
* USD 714,871.00

The majority of cells in an organism contain the same DNA, and yet they are able
to develop along different paths to achieve different functions and phenotypes.
The cell type identity is defined, at least in part, by the specific regions of
the genome that are transcribed from DNA to RNA. Transcription is the basic
cellular process that creates the RNA intermediate that either codes for
proteins, mRNAs, or regulates other processes, producing various non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs) like enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). Both types of transcript cell
differentiation paths or cellular responses to environmental influences. RNA
polymerases are the enzymes that produce RNA transcripts, such as mRNAs and
ncRNAs, and they exist in cells either as molecules that are maintain their
association with the DNA template or are released being transported away from
the DNA and acted on by other cellular machinery. One complication to analyzing
the transcription process is that genes can overlap, so the presence of a
polymerase and a nascent RNA transcript might indicate activity of either gene
using current methodologies. Since RNA transcripts have a high propensity to
fold into three dimensional shapes they that can affect the downstream
processes, both sequence and shape of the nascent RNA are important
characteristics of nascent transcripts still associated with DNA as well as the
RNA transcripts that are released from the DNA. Only recently have high
throughput nascent transcription assays become available; these allow
researchers to assess the activity of cellular polymerases directly. This
project seeks to develop an integrated analysis framework for nascent
transcription data. Critically, changes in the shapes or levels of transcripts
provide information as to how mutations, or other perturbations, have affected
an RNA polymerase's functional properties. Understanding the detailed molecular
basis of transcription is critical to many research areas including
biochemistry, molecular biology and computational biology. As such, careful
attention will be paid to the development of educational and computational
resources to support of the larger community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to develop of an integrated framework for the
interpretation and analysis of nascent transcription. This project leverages a
mathematical model of RNA polymerase II that, when fit to nascent transcription
data, quantitatively characterizes not only the levels but also the shapes of
all transcripts genome-wide. Specifically, this project has 4 overarching goals,
as follows: Leverage patterns of differential nascent transcription to identify
overlapping transcripts; detection of overlapping transcription at regulatory
regions like enhancers may provide insight into how such ncRNAs function.
Capture termination of transcription within a principled mathematical model of
polymerase behavior; the algorithm developed here will inform on the conflicting
hypotheses about how transcription termination occurs. Identify the impact of
technical choices, such as protocol selection and sequencing depth, on the
detection and characterization of transcripts, thereby recommending best
practice in nascent transcription studies. Enable broader adoption of nascent
transcription analysis through construction of an educational module that
supports the use of these computational tools; the module will encompass the
software, websites, and user documentation. In summary, the research proposed
here will provide an unprecedented perspective on differences in transcription
characteristics at individual genes and how perturbations affect them. By
quantifying alterations in transcription at individual genes and their
magnitude, the end result of this project will be an integrated framework for
the interpretation of nascent transcription. Datasets and codebase links, with
descriptions, may be found at http://dowell.colorado.edu/resources.html
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.