* 1759835
* Conference Support Grant: Numerical Relativity beyond General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yanbei Chen, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 9,996.00

One of the main goals of the field of gravitational-wave astronomy with Advanced
LIGO is testing Einstein's theory of general relativity (GR) in a regime where
it has never been tested before. The impact of such science is potentially
transformative, and may yield insights into a new paradigm of gravitational
physics. Accomplishing this goal will require a new generation of numerical
simulations of merging black holes and neutron stars. Not only does the
community need more precise simulations within GR, but also to explore full
numerical simulations of mergers in theories beyond GR. Such simulations are at
the forefront of gravity research. This is the first meeting with a focus on
numerical simulations in theories beyond GR. This one-week long international
workshop, "Numerical Relativity beyond General Relativity", aims at introducing
this emerging field to the larger community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performing
numerical simulations in beyond-GR theories has long been desired, but few
groups have made the efforts to tackle the problem. The main goals of this
workshop will be to disseminate information among all the researchers actively
making progress on this topic, and newcomers who are going to become future
leaders in this field. This will cross-pollinate and plant future research
ideas. The participants are drawn from the fields of numerical simulation,
gravitational-wave data analysis, and theories beyond GR. The format includes
structured talks (e.g. mathematical formalism, different numerical approaches,
statuses of simulations in scalar-tensor, Einstein-dilaton-Gauss-Bonnet,
Einstein-Maxwell-Dilaton, Chern-Simons, bimetric theory), and open discussions
(e.g. waveform requirements, open source codes, numerics in Anti-de-Sitter
space).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.