* 1759272
* Green Infrastructure Technologies Inspire STEM Interest
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Mercedes McKay, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging middle
school students in the science and engineering of urban green technologies
(e.g., bio retention planters, green roofs and rain gardens). By developing
student awareness and understanding of Green Infrastructure (GI) technologies,
the project will prepare students to become informed citizens who can research,
design, manage, monitor and sustain GI systems of the future. The project
includes students at northern New Jersey middle schools that are located within
densely populated urban cities impacted by the effects of combined sewer
overflows, rising coastal waters, frequent flooding resulting from changing
climatic conditions, and severe natural disasters (e.g., Hurricane Sandy in
2012). Middle school teachers and students will engage with the Stevens
Institute of Technology Living Laboratory, a state-of-the-art outdoor GI
research laboratory, by interacting with researchers and through classroom
activities and fieldwork experiences. Students will be able to view research
facilities and real-time events virtually, thus improving accessibility of the
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Civil Engineering faculty at Stevens
Institute of Technology, in collaboration with educators at the Center for
Innovation in Engineering and Science Education (CIESE), will prepare and
support 30 urban middle school teachers and actively engage teams of students in
design-based curricular activities that infuse engineering with earth science
content and practices. Students will be challenged to conduct a series of
investigations to identify the storm water runoff issues for their school or
community, use the findings to design and test a model to address the water
retention issues, and develop a proposal for addressing the identified issues
using one or more GI technologies. Ask-an-Expert webinars and virtual tours of
the Stevens Living Laboratory provide a platform for students to interact with
those in GI-related careers such as civil and environmental engineers, urban
planners and ecologists, environmental scientists, landscape architects and
horticultural specialists. Student surveys combined with an examination of
student work products, records of student interactions with those in GI-related
careers, and teacher feedback on classroom and fieldwork activities will provide
evidence of the extent to which an understanding of GI technologies stimulates
student awareness of and interest in GI-related careers and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.