* 1759000
* Biomechanics to Offer Diverse Young Minds Opportunities to Develop, Explore, and Learn STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Neal Grandgenett, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,199,939.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing and
interesting high achieving middle school students for advanced math courses in
high school and eventually in engineering careers. This University of Nebraska
at Omaha project, Biomechanics to Offer Diverse Young Minds Opportunities to
Develop, Explore, and Learn STEM (BODYMODELS) will investigate a learning model
that leverages the technology-rich and interdisciplinary context of biomechanics
to enhance understanding of and interest in STEM occupations among students in
grades 3-6. The project will provide a positive learning experience in using
biomechanics to teach STEM that will lead to more positive perceptions about
STEM among participating teachers and students. The learning experience in the
project would have a strong future impact on STEM education in and around Omaha.
The project will directly impact an estimated 1,500 youth, most of whom reside
in the diverse Omaha Public Schools district. In addition, the project will help
engage elementary teachers in the Omaha Citywide STEM Ecosystem, establishing
long-term professional networks to support their teaching of STEM after the
project period. The successful implementation of the BODYMODELS project will
result in standards-based and culturally responsive curricular resources that
can easily be adapted by elementary teachers across the country to reach
students in diverse school contexts. The project team will also pilot a graduate
biomechanics course for teachers in elementary education programs for possible
replication by other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
the BODYMODELS project is to use biomechanics as a context for increasing
awareness of, interest in, and capability to participate in STEM education
pathways among a diverse population of 3rd-6th grade students in urban Omaha.
The project objectives are: 1) Train a cohort of 3rd-6th grade in-service
teachers to become knowledgeable and effective STEM instructors who can
confidently integrate technology enhanced biomechanics lessons into their
school's STEM disciplines through learning core biomechanics concepts and
culturally responsive, inquiry-based learning (IBL) strategies. 2) Empower the
3rd-6th grade teachers by helping them develop and pilot biomechanics lesson
modules, hands-on activities, instructional methods, and personal implementation
plans (PIPs) to enhance interdisciplinary, culturally responsive, and
technology-enhanced STEM education at their schools. 3) Partner with
organizations in the Omaha Citywide STEM Ecosystem to engage professionals in
biomechanics-related fields to assist teachers in developing and refining their
PIPs to include activities that are motivating to students, such as classroom
visits from STEM professionals and/or field trips to STEM-related organizations.
4) Investigate the impact of the biomechanics intervention on teachers' and
students' confidence in teaching and learning STEM concepts and their attitudes
toward the STEM disciplines, as well as on student STEM content knowledge, with
a focus on refining the instructional model to facilitate its adaptation and
adoption in elementary STEM curricula nationwide. The project will develop and
investigate the utility of a learning model that leverages the interdisciplinary
and technology-rich context of biomechanics to teach cross-cutting STEM concepts
to students in grades 3-6 and to engage students in using emerging technologies
to conduct inquiry-based experiments. This new learning model addresses two key
challenges: 1) expanding student interest in STEM careers by engaging them in
inquiry-based activities that are relevant to them and 2) helping teachers
customize IBL lesson modules to account for differences in teachers'
biomechanics experiences, students' backgrounds, school districts, and course
objectives. Students will be assessed to determine if the program positively
impacts their attitudes towards, interest in, and motivation to pursue STEM
careers as well as their performance on statewide science and mathematics
assessment tests. The project will advance the understanding of how to offer IBL
using biomechanics in a variety of elementary school contexts.