* 1759701
* Security, Leadership, and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Fluri, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2022
* USD 475,000.00

This project will generate new fundamental geographic understanding of the
spatial extent of sociocultural influences on populations and the degree to
which specific groups or individuals assume leadership in public participation.
The project will address the complex factors that influence the public
participation of different segments of a population by considering the degree to
which family, education, religion, social, and other networks influence activity
in public participation. Divergent sociocultural influences will be correlated
with the development of beliefs and behaviors that lead to differential
leadership in public participation. This research will provide insights
regarding the diversity among groups related to their public participation
rather than analyzing all people as a single category. Results from this project
will have policy implications and inform national security interests regarding
emerging participation patterns and the motivation for groups that are engaged
in public participation. This multilayered examination of competing influences
and changing social roles will advance existing analytic frameworks for
evaluating and adopting the most effective means of ensuring security and
stability in communities. A post-doctoral fellow and a graduate student will be
trained as part of the project, thereby enhancing U.S. scientific resource
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design for this project will examine
the differential use of public space across a spectrum of perspectives and
social positions. Specifically, this project will focus on the complex dynamics
through which women have evolved as leaders in their families and communities.
The project will seek answers to two major research questions: (1) What are the
social, economic, and other influences or drivers that compel women to
participate in different types of organizations? (2) How do female leaders
influence public participation and ensure security within their families and
communities? The investigators will use multi-sited qualitative analysis of
participation in organizations across different regional locations, ethnicities,
socioeconomic class levels, educational experiences, and scales of influence.
Data-collection methods will include interviews, focus groups, and content
analysis of data from printed sources and documents. This project will focus on
Afghanistan, a nation that has been of considerable interest to the United
States from a national security perspective, and it will provide insights and
approaches for considering public participation across different
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.