* 1759460
* Dynamics and Mechanisms of Electron Delocalization over Supramolecular Mixed Valence Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Clifford Kubiak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 07/31/2020
* USD 170,000.00

In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Clifford Kubiak of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) is developing new
classes of inorganic materials for use in next generation computers. The goal of
this research is to develop and study new complexes that undergo picosecond (a
trillionth of a second) electron transfer or structural rearrangements that
occur in electronic grounds states. Such ultrafast molecular changes may be used
to make novel molecular devices including those for information storage. This
project has the potential to impact the broader scientific and engineering
communities involved in electronic device technologies where a critical goal is
to extend information processing by the current Complementary Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor (CMOS) platforms. The Kubiak group is well-positioned to provide a
highly technical level of education and training for students. Outreach
activities involving K-12 students, especially those from the Preuss School at
UCSD and Torrey Pines High School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
project is the investigation of ultrafast (picosecond) electron transfer in
mixed valence systems. Mixed-valent complexes typically consist of two identical
redox active centers that are separated by a bridge. In their mixed-valent
state, the redox centers differ only in their oxidation states and are
stabilized relative to disproportionation by electron self-exchange. The group
has showed that when the bridging interaction is composed of a hydrogen bond,
electron transfer (ET) in the mixed-valent state stabilizes hydrogen-bonding
interactions by about 5 kcal per mole relative to the neutral, isovalent,
hydrogen-bonded dimers. A core question of this project is whether the hydrogen
bond precedes, follows, or occurs in concert with ET. The specific goals are: to
develop a complete physical description of how ET occurs across hydrogen bonds;
to continue the synthesis of new complexes to better understand the interplay
between electron delocalization and hydrogen bonding; and to investigate the
switched-on self-assembly of supramolecular structures that can form stronger
hydrogen bonds when reduced. A collaboration with a 2-dimensional infrared
spectroscopy lab (2D IR) provides new spectroscopic insights into the dynamics
and mechanisms of ET and molecular rearrangements that occur in ultrafast ground
state molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.