* 1759075
* STTR Phase II:  Nanostraw-mediated Immune Cell Reprogramming
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Ryan Swoboda, Navan Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,149,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will be to develop a new tool to safely and
nondestructively deliver genes and other materials into large numbers cells at
the same time. New forms of therapies for cancer and other intractable diseases
take advantage of a patient's own cells, re-engineered in the laboratory to
target a tumor or other diseased tissue. However, generating these cells is
currently inefficient, slow, and expensive. Patient-derived cells resist
transfection using standard non-viral biochemical approaches of lipid delivery
systems, cell-penetrating peptides, and high-voltage electroporation, requiring
an engineering alternative. The proposed technology provides a safe, turnkey,
and scalable technology with a potential transformative impact in research and
life sciences laboratories and companies, representing a high-growth and high-
value market opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes a new nanomaterial delivery system to introduce reprogramming agents
into immune cells efficiently and with low cell toxicity. This project will
examine how the proposed nanostraw design, transfection protocol, and cell
preparation improves immune cell delivery efficiency, and optimize the process
to achieve &gt;50% transfection efficiency with primary immune cells. Market
analysis has found this level of transfection efficiency would be transformative
to researchers and clinicians using primary immune cells. The transfection
protocol will be optimized and codified into a simple to follow set of
instructions. A turn-key instrument will be developed to carry out these
procedures for use by life science researchers, with reduced device costs
through improved manufacturing techniques to be competitive with currently
available methods. The market-ready product will be evaluated by eight
preclinical immune cell research beta sites to discover new treatment
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.