* 1759972
* RCN: Building A Community of Practice for Household Water Insecurity Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,707.00

The Household Water Insecurity (HWISE) Research Coordination Network (RCN) will
advance the conceptualization of domestic water provisioning and water
insecurity in relation to broader social and environmental challenges. HWISE
will build a community of practice and collaboration that focuses on key
analytics and theoretical advances coupled with the development of research
protocols and standardized assessments to document, benchmark, and understand
the causes and outcomes of water insecurity at the household level. Water
insecurity is broadly defined as the situation wherein individuals or households
cannot benefit from the processes that support water flows, quality, and
services in support of human capabilities and well-being. This RCN will benefit
U.S. society by focusing analytical and methodological efforts on a critical
issue facing millions of the country's most vulnerable people facing acute and
chronic water insecurity. The HWISE network is comprised of scientists from many
disciplines and is designed to enhance collaboration, improve the interaction
between researchers and policy-practitioners to benefit society, and build
publicly available infrastructure. The RCN will host a public HWISE Portal to
disseminate all RCN products and provide access to new forms of social, visual,
and narrative data infrastructure, in addition to traditional survey,
geospatial, and qualitative research instruments and
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN advances the goal of sustainable and
socially equitable water policy and interventions through the robust evaluation
of key water security problems. The RCN gives explicit attention to the causes
and outcomes of household water insecurity and translates research outcomes into
meaningful and useful products for practitioners, communities, and decision-
makers. The HWISE Network advances conceptual innovation through an
interdisciplinary dialogue, which necessarily demands that the interdisciplinary
scientific community develop and evaluate research methods to advance cross-site
comparisons, including the challenge of household water insecurity in the United
States. The RCN will integrate geospatial methods and data, making the network
well positioned to contribute to an unprecedented high-resolution, spatio-
temporal, cross-cultural understanding of household water decision-making and
providing the groundwork to test new hypotheses about water-society
interactions. To achieve these objectives, the HWISE RCN will organize thematic
workshops, networking activities, conference-based events, research capacity-
building activities, inter-network exchanges, and special sessions in strategic
venues that enhance and support of academic and policy
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.