* 1759457
* RAPID: Assessment and treatment of flood-contaminated water sources and hot-spots of microbial contaminants in post-Harvey Houston
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,880.00

Research is needed to understand both the shorter- and longer-term impacts of
Hurricane Harvey's extreme flooding in the Houston region on the mobilization of
chemical and microbial contaminants, as well as how long they persist in
impacted areas. In this research, the findings are being integrated and compared
to the investigators' findings for previous flood studies in order to understand
generalizable principles associated with disease propagation post-flood and
microbial community structure changes as a result of extreme flooding. The
hypothesis of this study is that significant mobilization of both chemical and
microbial contaminants will be evident, resulting in contaminated drinking water
sources and sediments enriched in fecal indicators and pathogenic
microorganisms. The results are being used to inform the design and deployment
of the NSF-supported NEWT ERC's emergency-response treatment technologies that
target specific contaminants of concern, with a particular focus on serving
socioeconomically vulnerable populations. The results of this research help to
improve epidemiologic studies that evaluate the human health impacts of
contaminants mobilized and deposited by floodwaters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
societal impacts of this research involve providing data on water, soil and
sediment quality that permits assessment of potential human health and ecosystem
risks that have been enhanced due to the extreme floods caused by Harvey.
Furthermore, the results enhance our understanding of the microbial ecology of
disease propagation under flood conditions and inform the design of emergency
response treatment systems that can be deployed to vulnerable populations
impacted by future extreme flooding events. The research project involves both
graduate and undergraduate students. All results are being made available to the
public through Rice's Kinder Institute Urban Data Platform, a secure data
repository of research-ready geocoded data for the Houston metropolitan area
that facilitates cross-disciplinary research and community investigations.
Furthermore, the investigators are integrating the findings into courses and
developing a case study that includes teaching materials that will be made
publicly available.