* 1759724
* Linking Forest Regeneration, Plant Distributions, and Ecotone Dynamics in Changing Mountain Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Martin Dovciak, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2023
* USD 322,992.00

This research project will investigate how distributions of tree species and
boundaries between deciduous and coniferous ecosystems respond to changing
environmental conditions across multiple spatial scales The project will expand
current knowledge about the mechanisms through which tree seedlings colonize new
areas or experience poor recruitment in other areas by testing hypotheses that
integrate concepts from theoretical ecology, biogeography of climatic gradients,
and invasion ecology. Using predictive modeling, the project will provide new
insights about strategies for adapting to changing climatic conditions in
forests that provide valuable ecological and socioeconomic services in the
northeastern United States. Research findings will be disseminated to regional
forest management agencies and the general public via presentations or exhibits
in regional nature visitor centers, meetings of professional societies and
public interest groups, and a public-access website. The project also will
contribute to improved education in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields through graduate training and expansion of
undergraduate participation in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain regions
contain spatially compressed elevational gradients in climate and associated
biological communities. As a result, they are vulnerable to environmental
changes. Montane ecotones, such as the transition between low-elevation
deciduous and high-elevation coniferous forests, are particularly conducive to
detecting changes in species distributions. Many high-elevation treelines across
the globe have advanced upslope in recent decades in direct response to
increasing temperature and growing season length. The investigators will
quantify ongoing demographic shifts in tree species to provide an early
indicator of potential future changes along elevational climatic gradients of
northeastern United States. They will also analyze how the diversity and
composition of forest understories change along elevational climatic gradients,
and they will determine how forest understory composition and diversity affect
the establishment and recruitment of tree seedlings of various species along
spatial environmental gradients. Understory plant community composition, light
environment, microclimate, and tree seedling banks will be characterized and
analyzed in closed canopy settings and in forest gaps. Size-class distributions
of tree species over elevation will be analyzed using logistic models.
Understory plant diversity and compositional gradients will be characterized
with generalized linear models (GLM) and non-metric multidimensional scaling,
and GLM-based tree regeneration models will be developed for each major tree
species relative to the environmental gradients and understory
vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.