* 1759566
* HSI Conference: Catalyzing Progress in Undergraduate STEM Education with Insights from Midwestern HSIs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Laura Sanders, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 12/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

A conference on enhancing undergraduate STEM education at Hispanic-Serving
Institutions will be organized and hosted at Northeastern Illinois University
(NEIU) in Chicago, Illinois. The conference will attract participants from
regional public two-year and four-year public and private Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) in the Midwest. The conference will weave together two
intersecting threads: 1) Best practices in STEM pedagogy, and 2) HSI identity. A
particular focus will be students' transition points and momentum points
(academic achievements that tend to propel a student forward). These transition
points include K-12 to college, two-year to four-year, four-year to graduate
school, and military service to college. The conference was proposed in response
to a Dear Colleague Letter (17-092 - Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)) issued by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) calling for submission of conference proposals to inform the design of
NSF's new Hispanic-Serving Institution program, to be established in fiscal year
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through keynote speakers, panels, workshops,
lectures, and breakout sessions, the conference will integrate the two threads
by exploring tested practices in STEM education and pedagogy, and identifying
issues related to HSI identity, including opportunities, needs, and challenges
faced by these institutions. The overarching goal of the conference will be to
explore potential actionable solutions to challenges and opportunities in
undergraduate STEM education at HSIs. By identifying best practices, novel
pedagogical approaches, and diverse institutional strategies, as well as
providing a medium to catalyze networking and collaborative initiatives among
regional HSIs, the proposed conference will contribute in important ways to the
enhancement and improvement of STEM educational activities. Participants will
include institutional leaders, department chairs,