* 1759966
* Collaborative Research:   ABI Development: Symbiota2: Enabling greater collaboration and flexibility for mobilizing biodiversity data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Neil Cobb, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2022
* USD 435,506.00

Biological collections in the United States have amassed over 500 million
specimens but only 14% of these have been digitized; thus we need to greatly
expand existing tools and methods to efficiently digitize specimen data. This
project addresses this need by transforming Symbiota, one of the most widely
used software platforms for mobilizing specimens in US research collections.
Symbiota is an online biodiversity data management software platform that
integrates data and images from networks of data providers. It has helped
mobilize over 37 million specimen records from 766 natural history collections
and is one of the most successful platforms for creating large collaborative
data communities for sharing and displaying biodiversity data. Symbiota is used
by 74% of the projects funded by the NSF Advancing Digitization of Biological
Collections program and is thus a key platform to help digitize the estimated
430 million specimens in US collections that have yet to be digitized.
Symbiota's success is largely due to its low learning curve and powerful set of
tools for documenting species occurrences and integrating them with images and
detailed taxonomic descriptions. But its widespread use has yielded significant
feedback on how it could be made more effective. To accomplish this and aid its
future development, Symbiota needs a fundamental restructuring. This project
will transform Symbiota into a new version, Symbiota2, to catalyze
contributions, expand research use, enrich education-outreach activities, and
increase sustainability. Symbiota2 will enhance our ability to address a broad
spectrum of biodiversity-related research questions by facilitating data
visualization, linking multiple data sources (e.g., publications), creating
better tools for data quality assessment, and monitoring data
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformation of Symbiota into Symbiota2 will
completely refactor its code structure to emphasize modularity and improve
usability and accessibility. This transformation will achieve the following
goals, derived through direct management of Symbiota data portals and concerted
and dedicated interactions with the Symbiota user community: 1) Provide RESTful
web services so that data can be easily incorporated into a scientific workflow,
2) Build a plugin architecture to ease the development of new features, 3)
Create a database abstraction layer to include a wide variety of backend
database management systems, 4) Increase data utility by supporting analytical
and visualization tools, 5) Separate the Graphical User Interface (GUI) from
other processing so that new GUIs can be used, and 6) Enhance the data
collection by making it easier to add new kinds of data and work offline. With
these goals met, Symbiota2 will be a powerful biodiversity data management
system fulfilling the needs of developers, data providers, researchers, and
education professionals, as well as being interoperable with other biodiversity
initiatives. Please visit the project's home page at symbiota.org to learn
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.