* 1759559
* A Multidisciplinary Analysis of the Spatial Patterns of Marine Aquaculture Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Sarah Lester, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2022
* USD 377,196.00

This project will examine how mariculture, the cultivation of marine plants and
animals, has developed around the world and through time, providing an
understanding of the forces that drive the diffusion of new seafood farming
practices at global and regional scales. Mariculture production is growing
quickly, but the spatial patterns of production are varied, with some regions
experiencing rapid expansion while others lack any development despite good
conditions for growth. The investigators will analyze the geographic, social,
political, economic, and ecological dimensions of mariculture production,
examining the importance of each factor in driving mariculture expansion.
Mariculture is expected to be an increasingly critical component of the global
food system, with far more scope for expansion than land-based agriculture, yet
to-date there is limited understanding of what drives the spatial and temporal
patterns of production. Additionally, the project addresses societal concerns
regarding future food production, including food security, nutrition,
environmental sustainability, and livelihoods. Project results will be made
available to decision-makers, regulators, and mariculture developers to inform
policy interventions, development regulations, and economic incentives that
guide sustainable mariculture growth in the future. The project will also
provide multidisciplinary research training to graduate and undergraduate
students as well as a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using a
multidisciplinary approach, this research will provide novel insights into the
expansion of food production systems and the industrialization of the oceans.
Existing research on global food systems is heavily focused on land-based
systems, despite the growing importance of seafood cultivation in the oceans. It
is not well-understood why mariculture exhibits a geographically heterogeneous
pattern of development or how farming technologies expand into new locations.
The investigators will conduct a global scale analysis of the spatial and
temporal patterns of mariculture development and expansion. The study will
address questions about how innovations in mariculture diffuse across locations
and whether there are certain enabling social, economic or governance conditions
that are common pre-cursors to aquaculture development across regions. Using
large secondary data-sets, several different quantitative approaches such as
spatial statistics, time series analysis, and multivariate regression analysis
will be used to answer questions about worldwide mariculture expansion. Project
findings will be compared to previous work on drivers of agricultural expansion
and intensification, seeking to understand how the distinct human-environment
interactions in these two different contexts lead to convergent and/or divergent
patterns. In addition to its worldwide approach, the project will develop
regional spatial analyses by focusing specifically on case material from New
Zealand and Norway, which will examine mariculture drivers operating on sub-
national scales. Findings from this research have broad applicability for the
expansion of this industry in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.