* 1759963
* RAPID: Mobilization and transport of microbial contaminants along Texas waterways following Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Vikram Kapoor, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 79,277.00

Part I Project Significance and Importance Hurricane Harvey has caused
unprecedented damage to wastewater infrastructure in southeastern Texas,
resulting in the release of sewage contamination into surface waters and the
potential for widespread microbial pathogen exposure to humans. This proposal
seeks to understand the potential for human exposure to pathogens and assess the
extent of wastewater releases during Hurricane Harvey. Comparisons of transport
and other factors measured during the study will be made with the objective of
building a predictive framework for assessing wastewater contamination following
severe flooding. The investigation will focus on smaller towns in southeast and
lower central Texas rural locations to provide much needed and urgent data on
the effects of sewage spillages on the water quality of smaller towns.

Part II Technical Description

The hypothesis of this research is that sewage overflows and stormwater runoff
during and after Harvey have released high levels of potentially pathogenic
organisms into Texas waterways. This hypothesis will be tested by evaluating the
presence, abundance and fate of fecal indicator bacteria, human mitochondrial
DNA and selected human pathogens in flood-impacted surface waters in southeast
and lower central Texas rural locations. Specific measurements include the
quantitative analysis of fecal indicator organisms (E. coli, Enterococci, and
Human-specific Bacteroidales), together with human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and
selected human pathogens (E. coli O157:H7, Campylobacter spp., Vibrio spp.) in
water and sediment samples. This project will advance fundamental understanding
of fecal source tracking and expand the understanding of fecal indicators for
identifying sources of fecal contamination in coastal and surface waters through
the use of human mtDNA as a direct measure of fecal contamination.