* 1759996
* RAPID: Collection of Perishable Data on Wind- and Surge-Induced Residential Building Damage in Texas during 2017 Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Franklin Lombardo, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2018
* USD 39,854.00

Windstorms and associated hazards, such as storm surge, routinely cause the most
building damage of any natural hazard in the United States. To mitigate this
damage, it is important to understand the relationship between wind speed and
its characteristics and the resulting building damage. On 25 August 2017,
Hurricane Harvey struck the coast of Texas as a Category 4 hurricane with a rare
combination of high wind speeds and significant storm surge. Preliminary
reconnaissance showed that residential building performance in coastal
communities in Texas exposed to the brunt of Hurricane Harvey's impacts was
highly variable, even for similar building types that should have experienced
similar wind speeds and storm surge levels. This variability demonstrates gaps
in the fundamental knowledge of the relationship between hurricane hazards and
building damage. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will support
field data collection on residential building performance during Hurricane
Harvey in order to fill these gaps by formally evaluating the hurricane hazard-
to-building damage relationship through direct observation. A better
understanding of the hazard-to-damage relationship and the factors that
influence it can be used to advance hurricane-resistant building design
methodologies and society's resilience to windstorms. All data acquired during
the field work will be shared with the engineering research community through
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Data Depot available at https://www.designsafe-ci.org. The collected building
performance data, matched with wind speed observations or estimates, will
provide a library of engineering case studies for use in the classroom to
educate the next generation of engineers and architects on the impacts of
hurricanes on buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current building design and damage
prediction methods assume that windstorm damage is primarily a function of
standardized wind speed magnitude, local terrain, and building characteristics,
implicitly ignoring any potential differences between extreme wind event types
for the same given wind speed, and any effects from potentially coexisting
hazards such as storm surge. The goals of this RAPID project are to 1) collect a
representative, spatially-referenced database of residential building
performance during Hurricane Harvey, 2) develop hurricane fragility functions
for wind based on the field data collected, and 3) establish a framework for
evaluating the effects of enhanced hazard conditions, such as storm surge or
mesovortices within the hurricane eyewall, in addition to high winds, and other
extreme wind events such as tornadoes, on the wind-to-damage relationship.
Residential building damage data will be collected, from major areas with
significant building stock along the impacted Texas coastline, by a team of
researchers and graduate students from Auburn University, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, and University of Maryland. A guided cluster sampling
approach over a large spatial area will be used to conduct detailed, ground-
based surveys of single-family residential structures with geo-tagged
photographs and field notes. The collected data will include the damage ratios
for all major building components, characteristics of the building such as
construction material and number of stories, and any evidence that could be used
to estimate wind speed or storm surge height. The fragility functions developed
from the empirical data will be used to facilitate the comparisons between wind-
to-damage relationships, demonstrating differences in expected building
performance during wind-only, wind and storm surge, and tornado events.