* 1759224
* Exploring STEM Impact and Engagement in Student-Led and Purpose-Driven Projects
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Nathan Holbert, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 102,983.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) through advancing
student skills and interest in the area of data science. We live in a data-
driven age where data and the skills associated with it are in high demand in
STEM fields and beyond. Many students, particularly those from groups under-
represented in STEM professions, are given few opportunities to engage with data
in a way that connects their lived experiences to scientific practices. This
project aims to address this by empowering youth to construct solutions to
personally meaningful community challenges using open-source data. By putting
youth in a position to identify personally meaningful projects, and anchoring
them in a collaborative team of educators, data scientists, industry
professionals, and community groups all with the shared aim of solving a problem
in their local community, the project supports students in seeing see STEM
practices as aligning with their personal identity and values. By positioning
students as leads in designing projects that address compelling community
challenges, training them to become familiar with data science tools for
solutions-oriented learning, and amplifying their voice to share their solutions
with key stakeholders, this project provides important insight into the factors
and experiences that contribute to student learning and examines how to better
use co-designed and shared data-driven experiences to broaden participation and
diversify STEM workforces.

This two-year collaborative research project will address the lack of diversity
in STEM fields by engaging high school aged learners in an after-school club
that uses data to identify a compelling local community challenge and to design
a potential solution to address the problem. Leveraging the constructionist
design paradigm and research on project-based service learning, the project will
investigate how framing STEM practices to contribute to and improve one's
community might increase student interest in and shift identity towards STEM
fields. Rather than create a one-size-fits-all activity that assumes a community
problem, the project aims to develop and study design frameworks for creating
personally meaningful and learner-centric experiences and activities that can be
deployed in a broad range of communities with similar demographics. Year 1 of
the project will be devoted to the development of a network of education and
industry partners and pilot activity design and evaluation. In year 2, a pilot
will be deployed at two locations with eight partnering schools. Research
activities will include the evaluation of student learning about the core
concepts and practices of data science, students' personal connections with
local communities, and students' STEM interests and identities. The project will
deepen collaborations between Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Teachers
College, the New York City Department of Education's Division on Teaching and
Learning, community organizations, school educators, and relevant industry
partners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.