* 1759959
* ABI Sustaining: Geolocate for the Biodiversity Research Community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nelson Rios, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 289,993.00

Since 2002, the GEOLocate project has been engaged in developing, distributing
and supporting innovative solutions for deducing geospatial coordinates from
free-form textual descriptions of locations, typically from where biological
specimens have been collected and/or observed. It has resulted in a suite of
web-based tools and services which have become critical components of workflows
to digitize and mobilize biodiversity collections information, ultimately giving
researchers and the public access to the vast archive of specimens held in
natural history collections. Annotating biodiversity collection records with
geospatial information enables specimen occurrences to be visualized on digital
maps and allows researchers to relate the occurrences to other kinds of data
(e.g., environmental data). These data increase our capacity to study important
scientific and societal issues, such as endangered species conservation,
environmental restoration, and preparing for global climate change. GEOLocate
has long served the georeferencing needs of the natural history collections and
research communities and has been integrated into numerous third-party
biodiversity data management and analysis systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will permit the GEOLocate platform to continue providing technology and
support for semi-automated geospatial referencing of natural history collections
data while addressing long-term sustainability in maintaining operation beyond
the length of this grant. Specifically, this project will enable continued
operation and day-to-day maintenance of web clients, server software, spatial
data, hosting infrastructure and end-user support services. The project will
continue to educate end-users, provide guidance on large-scale georeferencing
projects and promote the use of the latest standards and best practices for
georeferencing. Finally, the team will work with the natural history collections
community, third-party integration partners and other relevant stakeholders to
evaluate and implement a model for fiscal sustainability enabling support for
the platform into the future. The GEOLocate project web site is located at:
http://www.geo-locate.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.