* 1759810
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: The central Apennines Earthquake cascade under a new microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* William Ellsworth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 213,389.00

A series of powerful earthquakes rocked the Apennine mountains in central Italy,
between August 2016 and January 2017 causing loss of life and inflicting heavy
damage to the historic towns of Amatrice, Accumoli and Norcia. This sequence
produced six strong earthquakes over a period of five months as response and
recovery operations were underway. This rapidly evolving seismic crisis
underscores the pressing need to better understand how earthquake sequences
unfold. The goal of this joint project, funded by the National Science
Foundation in the U.S. and the National Environmental Research Council in the
U.K., in coordination with the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Volcanologia in
Italy, will deepen knowledge of earthquake interaction by studying these
devastating earthquakes. An international team of earthquake expertss will use
high-quality seismic data recorded during the sequences to develop new
approaches that can address current obstacles that not only impede deep
understanding of the earthquake processes, but also delay the scientific
response in the post-earthquake disaster environment. The observational
capability to detect, locate and characterize even the smallest magnitude events
within few hours developed in this project will be directly applicable to
tectonic, induced, geothermal and volcanic seismicity in the U.S. and around the
world. Findings of this research will enable improved and scientifically-
informed response to the next earthquake crisis to strike the U.S. through
existing partnership with the U. S. Geological Survey and support international
collaboration amongst US and European earthquake
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the physics of complex
earthquake sequences through the analysis of high-resolution earthquake catalogs
to test increasingly sophisticated earthquake forecasting models. To reach this
goal this project will: 1) Use state-of-the-art techniques to develop a
comprehensive high-resolution earthquake catalog for the devastating earthquake
sequence that struck the Italian Apennines in 2016-2017; 2) Investigate the
physics of earthquake triggering and the evolution of large-magnitude events
within this sequence; 3) Develop and provide testable forecast models that can
support decision-making process for future earthquake sequences. The reseach
will use the unparalleled seismic data set recorded by more than 85 high-quality
broadband sensors deployed in the epicentral region to analyze how each
earthquake in the sequence contributes to the evolution of seismicity in space
and time. This sequence is particularly rich in this regard, with spatially
intertwined episodes on August 24, 2016, October 26-28, 2016 and January 18,
2017. The seismograms of both large and small events will enable us to develop
and test new full-waveform based algorithms for event detection, location and
characterization that will yield precise source parameters and faulting
mechanisms for even the smallest magnitude events. By improving the quality of
seismic source parameters across the magnitude spectrum it will be possible to
apply process-based models of earthquake nucleation and interaction, including
the role of fault complexity, fault loading, relaxation, stress interaction, and
fault susceptibility to stress perturbation to understand the evolution of this
sequence. The improved fault mechanical understanding will help to develop
innovative physics-based forecast models. Currently, real-time earthquake
forecasts that describe short-term clustering probabilities are based
predominantly on statistical/empirical models. However, these models lack an
underlying physical model and therefore have limited predictability if no
precursory seismicity exists. A common challenge for both physics- based and
statistical forecasts that are based on routine catalogues is the low-
probability and high-uncertainty nature of the resulting probabilities.
Decision-making and scientific advice are all severely hampered under these
conditions. Thus, using this new state-of the art earthquake catalog of the
2016-2017 Italian sequence to test physical, statistical and hybrid (physical
and statistical) forecasts in space and time will help (a) to test physical
models for earthquake occurrences in sequences, and (b) improve the resolution,
accuracy and skill of the forecasts. The broader impacts of this project include
improvement on seismic risk assessment as well as fostering collaboration
between US and European seismologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.