* 1759587
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: An Multi-technique Approach to Dietary Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Susan Kooiman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 9,672.00

In this doctoral dissertation research project MS Susan Kooiman, of Michigan
State University, will investigate the role of food and cooking in past human
social and environmental interactions. Food choice and preparation methods are
conscious and unconscious expressions of human identity, offering a window into
who people are and how they wish to be perceived. Archaeological exploration of
past foodways offers insight into how diet and cooking are connected to
environmental, social, technological, political, and ideological factors,
highlighting the dynamism and diversity of human adaptive and cultural decisions
about food that are often not visible within the modern industrial system.
Transformation of diet and cooking techniques through time are often reflections
of broader environmental and sociocultural changes. Cooking technology, such as
pottery, is also sensitive to social change, altering in form to accommodate
food processing requirements and in design to reflect symbolic identity. The use
of a variety of analytic techniques for investigating diet, food processing
technology, and cooking methods is an innovative way to explore these issues,
the effectiveness of which could help researchers across the world investigate
the role of food in human negotiations with their natural and social
environments. It can also inform reconstruction of traditional foodways for
groups such as Native Americans, demonstrating the depth of their culinary
traditions and aiding in recent traditional foodways revitalization initiatives.

MS Kooiman will investigate technological adaptations and foodways through an
examination of pottery and microscopic and chemical analysis of food remains.
Researchers have previously noted shifts in food choice, technology, settlement
patterns, and social organization in the Woodland and Contact periods (200 B.C.
- A.D. 1600) in the northern Great Lakes of North America. Some of these are
hypothesized to be the result of an increasing focus on a more limited range of
food resources. This process will be explored through analysis of ceramic
cooking vessels spanning this period from the Cloudman site (20CH6), located on
Drummond Island in Lake Huron. A set of diverse yet complementary analytic
methods will be employed. Functional and typological pottery analyses will
reveal potential alterations in pottery style, construction, and use over time,
and a variety of specialized analyses for investigating diet (lipid residue,
microbotanical, and stable isotope analyses) will confirm or refute associations
between changes in pottery form and use, shifting diet, and changing social
relationships. The results will demonstrate the efficacy of multidimensional
ceramic and paleodietary research for use in archaeological contexts across the
globe.