* 1759199
* Impacts of Heterogeneous Organizational Backgrounds and Social Norms on Employees' Behaviors in Temporary Organizations: Focusing on Safety Behavior in Construction Projects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Fiona Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,181.00

A temporary organization refers to a set of organizational actors working
together on a complex task over a limited period of time. As the world has
become more dynamic and interconnected, temporary organizations have been
increasingly employed across diverse industries like construction, film-making,
shipbuilding, software development, advertising, biotechnology, and fashion. Yet
despite their increased prevalence, temporary organizations are struggling to
foster and maintain coherent social norms. As opposed to traditional, long-term
organizations, most members of temporary organizations possess different
organizational backgrounds and a relatively short tenure. This project will
investigate how employees' behaviors can be better aligned with desirable social
norms through the reconciliation of multiple foci of organizational
identifications in temporary organizations. The researchers will use
construction workers' safety behavior as a case study of employee behavior in a
temporary organization. The construction industry provides a particularly useful
site for inquiry due to its central role in our economy, its wide use of
temporary organizations, its status as among the most dangerous industries in
the world, and the pervasiveness of accidents caused by workers' unsafe
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will extend theories on temporary
organizations and organizational identification by characterizing the mechanisms
through which desirable social norms are translated into organizational members'
behaviors with the help of organizational identification. The project will
incorporate diverse empirical data collection methods (e.g., survey, behavioral
economic experiment, and behavior sampling) and analyses to investigate the role
of multiple organizational backgrounds and social norms in shaping employee
behavior in a temporary organization. In addition, working with the industry
partners, the researchers will conduct quasi-field experiments to develop and
test a series of one-time, short-term managerial training that can promote
employees' social identification with the umbrella organization and ultimately
to elicit desired changes in improving employees' behavior. The results will
greatly contribute to the advancement of social identity theory and organization
studies. Further, by identifying effective managerial actions/strategies to
increase workers' project identification, the project will contribute to the
development of organizational actions/strategies that can overcome heterogeneous
organizational backgrounds and short tenure issues in a temporary organization,
which will eventually improve employee behaviors like safety. Finally, this
project will provide career development opportunities for diverse groups of
students. The effective education of students and professionals for social
influence-based management approaches will increase the competitiveness of U.S
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.