* 1759440
* RAPID:  Chemical and Microbiological Quality of Floodwaters in Houston Following Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 232,701.00

Hurricane Harvey landed in Texas as a Saffir-Simpson Category 4 hurricane at 10
p.m. CST on August 25, 2017. Harvey stalled over Texas for several days and
brought an unprecedented amount of rainfall into Houston that exceeded 50 inches
over some parts of the Greater Metro area. Such unprecedented flooding in an
urban area with abundant industrial activity has the potential to produce
widespread contamination of waterways, soils and sediment by chemical pollutants
and microbiological pathogens. A major issue with understanding the potential
impact of such events is that they occur relatively infrequently and are of too
short duration to allow for data collection and scientific evaluation using the
traditional proposal evaluation and funding processes. This proposal seeks to
remedy that problem by rapidly characterizing the chemical pollution and
microbiological contamination in Houston waterways post-Harvey to provide both
an understanding of the extent of pollution, as well as to provide a base of
comparison for subsequent studies of the recovery of the environment over time
to support future decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific project
objectives are to: (i) understand the spatial distribution of various
contaminants in Houston water systems post-Harvey; (ii) collect a one-of-its-
kind dataset to understand the recovery of the system after such a catastrophic
event; and (iii) use state-of-the-art metagenomics techniques to define the
microbiological condition of Houston waterways post-disaster and relationship to
community health. Four waterways will be studied: Brays, Buffalo, and Greens and
Peach Creek represent different flow and land use/land cover regimes, and
pollutant sources. Sample collection will encompass the water column, and soil
and sediment samples from inundated areas and in-stream locations. Chemical
analyses of metals, organic pollutants, and both state-of-the-art and more
conventional microbiological assessment techniques will enable detailed
investigation of the health hazards to surrounding communities in the wake of
Harvey. These data will support decision-making, building capacity and
increasing resilience within metropolitan urban water infrastructure in the face
of extreme weather events.