* 1759846
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Cultivating a sustainable Open Tree of Life
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Emily Jane McTavish, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 488,150.00

For over 150 years, scientists have been classifying different plants, animals,
fungi, and microbes based on how these organisms are related to one another. The
Open Tree of Life project created a comprehensive website that summarizes these
relationships. This website makes it easier for biologists to find previously
discovered knowledge about evolutionary relationships and to obtain the data
that underlies this knowledge. Understanding the evolutionary relationships
between organisms is crucial to answering questions in all areas of biological
research. The website is used in research that improves agriculture, fights
diseases, conserves biodiversity, ensures food safety, and improves our
understanding of basic processes in biology. The Open Tree of Life website also
provides students and teachers with up-to-date biological information across the
entire tree of life. This project will add several features to the core of the
Open Tree of Life project to make it sustainable and to keep the resource up to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Open Tree of Life project has built and deployed
the first comprehensive tree of life. That project is used by individual
biologists and by other informatics projects. This project will ensure the
sustainability of the Open Tree of Life effort by adding new features to the
user interface that motivate data deposition and curation, improving the rate
and reliability of automated procedures for incorporating new data into the
tree, and fixing several aspects of the core infrastructure to make the site
easier to maintain and cheaper to run. The results of this work will be
available at the Open Tree of Life site (https://tree.opentreeoflife.org)
throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.