* 1759261
* Making a Difference: Engaging Young People in Engineering and Computer Science through Computational Making and Social Entrepreneurship
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,198,923.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). This project will
implement and research the effects of a nine-month, after-school Making program
for 13-15 year olds from the New York Hall of Science's (NYSCI) immediate
neighborhood of high-need recent immigrants. Building on lessons learned from
NYSCI's ITEST-funded Innovation Institute on participant perceptions of computer
science and engineering as STEM career pathways, the project will investigate:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) How specific aspects of the program influence
participant perceptions of the relevance, usefulness and accessibility of
computer science and engineering as potential academic and career pathways,
and&lt;br/&gt;(2) Through collaboration with NYSCI's INCLUDES-funded national
network of out-of-school Maker Spaces, how to adapt, implement and study the
revised version of the Innovation Institute at scale in future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will deepen understandings of
factors, designs and practices that encourage and motivate students to pursue
and persist in education programs or pathways that prepare them for STEM
occupations. In the program, early adolescent immigrant youth will have the
opportunity to deeply explore a social inequity in their community that is
personally relevant to them and use the practices and problem-solving approaches
of engineering and computer science to develop potential solutions for this
issue. The hypothesis is that by developing solutions to a relevant community
issue, participant perceptions of the utility of using engineering and computer
science approaches will increase. The project will be well positioned to have a
broader impact on multiple audiences because of the involvement of the NSF
INCLUDES Designing for Diversity Network. In addition to the eight Maker Space
sites, the Network also includes a National Leadership Team that represents
corporate, philanthropic and non-profit organizations that are leaders in the
Maker movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Academically motivated but underrepresented
youth, including immigrant youth, often place a high priority on pursuing
careers that can help them to give back to their communities, but many of these
youth do not perceive engineering and computer science to be relevant career
pathways in relation to their desire to serve their communities. The project
will investigate how informal education institutions can organize specific
features of their programming to help young people make measurable shifts in
their perceptions of the relevance, usefulness and accessibility of engineering
and computer science as a potential career pathway that can help program
participants address the social challenges that are of personal importance to
them. This research project will be grounded in two implementations of a nine-
month, out-of-school-time program, which will be organized around the theme of
understanding and responding to quality of life issues in NYSCI's immediate
neighborhoods through the use of computational tools to develop sustainable,
high-impact solutions that benefit the community. The project will serve a total
of 50-60 youth from NYSCI's immediate community, produce and disseminate program
curriculum materials, and lay the groundwork for a scale-up implementation and
study of the program via the NSF INCLUDES Designing for Diversity Network. The
project's early stage research strategy includes a rich variety of qualitative
and quantitative measures to develop evidence of promise that the revised
Innovation Institute model has significant potential for success in a scale-up
to other sites. Measures will include video observations, digital portfolios,
pre-post participant interviews, and analysis of student design
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.