* 1759255
* OTREC: Convective Heating Profiles and the Transition from Shallow to Deep Convection over the Tropical East Pacific and Southwest Caribbean
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Zhiming Kuang, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2023
* USD 382,201.00

This award supports work on the Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
(OTREC) field campaign. The campaign seeks to understand the formation and
development of tropical convective clouds and associated heavy rainfall in the
adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial Pacific and the
southwest Caribbean, along with their evolution over the intervening portions of
Central America and Colombia. The campaign also examines the genesis and
evolution of easterly waves, large westward-moving atmospheric disturbances
(wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean
and eastern Pacific. The full set of campaign awards is discoverable on the
nsf.gov/awardsearch webpage by a keyword search on
"OTREC".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical convection plays a critical role in
earth's climate system and is also responsible for extreme precipitation and
hurricane formation. Easterly waves are of particular interest for weather
forecasting given their tendency to spawn hurricanes. More generally, tropical
convection is an engine of weather and climate worldwide yet poorly understood
and difficult to simulate. Work leading to better representation of tropical
convection in weather and climate models can thus lead to better weather
forecasts and impact assessments, both for the public and decision makers. Aside
from the societal relevance of the science, the campaign includes several
education and outreach activities including support for undergraduates to
participate in fieldwork and production of short documentary videos for use in
classroom teaching and informal science education. Work performed under this
award fosters international scientific collaboration with scientists in Colombia
and Costa Rica and helps to develop local infrastructure for rainwater
collection and isotopic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight week OTREC
deployment consists primarily of a set of 20 flights in the Gulfstream V (GV)
research aircraft maintained by the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR). The campaign uses an airport in Costa Rica for easy access to the
equatorial Pacific and southwest Caribbean study regions, and conditions in
these regions are sampled using dropsondes and a wing-mounted W-band radar.
Dropsondes contain the same instrument package as standard weather balloons,
only dropped from an aircraft (in this case from about 40,000 feet) with a small
parachute. Work performed here augments the aircraft observations through the
collection and analysis of rainwater samples from ground sites in Costa Rica and
Colombia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite intensive study we lack a satisfactory
theory for how environmental conditions determine when and where tropical
convection will form, how long it will last, how much it will expand and
organize, and how much rain it will produce. Vertical structure is a key
property of tropical convection that determines its evolution and its
interactions with the circulation and thermodynamics of the surrounding
atmosphere. The vertical structure can be simply characterized as top- or
bottom-heavy, according to the relative amounts of rising motion that occur in
the upper and lower troposphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work conducted here seeks
to determine the vertical structure of tropical convection by measuring the
ratios of stable isotopes in rainwater produced by it. Rainwater is almost
entirely composed of ordinary H2O, but it contains trace amounts of water in
which deuterium (D) replaces hydrogen (H) to form HDO, or oxygen-18 replaces
oxygen-16. These heavier isotopes condense more readily than ordinary H2O and
are thus more common in raindrops formed lower rather than higher in the
troposphere. The relative abundance of heavier isotopes in raindrops should thus
provide a means to determine if they formed in top-heavy or bottom-heavy
convection. Rainwater collection for isotopic analysis is planned at three sites
in Colombia: Nuqui, on the west coast; Quibdo, further inland; and Isla San
Andres, in the southwest Caribbean. Estimates of convective vertical profiles
from isotopic composition are compared with estimates from aircraft measurements
to determine if the method works. Further examination of the isotopic data would
be conducted using numerical simulations from a variety of atmospheric models
including some in which tracer "particles" representing water vapor are tracked
as they rise through cloud systems and ultimately
condense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further goal of the research is to understand
the transition from shallow to deep convection, a critical component of the
lifecycle of convective clouds. Three contributing factors in the transition are
examined: the gradual moistening of the atmospheric boundary layer; organization
of the subcloud layer, which allows cloud roots to form in air which has greater
moisture than the large-scale mean; and cold pools formed by convective
downdrafts, which organize the subcloud layer to produce larger cloud roots
which are in turn less susceptible to the diluting effect of dry air
entrainment. The third of these factors may lead to a positive feedback, in
which convective downdrafts organize the subcloud layer in a way that further
promotes convection. Better characterization of entrainment is of particular
interest over the southwest Caribbean, as midtropospheric air in this region is
quite dry yet convection still occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.