* 1759896
* ABI Development: A Genomic Data Mining Resource to Accelerate Genome-to-Phenome Discovery in Domesticated Animals
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Christine Elsik, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 869,764.00

Research on domesticated animals has significant impacts on society. For
example, species such as pig, sheep, chicken and dog are used to model human
biology, leading to discoveries with implications in human health and well-
being. Understanding the genetic basis of disease leads to improved health and
welfare of companion animals. Farm animal research leads to improvement of
traits related to animal health and production, ultimately enhancing global food
sustainability. To accelerate scientific discovery in animal genetics, an
international consortium called "FAANG" (Functional Annotation of Animal
Genomes) aims to generate comprehensive maps of functional elements in genomes
of domesticated animals. Data generated by FAANG will enhance the use of animal
models in the biological and biomedical sciences. It will hasten discoveries in
fundamental biology, as well as those that impact human health, animal well-
being and agricultural production. In order for the FAANG effort to have
substantial impacts on science and society, the data must be accessible to
scientists and students of diverse disciplines. Effective use of the FAANG data
will require data mining tools that enable easy search and retrieval, along with
a workforce trained in areas such as bioinformatics and
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need for a
high performance data mining resource that enables fine-grained querying and
integrating the heterogeneous FAANG data with existing information, such as
functions of known genes and research datasets. The specific aims of the project
are to 1) develop FAANGMine - a high-performance data mining system that
integrates genome assemblies and currently available annotation data for FAANG
species, 2) extend FAANGMine by integrating new data generated by the FAANG
Consortium, 3) create a FAANGMine user community that consists of students and
scientists working on genetics of domesticated animal species. FAANGMine will
empower animal researchers, with or without programming skills, to leverage the
FAANG data in their research, thereby accelerating discoveries that elucidate
the genetic basis of phenotypic variation. With the goal of fostering a
FAANGMine user community, the proposed project will train over 30 graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows through workshops and trainee visits with the
FAANGMine developers. Moreover, undergraduate researchers will contribute to
FAANGMine by developing demonstration projects. All trainees will have
opportunities to work with data generated from cutting edge "omics"
technologies, raising interest in STEM career pathways. The results of this
project will be available at http://FAANGMine.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.