* 1759152
* Strategies:  Seeding the Future of STEM researchers through emerging agricultural technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Larry Halverson, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,198,658.00

Researchers at Boston College will engage high school aged youth in a three-year
pathway framework that will engage the youth in conducting authentic scientific
research. The project will involve emerging agricultural technologies like
transparent soil (a recent discovery which is a hydrogel that behaves like
soil), a near-peer and college-focused mentoring model, and interaction with
scientists. The youth will learn to build and code Raspberry Pis (small and
affordable computers that students can use to learn programming) to share their
data with agronomists and plant scientists. The outcome goal for this work is to
prepare youth to enter a post-secondary institution with strong research skills
through experience in conducting careful, rigorous scientific research.
Throughout the three-year project, youth will be engaged in the same type of
scientific research that is occurring at the university level. Specifically,
youth will learn: (i) to build the tools (sensors connected to Raspberry Pi and
sensors connected to the Internet of Things web infrastructure provided by IBM
Watson software system) they will use to collect their data, (ii) to carry out a
rigorous scientific investigation (identifying questions, as well as finding and
minimizing experimental containments, and determining dependent vs. independent
variables), and (iii) to develop models and potential explanations based on
their data in collaboration with practicing scientists. The program will recruit
low-income youth, and youth from populations underrepresented in science from
high schools in Boston Public Schools and support them in learning core
scientific research skills and engage them in building the tools they will use
to conduct their more complex experiments. The program will not only build the
capacity of the youth participants to make potential scientific discoveries, but
through the mentoring program youth leaders and mentors will become role models
to youth in their community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four major aspects
of the proposed work. First, youth will engage with cutting edge technologies
being used in scientific research labs. Second, a diverse team of collaborators
will be assembled consisting of STEM career development experts, Youth Mentoring
experts, Scientists, and Science Educators to design the proposed work. Third,
the program is a unique combination of three synergistic components: (1) a near-
peer mentoring approach, (2) STEM learning, and (3) youth purpose and career
development. Unlike other out-of-school STEM programs, this program will not
only support the learning of STEM concepts, but it will do so by taking youth on
a personal journey designed to help them discover the relevance of STEM skills
for fulfilling future career aspirations, as well as preparing them for post-
secondary education. Fourth, the data that youth will share with practicing
scientists has the potential to help answer important questions in plant science
regarding how plants, particularly their root structures, react to environmental
stressors. The research approach provides an opportunity to examine how such
constructs as purpose, critical consciousness, and work volition impact youths'
intentions to pursue a STEM field. To date, these important constructs have not
been seriously considered in STEM career development. Thus, the research on the
impact of near-peer mentoring and youths' adaptability and intentionality to
explore, pursue, and stay in STEM fields will provide the ITEST community with
an evidence-based model integrating near-peer mentoring, scientific research,
and STEM career development to elucidate how youth may successfully pursue a
STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.