* 1759487
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Interpretable Machine Learning to Identify Molecular Markers for Complex Phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Matt Kaeberlein, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,499,266.00

Biologists are now able to gather complete sets of gene expression data and
protein concentrations for particular targets from specific tissues. The
presence and concentrations of these molecules serve as features when
determining a diagnostic pattern for specific states of development or disease.
The approach to biomarker identification taken in this research attempts to find
a set of features (here, gene expression levels) that best predict an outcome
(protein levels occurring in the condition). The identified features,
biomarkers, can help determine the molecular basis for the condition.
Unfortunately, false positive biomarkers are very common, as evidenced by low
success rates of replication in independent data sets and therefore low success
in such markers becoming important in applications such as diagnostics in
clinical practice. We seek to radically shift the current paradigm in biomarker
discovery by resolving fundamental problems with the current approach by using
novel, theoretically well-founded machine learning (ML) methods to learn
interpretable models from data, and follow this up with a systematic
experimental validation system in model organisms. The disease model we are
using is for Alzheimer's disease (AD), an urgent national and international
research priority. Amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are the hallmark
of AD, and their building blocks are Amyloid-alpha and tau proteins,
respectively. These proteins can be measured accurately from human brain
tissues, as can global gene expression values. At present, we lack an
understanding of the set of genes that affect formation of plaques and tangles,
or any protective or pathological responses to these toxic peptides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomarker discovery using high-throughput molecular data
(e.g., gene expression data) has significantly advanced our knowledge of
molecular biology and genetics. The current approach attempts to find a set of
features (e.g., gene expression levels) that best predict a phenotype and use
the selected features, molecular markers, to determine the molecular basis for
the phenotype. However, the low success rates of replication in independent data
indicate three fundamental problems with this approach. &lt;br/&gt;First, high-
dimensionality, hidden variables, and feature correlations create a discrepancy
between predictability (i.e., statistical associations) and true biological
interactions; we need new feature selection criteria to make the model better
explain rather than simply predict phenotypes. Second, complex models (e.g.,
deep learning or ensemble models) can more accurately describe intricate
relationships between genes and phenotypes than simpler, linear models, but they
lack interpretability. Third, analyzing observational data without conducting
interventional experiments does not prove causal relations. &lt;br/&gt;To
address these problems, we propose an integrated machine learning methodology
for learning interpretable models from data by 1) selecting interpretable
features, 2) making interpretable predictions, and 3) validating and refining
predictions through interventional experiments. This approach has the following
aims:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop NEBULA (network-based unsupervised feature learning)
framework to learn interpretable features that will likely provide meaningful
phenotype explanations from publicly available multi-omic data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a unified framework, called SHAP (Shapley additive
explanation), to interpret the predictions of complex models by estimating the
importance of each feature to a particular prediction.&lt;br/&gt;3. Validate and
refine predictions through interventional experiments using high-throughput
assays of gene knockdown on powerful nematode models of proteotoxicity.
&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project website at:
http://suinlee.cs.washington.edu/projects/im3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.