* 1759113
* POSITIONING OF HEALTH CARE SERVICE: EXAMINATION OF THE ADVERTISEMENTS AND STAKEHOLDER PERCEPTIONS
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sung-Yeon Park, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

Access to quality health care is one of the most pressing issues the nation is
facing today and intricately interwoven in the debate is the advertising for the
professional services provided by physicians and hospitals. The concerns about
health care service advertising are founded on the notion that health care is
fundamentally different from other commodities or services and thus the
conventional, market-based distribution of the limited resources can be
problematic. Also raised are the issues related to information asymmetry between
health care service providers and the public. Advocates of a market-based health
economy, on the other hand, argue that advertising helps health service
consumers by bringing down prices and increasing choices. However, little
empirical evidence exists to support or rebuke the claims purported by either
side. It is also unclear what degrees of concern or ambivalence exists among
health care professionals about the advertisements and how much, if any, health
care service marketers are aware of the tension. Research on consumers' health
care service advertising literacy is scarce, although they are often directly
targeted by the advertisements for highly technical and often very costly
services. This research will enhance health care marketing education and
practice by generating concrete knowledge and evidence. In addition, the current
study will lay a groundwork for health care service consumer education by
gauging public understanding of the advertising messages. Ultimately, this
research will illuminate how health care service advertisements can be deployed
to spur healthy competition without wasting health care resources and
compromising the doctor-patient relationship, and thus contribute to the
enhanced wellbeing of individuals and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
examining the content of health care service advertisements and perceptions and
attitudes of the stakeholders, this research employs positioning theory, a
framework for analyzing strategic communication of organizations, to better
understand the relationships among the positions taken by the stakeholders, the
messages conveyed through the advertisements, and the narratives about the
relationship between the medical profession and society. The proposed study has
three objectives: 1) To systematically analyze the content of health care
service advertisements to capture a comprehensive and accurate picture of
current health care service advertising practices; 2) To map and assess the
positions of physicians, consumers, and health care marketers regarding the
practices, aims, responsibilities, and ethical issues unique to the
advertisements; 3) To advance positioning theory as an analytical framework for
the strategic communication of organizations. To meet the objectives, content
analysis of health care service advertisements, surveys of physicians and health
care marketers, and a consumer focus group will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.