* 1759064
* Factors Influencing Vegetation Trends in Dryland Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Colin West, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 231,354.00

Land degradation is a significant threat that can reduce agricultural production
and cause extreme human suffering. This is particularly true in drylands where
climate, soils, and human activities interact to produce desertification, the
reduction or loss of ecosystem services in arid and semi-arid regions that
negatively affect people, animals, and plants. Nearly the entire western half of
the United States is considered a dryland and our country's Dust Bowl of the
1930s is often cited a classic large-scale example of desertification. Severe
droughts, inappropriate agricultural practices, and fragile soils caused
widespread dust storms and enormous crop and cattle losses in the southern Great
Plains. Severe droughts and attending famines in semi-arid Africa and parts of
Asia have also been linked to desertification. Because it affects a huge portion
of the globe's population, there is a United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD), which was signed in 1994. Despite these historical
events and global concern, desertification remains a poorly understood and often
controversial environmental process. Basic questions concerning its rate, extent
and severity at local, regional and global scales are frequently examined in
scientific studies but rarely definitively answered. One of the largest of these
questions concerns whether or not desertification, once started, can be reversed
and, if so, how? This study uses a test case where droughts in the 1970s and
1980s initiated widespread desertification and where recent satellite images
suggest large-scale clusters of increased vegetation, or potentially
desertification in reverse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Colin West and Dr. Aaron
Moody of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will explore what
factors drive vegetation trends in the greening of dryland zones. This study
would test the hypothesis that local land-use practices drive regional
vegetation trends. The research would take place in northern Burkina Faso, where
one of the researchers has conducted long-term anthropological work since 2002.
With previous support from the National Science Foundation, the research team
has assembled a time series of satellite images that show distinct areas of both
greening (where desertification may be in reverse) and browning (where
desertification may be accelerating). Using these results as a guide, they seek
to ground-truth these patterns by asking local farmers and herders about their
perceptions of environmental change. The anthropologist, his graduate students,
and local collaborators will conduct workshops using high-resolution satellite
images in areas considered greening, browning and mixed. Using remote sensing
procedures, other students will process and analyze these images to measure the
amount of vegetation in the three zones. The study predicts that green zones
will have more trees than brown zones and that the mixed zone will be
intermediate. Workshops will local resource users will also seek their
perspectives on how climate, land-use practices, and soils interact to produce
these patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.