* 1759034
* Investigating how the cellular ER stress machinery regulates plant virus infection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jeanmarie Verchot, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 573,792.00

This research uses cultivated potato, which is the world's third largest food
crop after wheat and rice. While most crops grow from true seeds, potatoes are
vegetatively propagated and multiplied for several years in the field. Without
proper management, disease incidence in potato can rise to devastating levels
within a few years. PVX and PVY are significant viruses that gravely impact
potato yield and marketability, and economically impact producers. The global
spread of necrotic PVY strains has created new challenges for producers. There
is an urgent need to advance the knowledge of genes in potato responding to
virus disease. The overarching, long- term goal is to improve potato resistance
to PVX and PVY infection. This research will uncover the mechanisms of how
plants can respond to virus stress and adapt to challenging environments. This
research will investigate a key set of stress response genes that protect plants
against drought and virus infection. This research will also explore how a set
of proteins known as BiPs suppress disease and determine how these can be used
to provide protection against virus infection. We will use this information to
improve potato production strategies and effective breeding practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a central hub for
responses to adverse environmental challenges in plants such as virus infection,
heat, chemical, osmotic, and salt stress. The physiological consequences of
prolonged low-level ER stress include constrained plant development and
productivity, whereas chronic stress can result in death and crop losses. Three
well known monitoring/sensing pathway use the transcription factors bZIP60,
bZIP28 and/or bZIP17 to activate cellular adaptive responses. They coordinate
the transcription of molecular chaperones, including the ER lumen binding
protein (BiP). It is well known that Arabidopsis plants overexpressing certain
BiP isoforms display greater tolerance to virus infections and heat and osmotic
stresses. The central hypothesis motivating the project is that bZIP60, bZIP28,
and bZIP17 differentially up-regulate expression of BiP isoforms that
ameliorates ER stress and cell death regulation in solanaceous plants, such as
potato and tobacco. The research team will test a model in which ER stress
sensors and BiP isoforms are engaged in N. benthamiana and potato to provide
cellular protection against virus infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.