* 1759505
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Shaping Future Scientists: Student Labor and Training in the Knowledge Economy
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Timothy Sacco, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 03/31/2020
* USD 17,875.00

Graduate and undergraduate students are training to be the next generation of
scientists while performing much of the daily work in scientific knowledge
production. This doctoral dissertation research improvement project investigates
how changes in the knowledge economy influence these training and work dynamics.
The extent of collaboration between faculty scientists and industry scientists
has grown in recent decades. Together, academic and industry scientists have
made breakthroughs that have improved human health, technology, and production
processes. This project investigates how graduate student training in science
and engineering is changing in response to these closer connections between
academia and industry. Through understanding changes in the knowledge economy
and how graduate student training supports knowledge production, this project
addresses the need to integrate graduate students more effectively into the US
science and engineering workforce. The project also has implications for
broadening participation in science and engineering, as the results will bring
out the ways female and male graduate students are recruited and retained in
science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project
employs two qualitative research methods: ethnography and interviews. The
detailed ethnographic observations chart physical scientists' daily practices
surrounding research, collaboration, and the training of students. Observations
are conducted at a research center and with a training grant program. In
addition, observations at professional scientific meetings will expand the scope
for understanding the complex role students play in knowledge production. These
data reveal how graduate students are trained to disseminate their scientific
knowledge, and collaborate with colleagues in academic and industry settings
outside of their own campus. Interviews with students, faculty, and research
support personnel provide data on the experiences and perceptions that
scientists have of wider changes in the knowledge economy, and of their own
collaborations. Observations and interviews will be supplemented with content
analysis of documents and written materials from each site and from professional
scientific associations. This project aims to understand not only the dynamics
of work and professionalization for students training to become scientists, but
also to uncover student perceptions of broader changes in the knowledge economy.
The research will generate new knowledge on how relationships between academic
and industry science shape student work, training, and professional development.
The findings from this dissertation project will inform policy discussions about
the future development of the U.S. scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.