* 1759844
* ABI Sustaining: The CIPRES Science Gateway, a Resource for Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Wayne Pfeiffer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,132,807.00

Understanding the evolution of life on earth is of fundamental importance in
virtually every field of modern biology. The study of evolutionary relationships
helps researchers understand and respond to the origin and spread of viruses,
develop strategies to preserve existing species, mitigate the impact of invasive
species, and determine how environmental changes impact populations, shaping
local and global ecologies. The information obtained from evolutionary research
informs both agricultural and medical policies, two areas where the potential
impact on national and global economies is substantial. At present, evolutionary
research is critically dependent on the analysis of large amounts of DNA
sequence data. Phylogenetic analyses and population genetics studies of sequence
data are computationally intensive and are accomplished most efficiently through
access to powerful high performance computing resources. This project will
sustain the operation of the CIPRES Science Gateway, a premiere web service for
analyzing sequence data that has provided 30,000+ researchers around the world
with easy access to high&amp;#8208;performance computers at no charge. CIPRES
lets individual investigators and multi&amp;#8208;national research teams
analyze their data anywhere an internet connection is available, and it makes
running the analyses as easy as possible for researchers with little knowledge
of high&amp;#8208;performance computing. Analyses run by CIPRES produce results
10&amp;#8208;to&amp;#8208;100&amp;#8208;fold faster than is possible on a laptop
computer. As a result, comprehensive studies can be completed more quickly, and
large studies that are not practical on laptop computers can now be completed
successfully. CIPRES thus dramatically improves researcher productivity and
democratizes access to high&amp;#8208;performance computing, allowing
investigators to contribute to the growing understanding of evolution on earth,
independent of their local resources. The impact of CIPRES on the rate of
discovery has been substantial; it has supported more than 4,500 published
research studies since 2010 and has been used by 90+ instructors in classroom
environments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CIPRES currently supports 10,000+
researchers annually who are investigating the evolutionary history of proteins,
viruses, bacteria, plants, and animals; identifying new genera and species;
evaluating and developing new techniques; and exploring the evolutionary history
of diverse populations. This project will sustain the continued online presence
of CIPRES for these researchers through the following activities: provide
browser and RESTful access to current versions of community phylogenetics and
population genetics codes deployed on high&amp;#8208;performance computing
resources supported separately by the NSF XSEDE project; update the codes and/or
usage policies to help users do more computationally demanding analyses; adapt
the codes and policies to changes in available XSEDE resources and the local
operating environment; modify the underlying software to support new code
capabilities and correct any functionality or usability issues that arise;
minimize negative impacts of planned and unplanned system outages on hundreds of
simultaneous jobs; provide outreach by making presentations at professional
meetings and hosting workshops to improve connection with the systematics
community; monitor usage statistics to better understand and improve the
effectiveness of CIPRES; and procure allocations of supercomputer resources to
support the large CIPRES user community. The project will also sustain the
CIPRES Workbench Framework, an open source software package that underlies
CIPRES and that has been adopted by four other biology communities to create
their own gateways. CIPRES can be accessed at
http://www.phylo.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.