* 1759837
* TRANSFORM-PGR: Mining the compact Utricularia genome as source of novel regulatory elements for crop biotechnology
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Wayne Parrott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 487,811.00

The goal of this project is to advance plant genetic engineering technology and
enable next-generation research and plant-improvement to help meet the upcoming
challenges in agriculture. The need for increased but sustainable food
production needs to be addressed through many approaches. Bioengineering can
help address human food security through crop improvement. These improved crops
will range from varieties highly adapted to diverse climates to crops with
improved nutrition, that are better able to resist pests, use less water and
fertilizer, or make the raw materials for bioplastics and other biodegradable
materials. To make these plants a reality, it is first necessary to develop the
ability to bioengineer multiple traits into plants. Current technology can place
many genes close together and insert them into a crop; however, placing these
genes close to each other causes them to interfere with each other. Hence,
plants typically put a lot of space between their genes, but there is at least
one plant known, the bladderwort, that has solved the problem of gene spacing
its genome has many genes that are close together, but do not interfere with one
another. The bladderwort also contains shortened versions of other DNA sequences
that control when and where genes are expressed. This project uses
bioinformatics to identify the bladderwort DNA sequences that allow for close
spacing of genes, and to isolate the shorter versions of DNA control sequences.
The function of each sequence will be validated empirically, and then made
publicly available. The research team will also use the bladderwort sequences to
find similar control sequences in other plants, including important crop
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the lack of appropriate DNA regulatory
elements can make it difficult to get coordinated expression of multiple genes
cloned into one vector. A few DNA insulators have been identified in plants that
prevent interference from neighboring genes, but these insulators are so large
their use makes vectors impossibly large. The compact genome (just 82 Mb) of
Utricularia gibba (bladderwort) has solved many of these expression issues as it
evolved. Expression patterns makes it clear this species has compact promoters,
terminators, and insulators, as well as bidirectional promoters. Identification,
cloning and validation of these elements and their function will provide a set
of tools that will enable the routine use of multiple gene engineering. The DNA
elements identified in this project will be made publicly available via AddGene,
and thus contribute to a new generation of genetic engineering vectors. The
researchers will also use the bladderwort sequences to identify similar
conserved regulatory elements across angiosperms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.