* 1759883
* Collaborative Proposal: ABI Development: An Integrated Platform for Retrieval, Visualization and Analysis of 3D Morphology From Digital Biological Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ali Maga, Seattle Children's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 807,246.00

The anatomical structure of an organism can provide important clues about its
adaptation to its environment, its evolutionary history and its systematic
relationships. The morphometric (quantitative) study of the organism's shape and
function is typically conducted at natural history museums, by measuring the
specimen directly. High-resolution 3D imaging techniques (e.g., micro computed
tomography) provide us to capture the internal and external anatomy of
biological specimens in unprecedented detail. Likewise, online virtual
"collections" (e.g., MorphoSource) provide a convenient access to these
datasets, without requiring scientists to travel to different museums to collect
their data. However, the complex nature of these 3D datasets makes them
challenging to analyze for most researchers. In this project, we propose to
develop an open-source software to retrieve and visualize 3D biological
specimens from online museums. We will also develop tools for the scientists to
measure and analyze the anatomy more easily. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric
Morphometrics Methods (GMM) are a set of quantitative analytical techniques that
rely on landmarks to capture organismal shape and form. This project proposes to
develop a GMM module for open-source 3D-Slicer (Slicer) visualization software
as an integrated toolkit to address challenges researchers face working with 3D
anatomical data. In addition to manual annotation of landmarks, the toolkit will
provide two distinct (user-guided and automated) types of semi-landmarking
methods to enable general purpose dense spatial sampling for different study
designs. Annotated landmark data can be analyzed in the GMM module using the
Generalized Procrustes Analysis (GPA). Shape variation associated with GPA can
be decomposed as principal warps and can be visualized in full 3D. Toolkit will
also provide a data aggregator (SpecMart) that will query online 3D specimen
repository MorphoSource by taxonomy (and other tokens), retrieve and visualize
data within Slicer. We will train students in theory and application of 3D image
segmentation, analysis and visualization as it applies to nonmedical volumetric
imaging datasets to facilitate reproducible and high-throughput analysis of such
datasets. The toolkit will be developed as an add-on package to Slicer using
open-source toolchains and software development platforms (such as git). The
stable versions of the module will be distributed through Extension Manager of
Slicer (and its online portal) and documentation will be hosted on their site.
The open-source nature of this development and use of the Slicer community's
existing infrastructure that has been in existence more than 15 years to
distribute and support the toolkit will mean that the software will be widely
available for many years to come and can be supported (and potentially expanded)
by the user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.