* 1759006
* Curriculum and Community Enterprise for Restoration of a Keystone Species in New York Harbor
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Christelle Scharff, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 02/28/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by expanding and testing
an innovative curriculum model that features locally relevant, problem-based
learning. The curriculum model is organized around habitat restoration in New
York harbor and will engage students and teachers in a sequence of activities
that span the elementary, middle school, and high school grades of the nation's
largest urban school system. Students will conduct field research in support of
restoring native oyster habitats, and the project will be implemented by a broad
partnership of institutions and community resources, including Pace University,
the New York City Department of Education, the Columbia University Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory, the New York Academy of Sciences, the New York Harbor
Foundation, the New York Aquarium, and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on important concepts in the geological, environmental, and biological
sciences that typically receives inadequate attention in schools: watersheds and
the roles of keystone species. This project builds on and extends the Billion
Oyster Project of the New York Harbor School. The project model includes several
interrelated components, including: a teacher education curriculum that includes
a component for elementary teachers that focuses on restoration science; a
student learning curriculum; a digital platform for project resources; an
aquarium exhibit; an after-school STEM mentoring program and a near-peer
mentoring program; community based restoration science hubs, and advanced
methods in restoration science for high school students that includes genetic
barcoding (species ID), environmental DNA sampling and analysis, bacterial
monitoring, and basic water chemistry analysis. The project targets students in
low-income neighborhoods with high populations of English language learners and
students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields and education pathways. The
project will directly involve 97 schools, over 300 teachers, and approximately
15,000 K-12 students over a period of four years. A quasi-experimental, mixed-
methods research plan will be used to assess the individual and collective
effectiveness of project components. Multivariate analyses will be used to
identify effective program aspects and assess the individual effectiveness of
participation in various combinations of program components. Questions guiding
the research include: 1. How does the project influence motivation and
preparation to pursue STEM careers among K-12 students? 2. What aspects of the
project have a positive influence on underrepresented students' motivation and
preparation to pursue STEM careers, compared to other students? And 3. What
curricular innovations associated with the project contribute to heightened
awareness of and intent to pursue STEM careers among
students?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.