* 1759254
* Promoting Commenting and Debugging in Early Years Programming
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Laura Bofferding, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 397,606.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivation and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). It is essential that
STEM professionals effectively and efficiently communicate and justify
processes, and find and fix mistakes. In this project, researchers will
investigate how students' explanations during play, and the use of step-by-step
demonstrations of problem-solving, called worked examples, can enable early
elementary school students, female students in particular, to gain familiarity
and competency with commenting and debugging computer programming code.
Establishing these practices in elementary education could help create a
workforce where commenting on code and explaining one's process of thinking is
natural and expected. The project will connect students' programming experiences
with those of industry professionals in an effort to increase their interest in
future STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a series of interventional
sessions, pairs of first- and third-graders will work in partners to learn how
to program using the Coding Awbie game by OSMO(TM). In particular, researchers
will investigate the following research questions over two years: (1) How and
when do first- and third-graders comment on and debug their code during free-
play compared to when they are asked to explain what they will do before
playing, i.e., explained play? (2) How does students' commenting and debugging
compare and change depending on if they analyze worked examples before or after
their play? (3) How does students' commenting and debugging of worked examples
relate to their explaining and correcting errors in mathematics problems in
addition to computer coding? (4) How does the intervention affect students'
early attitudes toward programming and knowledge of the role of programming in
STEM professions? Measures include programming and mathematics explanation and
debugging tasks as well as surveys related to programming. Through this repeated
measures design, researchers will learn what conditions best support students'
explaining and debugging while learning to code within the program, and students
will gain important STEM practices in their early years of elementary education.
Further, presentations by industry professionals will help connect the practices
to a variety of STEM careers, helping students see the relevance of the
practices of explaining and debugging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.