* 1759980
* ABI Innovation: ProteoCarta: a community-scale resource for multi-species proteomics big data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nuno Bandeira, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 898,780.00

Proteomics research focuses on high throughput analysis of proteins, with the
ultimate goal of understanding their role in the molecular biology of both
simple and complex organisms. Following the successful development of mass
spectrometry (MS) technologies, that have enabled the identification and
quantification of many thousands of proteins in hundreds of species, the high
throughput tandem mass spectrometry approach has become the method of choice for
the overwhelming majority of large scale proteomics studies. Data acquisition
has proceeding at faster and faster rates, and, combined with the reliability of
large scale repositories (e.g., PRIDE, MassIVE, etc) and with journal
publication guidelines for quality and annotation, the result has been public
availability of hundreds of terabytes of well documented proteomics MS data. The
total volume of proteomics data is currently doubling about every 1.5 years.
There is tremendous potential for untapped discoveries lying in these 9000+
public datasets. Unfortunately the drive for sharing of raw data has not been
accompanied by corresponding efforts to provide protein identification and
abundance data, that are required for initial verification by MS experts and
subsequent re-use by scientists who are not MS experts. As it stands today, less
than 0.1% of all public non-human proteomics MS data only report identifications
at the most minimal standards that show acceptable statistical controls;
essentially no datasets report quantitative results. The ProteoCarta platform
created through this award will address this problem by i) systematically
reanalyzing public datasets using advanced computational mass spectrometry
workflows and ii) organizing the results in a structured database so that
results will be accessible through intuitive query
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on computational MS
platforms that have already processed over 10 billion spectra in 700,000 jobs
from thousands of users in 122 countries, this proposal aims to address this
community-scale challenge with a new ProteoCarta resource equipped to
systematically reprocess proteomics MS big data from hundreds of species and
designed to integrate all results into an open knowledge base that indexes
repository-scale global proteomics data. ProteoCarta will significantly scale
state of the art algorithms to enable analysis of hundreds of terabytes of data
and will extend and integrate new spectral network algorithms for large scale
discovery of protein variations within and across samples and species, including
MS detection of sequence variants as well as discovery of unexpected or novel
post-translational modifications. In addition to releasing all data and analysis
results in standard open formats, ProteoCarta results will be directly attached
to reanalyzed public datasets, to be stored at MassIVE, whereby hundreds of
scientists will be automatically notified of the updates and directly encouraged
to actively explore the new results on their own data. Links to resources will
be provided through https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~nbandeir/software.html and
https://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.