* 1760251
* Collaborative Research: High-Strain-Rate Dynamics of Copolymer Microparticles for Advanced Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sinan Muftu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 194,187.00

In the cold particle gas spray manufacturing technique, sub- or super-sonic
spraying of feedstock powders or micro-size polymeric particles can enable
unique additive processing without the use of volatile organic compounds due to
the extreme deformation of the microparticles during the collisions onto a
substrate. As the consolidation occurs below the microparticles' melting
temperature, extraordinary nanostructures created by the collision-induced
deformation can remain and contribute to the performance of the end products.
Thus, advanced additive manufacturing with the capability of nanoscale
engineering of materials being deposited can be envisioned. Multiphase
copolymers can serve as a promising material platform as they exhibit favorable
inherent material behavior for cold particle gas spray process. This project
intends to provide comprehensive and fundamental knowledge of the nanoscale
morphologies of copolymers created under such process using an integrated
experimental-computational approach. It is envisioned that a deeper
understanding of high-strain-rate behavior of multiphase polymers will not only
facilitate the development of the cold particle gas spray manufacturing
technique but will also advance knowledge of materials use in extreme
environments for defense applications, thereby promoting the progress of
science; advancing the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and securing
the national defense. The educational and outreach plan in this project
includes: curriculum updates, development of a new teaching model based on
student-led group projects and videography, and introduction to science and
engineering for high school students through a specialized class at a local
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to determine the high
strain-rate dynamic characteristics of multiphase block copolymers consisting of
mechanically distinctive (hard/glassy and soft/rubbery) polymer blocks, for
eventual application in cold particle gas spray manufacturing. High-velocity
collision experiments of single copolymer micro-particle will be performed to
achieve this. Under precise collision conditions including particles? kinetic
energy, angular momentum, and temperature, high-strain-rate rheology and various
transitions in phase and morphology will be studied. The research team will also
perform simulations based on the development of new constitutive models.
Detailed high-strain-rate dynamics of deformation and the contributions from
nanoscale characteristics of the polymers to the manufacturing process will be
quantitatively investigated. The successful completion of this project will
establish a new microscopic methodology to understand high strain-rate
characteristics of multiphase polymers. The data from this research will be made
available in a publicly accessible database for wider
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.