* 1760999
* Understanding Particle Scale Motion Initiation Physics for Loose-laid Building Rooftop Aggregates in Severe Windstorms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Nigel Kaye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 369,968.00

Loose-laid aggregate is commonly used on building rooftops either as ballast or
as part of increasingly popular green roof systems. However, the individual
stones can become airborne during severe storms such as hurricanes, tornadoes,
and thunderstorms. Once airborne, the particles can damage buildings downwind
and destabilize the roof from which they are removed. The mechanics of exactly
how the wind lifts up individual particles is poorly understood, particularly in
the complex wind flow around and over a building. This research will combine
state-of-the-art, large-scale wind tunnel testing with detailed computational
modeling to establish the aerodynamic forces acting on individual particles as
they become airborne. The knowledge generated from this research will enable
engineers to design building roof systems that are significantly less prone to
aggregate blow-off, thus creating safer buildings and surroundings during severe
storms. Learning modules based on the research findings will be developed for
undergraduate and graduate fluid mechanics courses. The research also will be
used as a platform in Clemson University's EMAG!NE program to engage high school
science and math students in outreach activities related to windstorms and other
natural hazards. The research team will include a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students working with faculty in South Carolina and Florida. Data
from this project will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org/). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will, for
the first time, elucidate the physics of loose-laid particle motion initiation
in a non-uniform, highly separated turbulent flow. The combination of large- and
full-scale wind tunnel experimentation, Large Eddy Simulation (LES)
computational modeling, and model validation using physical tests will produce a
comprehensive understanding of the mechanics of particle motion initiation. This
project will use the NSF-supported NHERI Wall of Wind facility at Florida
International University for experimentation. The experiments and simulations
will produce data on the surface shear stress distribution over a roof surface
and its correlation with the pressure field. The research approach of examining
particle scale loading and developing physics-based criteria for motion
initiation can transform the understanding of other scour problems and mark a
significant departure from models that assume uniform flow. This research will
move away from empirical approaches to scour that assume shear stress and
horizontal aerodynamic drag as the dominant factors for the motion initiation
process. By modeling the individual physical processes that, when coupled,
result in particle motion, the research can be extended to other erosion
problems in unsteady separated flows. The mitigation study on parapets will
result in a comprehensive data set on the load changes that result from placing
parapets above flat roofs. Combined with the LES modeling, this research will
improve the understanding of the role of parapets in building aerodynamics and
can lead to safer building designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.