* 1760183
* Assessing the Influence of Hazard Mitigation Planning on Disaster Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ward Lyles, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,808.00

This research project fills a critical gap in knowledge about the influence of
pre-disaster hazard mitigation planning on post-disaster recovery, and
reductions in long-term risk from natural hazards like hurricanes and floods.
Common sense holds that mitigation planning done before a major disaster should
help reduce disaster impacts and shape recovery, including whether decision-
makers leverage the window of opportunity that opens after a disaster to avoid
repeating decisions from the past such as concentrating development in
floodplains that increase long-term risk. This project overcomes two barriers
that have previously limited research on linkages between mitigation planning
and recovery decision-making: 1) lack of comprehensive datasets on hazard
mitigation planning and 2) datasets that do exist do not cover areas hit by
major disasters. The research team's prior work in North Carolina and with
Hurricanes Matthew and Florence provide unique opportunities to resolve both
barriers by first collecting data on post-disaster recovery decision making,
outputs like planning documents, and outcomes like decisions to steer
development out of known hazardous locations. And second, coupling these
recovery data with the researchers' data on hazard mitigation from earlier in
the 2000s in quantitative analysis and case studies. In addition to new
scientific knowledge, the research activities will generate timely and novel
policy and practice-relevant information, extend the foundation of datasets
needed for longitudinal and comparative analyses, and strengthen the hazards
research community. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve community planning and
mitigation for disasters which can save lives and reduce economic
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically, pre-disaster hazard mitigation
planning can improve post-disaster decision-making by 1) improving local
decision-making processes by fostering a collaborative network of local
stakeholders, 2) generating plans that organize information and prioritize
approaches to reduce long-term risks, and 3) increasing implementation of
locally prioritized mitigation approaches, including non-structural approaches
like prohibiting rebuilding in floodplains and restoring wetlands. Hurricanes
Matthew and Florence create a natural experiment aligning with a multi-
dimensional dataset on hazard mitigation planning generating as part of a
national evaluation of the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000. The overarching
hypothesis for this project is that communities with higher quality pre-disaster
hazard mitigation planning and implementation will have reduced disaster
impacts, and will better capitalize on the post-disaster window of opportunity
to pursue non-structural mitigation approaches in recovery than communities with
lower quality pre-disaster hazard mitigation efforts. This proposed research
will collect data on decision making, planning outputs, and planning outcomes
during hurricane recovery through content analysis of mitigation and recovery
documents, surveys and interviews with key stakeholders, field visits to matched
pairs of case counties, and from secondary sources. Multivariate regression
modeling will identify the strength and directions of relationships between pre-
event hazard mitigation and post-disaster recovery decision-making, outputs, and
outcomes, controlling for the external and internal influences, such as hazard
intensity and social vulnerability. Detailed case studies will complement and
extend the knowledge generated from the regression modeling by examining the
role of local champions in advancing support for non-structural mitigation among
local stakeholders and decision-makers and conducting fine-grained analysis of
whether variation in pre-event implementation of mitigation approaches (e.g.
non-structural vs. structural) was associated with reduced damage and
disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.