* 1760389
* BGSU ALLIES: Building Inclusive Leadership Practices and Policies to Transform the Institution
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Ogawa, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 984,484.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bowling Green State University (BGSU)
Adaptation project will implement activities to improve the representation and
advancement of women STEM faculty at BGSU. BGSU will develop the ALLIES project
which adapts evidence-based strategies from two ADVANCE-IT projects to build
faculty allies within departments and inclusive leaders across the university:
North Dakota State University's "Advocates &amp; Allies" program and Florida
International University's "Deep Change" program. The ALLIES project will focus
on how administrators and faculty allies can work collaboratively to reduce
biases and transform institutional policies and practices. Department allies
ensure equitable review of job candidates and evaluation of faculty, serve as
mentors to support colleagues' careers, and intervene when bias emerges.
Inclusive leaders advocate for faculty and ensure policies and practices produce
an equitable workplace. The long-term goal of the project is to make allyship
and inclusive leadership the expectation and norm at BGSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inclusion, intersectionality, and interconnections--the 3
I's--serve as the unifying theme of all BGSU ALLIES programming. The BGSU ALLIES
model is innovative because it integrates the concepts of allyship--rooted in
the activities of faculty colleagues within departmental cultures--and inclusive
leadership--the domain of department chairs, deans and other senior
administrators--into a single unified program of institutional transformation.
This approach is directed both top-down and bottom-up, as neither is likely to
be effective alone. The BGSU ALLIES project has four objectives: 1) revise
institutional policies and processes to make allyship and inclusive leadership
the expectation for faculty and administrators, 2) design training materials,
workshops, and online modules to train and develop departmental allies and
inclusive leaders, 3) deploy new data collection processes for better tracking
of faculty careers, and 4) disseminate training materials and best practices to
other institutions through a strategic communication plan and a regional
conference at BGSU. Most research on ally building in higher education settings
focus on students therefore this project will contribute important new
information about faculty and administrator allies to that
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.