* 1760757
* Family Support of Math and Science: Examining an Untapped Source of Resilience for Diverse High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jacquelynne Eccles, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2022
* USD 979,734.00

High school is a critical turning point in many students' STEM coursework and
career trajectories. For example, students' math motivation peaks in high school
yet 45% of 10th graders who express interest in pursuing a STEM career lose that
interest by the end of high school. Adolescents with minimal math and science
high school coursework are extremely unlikely to either try or be able to enter
STEM college majors and careers. To change these trends, it is necessary to
understand how best to support high school students in math and science.
Moreover, to increase the diversity of the nation's STEM workforce, it is
important to understand whether motivational processes work differently for
youth who reside at the intersections of demographic characteristics such as
gender, race and social class. The current body of research on social factors
that contribute to high school students' STEM motivation is largely based on
studies of Caucasian families. This project exemplifies the Education and Human
Resources Core Research program's commitment to fundamental research on learning
in STEM that combines theory, techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of
disciplines and contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from expectancy-value
motivational theory, social positioning theories and feminist intersectionality
theory, this project has five aims that center around understanding the role
that parents play in students' STEM trajectories. Family support matters because
it has been recognized as an important factor in maintaining student interest.
To achieve its aims, the project team will analyze four waves of data from the
High School Longitudinal Study (HSLS). The HSLS includes a nationally
representative sample of 21,444 9th graders. It offers a large, rich sample to
study intersectionality as defined by students' simultaneous status on multiple
demographic indicators. The data includes longitudinal multi-reporter
information on student motivation, outcomes, and parent support in math and
science. Students' trajectories will be traced at 9th grade, 11th grade, the
fall immediately after high school graduation, and 3 years after high school.
The role of other socializing factors such as school and peer experiences are
also examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.