* 1760010
* RAPID: Preservation of 3D Damage Data for Reality-Capture-Enhanced Modeling of Engineered Steel Structures on the Texas Coast Subjected to 2017 Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Robert DeOtte, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2019
* USD 29,961.00

Hurricane Harvey, the first major hurricane to strike the United States in
nearly a decade, made landfall near Rockport, Texas, on August 25, 2017, and
caused substantial wind damage to steel and cold-formed steel buildings in this
area. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will use the West Texas A&M
University (WTAMU) laser scanner and digital cameras, recently acquired through
an NSF Major Research Instrumentation grant, to capture and preserve digital 3D
models of steel buildings damaged in the Rockport area during this hurricane.
The building models will be shared with other researchers through the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org) to better understand the behavior of steel
structures subjected to high winds and advance new design methodologies and
mitigation techniques for hurricane-resilient buildings. In this RAPID study,
the relatively new WTAMU engineering program will obtain a significant hurricane
damage dataset that can position the faculty for research collaborations with
other academic institutions. This study will also provide pathways for advanced
research topics for undergraduate students, and collaborations with other
research institutions will provide exposure and foster encouragement for
undergraduate students to pursue graduate education.

This project will collect and archive damage data for engineered (industrial)
steel and cold-formed steel buildings affected by winds generated by Hurricane
Harvey in the Rockport area. The relatively simple load paths of such buildings
make them ideal for early exploration of "reality-capture-enhanced" modeling
techniques. Although buildings are designed to have certain minimum strengths
and to resist certain minimum wind speeds, buildings generally have strength
above and beyond their intended design strengths. Often it is not known exactly
how much "reserve" strength such buildings have (and what wind speeds are
required to cause damage) unless they are damaged by winds of known speeds.
Because Hurricane Harvey's approximate landfall location was predicted in
advance, wind scientists and engineers were able to position specialized
equipment in the path of the storm to measure the wind speeds. As a result,
records of wind speeds throughout the area affected by the high winds of
Hurricane Harvey are now available, and researchers are able to correlate
various types of building damage with wind speeds. The project will target
buildings within areas of various known wind speeds that exhibit a range of
damage levels. The research team will utilize NOAA aerial imagery and Google
imagery to assist with the selection of buildings to be investigated. The
project will acquire perishable 3D damage data for steel buildings using high-
resolution terrestrial laser scanning equipment (LiDAR) as well as digital SLR
cameras to acquire images to facilitate the creation of digital photogrammetry
models. Preservation of these damage data can facilitate the forensic analysis
of steel and cold-formed steel construction for the development or validation of
fragility methods, can enable an evaluation of the effectiveness of wind design
provisions along the U.S. hurricane coast, and can highlight needs for future
research necessary to achieve more hurricane-resilient buildings. The acquired
data will enable comparison of LiDAR and photogrammetry information streams -
identifying which option may be optimal under specific circumstances (e.g.,
available equipment, access, personnel, and field reconnaissance time).
Interaction with structural modelers will provide feedback regarding the utility
of the data captures and adjustments that may be necessary for future forensic
studies.