* 1760544
* Collaborative Research: New Insights into STEM Pathways: The Role of Peers, Networks, and Demand.
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Bruce Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2022
* USD 745,764.00

The project is a collaborative effort involving researchers from New York
University, Ohio State University, and University of Michigan Ann Arbor who are
extending work on a previous project that links multiple data sets to conduct
longitudinal analyses of STEM student outcomes. The current project leverages
the research infrastructure that was supported by prior awards to examine how
peer effects, network connections, and employer demand shape career outcomes for
doctoral students. It integrates comprehensive administrative data for 113,000
doctoral students, UMETRICS research data, Proquest data on dissertations with
information on fields of study and research, and restricted Census Bureau data
on earnings and employment outcomes. Dara integration will occur under the
umbrella of the Institute for Research on Innovation and Science (IRIS). The
project will contribute new knowledge by articulating and testing key aspects of
a novel conceptual model of STEM career choices. This theoretical and empirical
work will establish basic facts about how demand and training conditions shape
early STEM career choices that can be determine only through the integration of
separate datasets. The project is supported by the Education and Human Resources
Core Research Program, which funds fundamental research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design integrates three
approaches - peer-based, network-based, and demand. In their peer-based
approach, the researchers propose to take the composition of peers in entering
graduate cohorts to be quasi-random and estimate how the composition of peers
interacts with their own characteristics. A second set of analyses involves
identifying labs from the data and estimating how the composition of the persons
in a lab relate to outcomes. The network-based approach will be used to examine
how individual differences in social capital shape doctoral student outcomes.
The demand will answer the analytical question of the effect of actual and
perceived labor market demand on the choice of careers. The analysis will begin
with a description of the early career outcomes of students from undergraduate
dropouts to college graduates, from master's students to Ph.D. dropouts to
doctoral recipients. In addition to enhancing the infrastructure to conduct
robust workforce development research, the project will provide a more
comprehensive analysis of the role and impact of peer networks on STEM workforce
development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.