* 1760831
* Pre-service Educators Reimagining Core Experiences in Physics Teaching
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Borland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 733,392.00

The need to prepare a skilled and motivated STEM workforce who can meet the
demands of a dynamic and complex global economy is a widely recognized national
challenge. This project, a cross-institutional collaboration among North
Carolina State University, the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, and
Davidson College, capitalizes on advances in technology to respond to that
challenge. It aims to provide empirical evidence on the enhancement of
foundational physics concepts of pre-service elementary school teacher
candidates, key players in the development of the STEM professional workforce,
using haptically-enabled science simulations (HESSs). Haptics is an umbrella
term for the sense of touch (in this case virtual touch). The HESSs are virtual
representations of real-world systems, displayed visually, and augmented with
haptic force-feedback. Users can physically interact with multiple (often
invisible) components of the modeled system (in this case) forces. The project
team's underlying premise is that if soon-to-be teachers (re)learn core physics
concepts more deeply, they will be empowered to provide richer learning
opportunities for their students. This project will provide pre-service
elementary school teachers access to ideas (in physics) and tools (technological
and pedagogical) with the potential to influence how they approach the teaching
of basic physics concepts in the elementary grades, as their students are just
entering the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets two
intertwined focal areas of the EHR Core Research (ECR) program: STEM workforce
development and STEM learning and learning environments. Building upon prior
work involving HESSs, this project will work with undergraduate pre-service
elementary school teachers to examine implications for the use of HESSs during
their preparation. The project team will investigate pre-service elementary
school teachers' understandings of forces as interactions (a foundational
concept in physics) and the influence of haptic force-feedback technology. The
project adopts an embodied cognition perspective in the design, building, and
testing of its intervention. It uses a mixed-methods approach to examine the
interfaces between teaching and learning and the mediation of STEM learning
through fundamental use-inspired research. The design, develop, and testing
research cycle will include focus groups, usability testing, and small-scale
pilot testing. The pilot testing will use a pretest-posttest control group
design with random assignment into two groups, haptic vs. non-haptic
simulations. This research has the potential to provide foundational knowledge
for a new model of teaching about core physics concepts in the form of HESSs.
Project goals are to (1) add foundational human-computer interaction knowledge
to guide the design, development, and testing of HESSs, (2) isolate and document
the haptic influences on the development of teachers' specialized content
knowledge of forces as interactions, and (3) study the pedagogical impact of the
HESSs on pre-service elementary school teachers. In addition to the benefits to
the pre-service elementary teachers who participate, this project will train
graduate research assistants and involve undergraduate students in cutting-edge
STEM research, which also has the potential to contribute to STEM workforce
development. Project findings will be used to develop a set of design guidelines
for the haptic-augmentation of science simulations that can be used by other
researchers. Moreover, cross-institutional and cross-disciplinary partnerships,
such as this project, may enhance the infrastructure for STEM education and
research. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports fundamental research in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.