* 1760645
* RAPID:  Discovering Crises Within Crises - Real-Time Detection, Tracking and Visualization of Emergent Crises in Hurricanes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* John Taylor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 187,739.00

Hurricanes are a devastating natural disaster. Forecasters at the NOAA Climate
Prediction Center have predicted an above-normal hurricane season this year.
This prediction is already proving accurate as evidenced by the two massive and
devastating recent hurricanes: Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma. It is urgent
and time critical to develop, refine and test systems that can improve the
ability of first responders and emergency management agencies to identify
emergent crises before, during and after hurricanes. The research objective of
this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) is to develop a crisis detection, tracking
and visualization system. Social media data collected before, during and after
Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma will be used to develop and retrospectively
validate the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
improve the detection, tracking and visualization of emergent crises in
hurricanes and other large scale natural disasters in the future by enabling the
pinpointing of extreme crisis areas in the midst of an overall emerging crisis.
This will be accomplished without prior definition of crisis topics to enable
the detection of unexpected crises that are clustered in space and time,
potentially leading to more lives saved. It will further provide first responder
and emergency management agencies with a new understanding of the role
spatially-referenced social media can play in increasing the effectiveness of
disaster response efforts. The research findings and the detection, tracking and
visualization system will be disseminated in presentations to emergency
responders in coastal urban areas to demonstrate the system and encourage its
implementation in future tropical cyclone seasons.