* 1760971
* Theories of Urban Traffic Dynamics and Adaptive Control for the Age of Big Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Carlos Daganzo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 506,856.00

The project will explore how big-data technologies can be applied to traffic
signal control. The project will leverage recent advances in graph theory and
data science to identify distinct congestion patterns and develop unique
treatments that would adaptively treat traffic congestion on urban streets.
Extensive preliminary work has been conducted under idealized conditions and
this research will make the leap from idealized conditions to complex, real-
world settings, for significant impact in reducing congestion and aiding
economic growth for the nation. Algorithms designed for this project will be
open-source, with the potential to be implemented on ordinary traffic and
communication infrastructures. The development of a platform to simulate the
developed algorithms in realistic settings will be a valuable teaching and
outreach tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's transformative quality lies
in its plans to: (i) detect and distinguish the various geometric patterns that
traffic congestion can exhibit on city streets; and (ii) target treatments to
suit those distinct patterns. The detection of geometric patterns will be
pursued using big-data monitoring technologies, and by representing street
networks as graphs. Treatments envisioned for those distinct geometric patterns
entail the re-timing of traffic signals, both to adaptively meter cordoned
neighborhoods and to synchronize green phases to coincide with the dissipation
of queues immediately downstream. These will be integrated with another
treatment that expedites bus movements past traffic signals on as-needed bases.
Specific enhancements are envisioned for existing models of neighborhood
traffic, and for model-free, Reinforcement Learning approaches. The enhanced
methods will be used to predict how the treatments perform in complex, real-
world settings. The project will also explore how model and model-free
predictions might be continually refined using inputs measured and processed
with big-data technologies. Further exploration will then go toward coupling the
refined predictions with optimization techniques, so that treatments can adapt
over the day to suit a city's evolving congestion patterns. Once generalized in
the above ways, the treatments will be tested and refined using simulation. The
aforementioned algorithms will then be designed, and the refined treatments will
be coded into the simulation platform for teaching and outreach
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.