* 1760916
* Atomistic Mechanisms of Surface- and Interface-Mediated Creep in  Small-sized Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Scott Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,795.00

Irreversible, plastic deformation in polycrystalline metals normally arises from
the movement of line defects, also known as dislocations. However, in materials
composed of nanoscale agglomerations of crystals, i.e., nanograins, the
significant amount of crystal interfaces and free surfaces could dramatically
facilitate mass (atoms) transport, thereby leading to fundamentally new
atomistic deformation mechanisms and distinctive mechanical properties compared
to those of their large grain counterparts. Such surface or interface-mediated
diffusive plasticity (creep) has been found to play a significant role in
mechanical behaviour of nanomaterials even at room temperature. This project
will investigate the atomistic mechanisms governing the interface and surface
controlled diffusive plasticity in nanostructured metals through in-situ high-
resolution microscopy. The understanding achieved through this research will
have direct impact on the development of nanoscale metals and alloys with high
strength and ductility, facilitating development of advanced nanomechanical
devices with superior reliability. The results from this research will advance
experimental mechanics at the nanoscale, and the knowledge gained will advance
the national health, prosperity, and welfare by benefiting the materials and
manufacturing industries. The project will also embark on an extensive plan of
undergraduate and graduate curriculum development, training of underrepresented
undergraduate students in advanced engineering sciences through summer
internships, and outreach to elementary school students in collaboration with
the local science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to investigate the atomistic mechanisms governing grain boundary and surface
diffusive plasticity in nanostructured metallic systems through in-situ
observation under high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM).
Specifically, the research will be divided into two parts: firstly, the
interplay/competition between dislocation plasticity and diffusional creep will
be atomically resolved, with an emphasis on the coupled diffusive-displacive
processes at nanocrystal surfaces and the size dependent impact of surface
diffusion on the strength and ductility of nanocrystals; secondly, atomic scale
grain-boundary mass transport will be investigated in nano-size metals
consisting of low-angle grain boundaries during uniaxial stressing, and a
quantitative model will be developed to understand the contribution of such
grain-boundary-mediated diffusive process to the overall plasticity.
Understanding diffusional plastic deformation process of nanostructured metallic
materials will have direct impact on the development of nanoscale metals and
alloys with high strength and ductility to be used for advanced MEMS/NEMS with
superior reliability for elevated temperature
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.