* 1760817
* Systematic Design and Analysis of Closed-Loop Controllers for Automated Hypovolemia Treatment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Jin-Oh Hahn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 401,342.00

This project will create an engineering-driven approach for use in development
of comprehensive, automated treatment of critically ill patients suffering from
hypovolemia (low blood volume). The research will focus on developing methods to
monitor the patient?s overall blood volume state, creation of a mathematical
model of the patient?s blood system, developing an algorithm to guide treatment
decisions, and a system of controllers for treatment. The outcomes from this
project will advance national health and quality of care of hypovolemic patients
by improving treatment effectiveness as well as reducing healthcare costs. More
generally, it will further the progress of basic science related to the
automation of healthcare. This project will also support STEM education and
inclusion of diversity through its unique education and outreach activities to
attract under-represented groups to research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introduction
of closed-loop automation to the care of critically ill patients suffering from
hypovolemia has potential to overcome challenges related to patient safety and
treatment effectiveness. However, existing effort has mostly resorted to ad-hoc
control techniques in the absence of control-oriented mathematical models and
systematic model-based tools for real-time patient monitoring and closed-loop
treatment control. To address these challenges, this project seeks to develop a
suite of methods and tools to enable closed-loop automation of hypovolemia
treatment, including an array of control-oriented models of critically ill
patients under hypovolemia, disciplined procedures for system identification and
analysis of such models, novel techniques for real-time monitoring of a
patient's blood volume state leveraging such models, and systematic methods for
the design of model-based closed-loop hypovolemia treatment controllers. This
project will advance a wide spectrum of aspects related to closed-loop control
in medicine, ultimately contributing to improved quality of life of human
beings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.