* 1760347
* CRII: CHS: Human in the Loop: Safety for Semi-autonomous Driving Systems in Emergency Situations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/25/2017,07/31/2019
* Jing Chen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2019
* USD 97,786.00

Human-cyber physical systems (CPS) are systems in which the functions of
intelligent machines and human operators are well integrated. Such systems have
become increasingly pervasive, from intelligent manufacturing systems to smart
homes to automobiles. The existing intelligent technologies aim at reducing
human workload and increasing system safety, yet they also bring new safety
concerns. These concerns are particularly essential in emergency situations, in
which the human operator may be required to make decisions under time pressure
and high-level stress. The decisions made in these situations are often the most
important ones that can cause severe safety issues. This CRII project
investigates influential factors for human-CPS system safety in emergency
situations, using the semi-autonomous driving system as a concrete domain. The
project outcome will improve our understanding of the safety-critical factors
for semi-autonomous driving, inform the future design of other human-CPS
systems, and ultimately lead to a more efficient and safe
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the inclusion of human drivers in the
semi-autonomous systems makes the control tasks of the system more difficult
because the controller must allow for unanticipated input from the human driver.
Most existing work on the safety of such systems assumes a priori models that
are expected to fully characterize human behaviors. However, such assumptions
may become invalid when the human operator has to make a decision in emergency
situations, such as car crashes or malfunctions. The goal of this project is to
investigate systematically how the human-CPS system as a whole reacts to such
situations and examine influential factors of the human driver, the vehicle sub-
system, and the interaction. The proposed assessment measures of system safety
in emergency situations include human performance in response to unexpected
hazardous events, and human decision making during vehicle malfunctions caused
by cyber attacks.