* 1760009
* RAPID: Hurricane Harvey, natural disasters, and willingness to help over time
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Oleg Smirnov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 92,888.00

Greater willingness to help is an important source of assistance to victims of
natural disasters such as hurricanes. Such willingness may translate into
immediate desire to help (e.g., donate money) as well as the long-term
propensity to support policies contributing to disaster mitigation and
adaptation (at a possible cost to tax-payers). Willingness to help, however, may
be a product of complex interaction between individual socioeconomic status,
demographic characteristics, psychological attributes, political ideology, and
beliefs about the issue of climate change. Moreover, the rally effect may be
short-term for some but long-term for others. Understanding the complexity of
this relationship may increase efficiency of social mobilization to help victims
of natural disasters and contribute to greater environmental awareness and
support for natural disaster preparedness in general. The investigator proposes
to conduct a two-wave survey of public opinion on a nationally representative
sample of adults in the United States. The goal of the survey is to examine
respondents' reactions to hurricanes (specifically, Hurricane Harvey) and
analyze how individual attitudes and willingness to help change over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously, scholars suggested investigating the time
course of reactions to natural disasters but the temporal dimension of public
opinion in the context of hurricanes and other such disasters remains largely
unexplored. The proposed survey design examines possible deterioration of
empathetic concern for victims of the disaster in the context of individual
ideological preferences (e.g., liberal or conservative), partisan/political
identification, psychological traits (e.g., perspective taking, social
desirability bias), behavioral propensities (e.g., risk preferences, future
discounting), and social environment (e.g., existence of tangible social
support). An important goal of the project is to establish under which
conditions helping behavior is most stable and under which it is most fragile
and short-lived. Previous research has shown that willingness to help increases
if responsibility for disasters could be attributed to human actions (e.g.,
government), not natural phenomena (which traditionally included hurricanes).
Therefore, greater attribution of hurricanes to anthropogenic climate change has
a potential to promote helping behavior and environmental support in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.