* 1760025
* Electrochemical Separation and Recovery of Metals from Liquid Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Antoine Allanore, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 357,418.00

The research made possible by this award will explore faster, safer, and more
sustainable methods of precious metal recycling. This will guide researchers
toward understanding the science behind the processing of materials. By virtue
of its higher productivity, this new method can be utilized to the benefit of
the US manufacturing economy. Precious metals have seen an increased prevalence
in electronics; unfortunately, these devices have short lifetimes as they are
quickly discarded for newer models. This grant supports investigation of a new
method for metal recycling, called electrometallurgy, which makes use of
electric fields to separate and recycle metals from scrap. This approach
provides substantial benefits over existing methods for metal separation, which
involve combustion or harsh acid dissolution. This fundamental research will
investigate how electricity can be used to selectively recycle and purify the
many different metals contained in electronic waste, targeting the precious
metals (gold and silver). Bringing together the fields of processing science,
thermodynamics, chemical engineering, and electrochemistry, this cross-
disciplinary work will bring new knowledge of benefit to engineers in multiple
fields. The basic principles developed can be extended to the sustainable
production of metals for aerospace and defense, construction, and technology,
presenting a large benefit to the US economy as well as public health.
Furthermore, the computational tools developed in this work will be made widely
available as free teaching tools for thermodynamics. This online tool will reach
a broad and diverse audience, empowering students to pursue science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When compared to other recycling methods,
electrometallurgy has the potential to reduce the energy use by 80x and the time
needed for recycling by a factor of 10. In order to realize these benefits,
however, the electrochemistry of liquid alloy electrodes must be better
understood in order to be able to control which metal, among the many present in
electronic waste (e-waste), is recycled. Furthermore, a high-temperature
solvent, the first of its kind able to accommodate molten gold, copper, and
silver simultaneously, will be investigated. This research aims to understand
the underlying kinetic, transport, and thermodynamic factors that determine
which species is reduced at the cathode and oxidized at the anode made of melted
e-waste. A new model predicting which metals are stable and in what proportions
will be developed. In addition, the rate-limiting step in the process will be
verified with experimental electrochemical measurements. Advanced
electrochemical characterization techniques, such as alternating current cyclic
voltammetry, alongside traditional chronoamperometry and electromotive force
measurements, will be employed experimentally. Mutiphysics modeling,
thermodynamic calculations, and phase diagram predictions will be used to
iterate and optimize process conditions on the computational side. Together,
both experimental and modeling techniques will inform the underlying
fundamentals of electrochemical behavior of molten precious
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.