* 1760809
* Interaction of Tool Wear and the Machining Affected Zone in Nickel-Based Superalloys.
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Laine Mears, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2023
* USD 509,999.00

This award supports fundamental research in understanding the relationship of
tool wear evolution and vibrational stability to cutting mechanics when
machining nickel-based superalloys, to provide knowledge needed to plan new
approaches that can extend tool life and make behavior more consistent.
Application of this research will help reduce costs and improve quality for
high-value energy and aerospace systems, including defense applications. As
such, this project promotes the progress of science, advances national
prosperity and welfare, and helps secure national defense. Additionally, this
work includes a plan for broadening participation of underrepresented and
minority groups in scientific research by recruitment efforts through the
National GEM consortium and Clemson's Women in Science and Engineering (WISE)
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
decouple the variability in tool wear evolution models through a novel
experimental procedure, and to relate wear and machining parameters to the
plastic deformation layer (Machining Affected Zone, MAZ) depth in nickel-based
superalloys. The derived models will be used to simulate stable, robust and
minimum cost path plans. The approach to accomplishing this will be to model the
process parameters' effect on wear and cutting forces, and the subsequent
cumulative effect on the plastic deformation zone depth (i.e., MAZ) through a
stochastic representation approach, whereby model parameters are represented as
random-variable belief distributions. The knowledge generated will be applied to
deriving robust tool paths for improving the process consistency and
performance. If successful, the broader impacts of this work will include
improved economy of machining for energy and aerospace manufacturers, and
increased participation of underrepresented groups in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.