* 1760884
* Designing Multisite Mediation Studies to Track Teacher Development Processes in Mathematics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Kelcey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,996.00

There is widespread recognition that research on malleable teacher attributes
represents a critical component of the foundational knowledge necessary to
improve and advance STEM education. A method of research to understand how
teachers affect students is mediation analyses. Mediation analyses decode how
and why attributes are connected to student improvement by probing the
intermediate developmental processes and behaviors of teachers that
operationalize these relationships. Multi-school or multisite mediation studies
can build a multilayered body of evidence regarding if, how, and why specific
attributes help improve student outcomes. They can delineate how interventions
(e.g., through professional development programs) might improve both teacher and
student outcomes. They can concurrently map out teacher development processes,
create opportunities to discover, unpack and learn about variation in these
processes, and accommodate naturally occurring variation within schools.
Unfortunately, there are scant literature and tools available on methods and
strategies to intentionally design effective and efficient multi-school
mediation studies in the context of teacher development and effectiveness. In
this project, this line of inquiry will be enhanced by developing a theoretical
and empirical framework for multi-school mediation studies. The proposed work
aims to derive useful tools, that is new statistical estimators, principles, and
strategies for multisite designs that are widely applicable across STEM areas.
It also intends to develop empirically-based strategies and software for studies
of teacher development in mathematics. These tools integrate four key
components: (a) the development of statistical estimators to direct the design
of observational and experimental multisite studies of mediation, (b) the
development of an empirical basis from which to operationalize these strategies
for a rich array of teacher development processes, (c) the development of free
and accessible software to implement these results, and (d) the development of
training materials to improve the capacity of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a framework to direct
the effective and efficient design of multisite mediation studies of teacher
development in mathematics. A suite of tools--statistical, empirical, software,
and training--will be developed to prospectively design and implement multisite
mediation teacher development studies so that they are positioned to produce
effective, efficient, and comprehensive evidence. The work partitions into three
components. The first component aims to develop the statistical theory
underlying the effective and efficient design of multisite mediation studies and
has four objectives: (a) derive statistical power estimators for multisite
mediation in observational and experimental designs, (b) extend these formulas
to accommodate moderators of the mediation processes (under heterogeneous
teacher development processes), (c) extend these formulas to include covariates,
and (d) derive formulas to identify the optimal (most powerful) sampling plans
given constraints. The second component will apply the resulting statistical
theory to the study of teacher development in mathematics. The project intends
to develop empirical estimates of the parameters needed to design teacher
development studies by conducting a meta-analysis on a rich array of teacher
attributes and mediators in mathematics education. Specifically, the project
plans to develop (a) empirical estimates of the necessary parameters for
numerous teacher and student variables and (b) empirically-based guidelines and
strategies for improving the efficacy of multisite teacher development studies.
The final component is the development of software to carry out the above
formulas and calculations using free and user-friendly software and workshops to
train a broad range of researchers. Ultimately, this project seeks to improve
the scope and quality of evidence produced by mediation studies of teacher
development. The core platform is intended to be transferable to other STEM
education areas and STEM disciplines. Moreover, the software and workshops
developed in this project are intended to be used to distribute the results in
an accessible manner to broad and diverse sets of research and practitioner
groups across STEM education areas and STEM disciplines. Thus, this project has
the potential to substantially expand the scope and quality of evidence
generated through mathematics teacher development studies and, more generally,
multisite mediation studies throughout STEM areas. This potential exists as this
work increases researchers' capacity to design effective, efficient, and
comprehensive studies. This project is supported by the Division of
Undergraduate Education's Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program as a
Development and Implementation project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.