* 1760465
* Collaborative Research: RAPID-HARVEY: Response of plankton assemblages and trophodynamics to a historic, hurricane-induced floodwater plume in a subtropical, pelagic environment
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Astrid Schnetzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2019
* USD 55,187.00

This project will examine how plankton in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico
respond to large floodwater plumes generated by extreme weather events like
Hurricane Harvey at time scales relevant to its development and evolution (days
to months). The goal is to understand how the timing, magnitude, and constituent
loads of a massive pulse of freshwater to the Louisiana-Texas shelf are: (1)
driving changes in phytoplankton, zooplankton, and larval fish communities and
distributions over monthly, seasonal, and annual time scales and, (2) what the
consequences of those changes are to food web interactions within the plankton.
The timing of Hurricane Harvey flood water disturbance coincides with the
summer-fall spawning seasons for economically important Gulf of Mexico fisheries
(e.g. red drum, sea trouts, snappers), raising additional questions of longer
term effects of food web disruptions on recruitment. This project will train two
undergraduate students and four PhD-level graduate students across three
institutions, as well as support three early-career investigators. Pre- and
post-floodwater plume data and samples will be shared with the broader
scientific community within one year of collection to facilitate their immediate
use by scientists beyond the research team. The team will give coordinated
public talks at established regional science communication series and through
other existing regional outreach partnerships to extend the educational scope of
the project. Finally, results from this research will be incorporated in course
curriculum and shared through scientific presentations and publications in peer-
reviewed journals.

Record-breaking rain delivered by Hurricane Harvey to Southeast Texas in late
August 2017 has resulted in a massive floodwater plume being delivered to
coastal waters in the northern Gulf of Mexico (GOM). This project will
investigate the short- and mid-term effects of that plume on planktonic (from
pico- to ichthyoplankton) community composition and trophic interactions in that
system. Building on data collected in July 2017 during a GOM Ecosystems and
Carbon Cycle (GOMECC-3) cruise, and from historical datasets in the region,
plankton assemblages, abundance, and food web interactions will assessed during
three research cruises 2, 4, and 8 months after the event. Oceanographic data
and samples will be collected and processed using standard and state of the art
gear, including ZooScan, FlowCAM, flow cytometry, and next generation
sequencing. Onboard micro- and mesozooplankton grazing experiments will be
conducted to understand the trophodynamic interactions and relationships between
different plankton groups under changing environmental conditions. Diet and
growth rate analyses of larval fish will be undertaken and related to phyto- and
zooplankton (i.e. prey) abundance and community composition data. Application of
the same gear types and methods during the three project cruises will ensure
comparability of these new data to existing samples and datasets. These post-
Harvey data will be compared to immediately-preceding and long-term data
collected in the area by NOAA's Southeast Area Monitoring and Assessment Program
(SEAMAP), allowing for investigation of the temporal evolution of planktonic
assemblages and interpretation of plankton regime shifts in seasonal, multiyear,
and decadal contexts.