* 1760126
* I-Corps: Low-complexity Asynchronous Re-sampler for Optical Coherence Tomography
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Sebastian Hoyos, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on
significant improvements in accuracy and cost reduction of eye-related disease
diagnosis by providing a high-quality, high-speed tissue imaging solution.
Specifically, the project will shorten clinical scan time, and as a result,
increase image resolution while reducing the number of required patient clinic
visits. These improvements directly lower associated medical costs. The project
goal is to create a new-generation of Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), a
technique that is used in the clinical practice to provide cross-sectional
images of the retina. Currently, the biggest challenge faced by OCT clinical
applications is their slow scan speed, which leads to low image resolutions and
therefore unsatisfying clinical experience. A high-quality, high-speed signal
processing tool is needed for reliable clinical decision-making and disease
monitoring with OCT systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
further develop a new-generation of Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT). The
I-Corps project will explore the commercial potential of the innovation, a
system capable of decreasing the signal processing time of swept source OCT (SS-
OCT) devices by up to ten times according to lab tests. This device is based on
a family of novel signal processing algorithms that significantly improve the
accuracy and speed required for the medical images to be acquired. The SS-OCT
platform will be enhanced in terms of the image acquisition speed, accuracy, and
cost. This, in turn, will decrease the number of visits a patient needs to make
to an ophthalmology clinic while increasing the overall clinic capacity to
attend visiting patients per day, generating more revenue for those centers.