* 1760203
* Mercury Stable Isotopes as a Proxy of Photic Zone Euxinia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,380.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new approach to identify periods in
Earth history when hydrogen sulfide-rich waters reached the shallow depths of
the oceans which sunlight easily penetrates, known as the "photic zone." This is
the part of the ocean in which biology is most vigorous. In particular, the
photic zone is where about 25% of photosynthesis happens on Earth each year.
When hydrogen sulfide-rich waters enter the photic zone, they devastate animal
life and may also hinder photosynthesis, causing massive disruption to ocean
ecosystems. Many mass extinctions in Earth's past may have been associated with
hydrogen sulfide in the photic zone, but the details of how ocean chemistry and
ecosystems are linked are poorly understood because there are few good ways to
detect shallow water sulfide in the geologic record. This research is therefore
of fundamental importance to understanding the course of life through Earth's
history. However, the research is also relevant to predicting our future because
the occurrence of hydrogen sulfide in shallow waters is now more likely due to
human activities. These include excess use of fertilizers and global warming.
This research therefore may help to shed light on the sorts of ecosystem changes
that might be expected as the human impact on ocean chemistry accelerates. As
part of the work this team will also develop a novel digital education resource
to teach students about changes in ocean chemistry through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, investigators will explore the use of
mercury (Hg) stable isotopes as a proxy for photic zone euxinia (PZE) in Earth's
ancient oceans. PZE occurs when anoxic, sulfide-rich waters expand into the
photic zone. Although this condition is rare today, PZE is thought to have been
widespread in some ancient oceans with potentially profound effects on marine
and terrestrial ecosystems. However, developing convincing evidence of PZE in
the past has been difficult. In this proposal, investigators hypothesize that Hg
stable isotope compositions in marine sedimentary rocks may serve as a new proxy
of PZE. The basis of this novel proxy is that Hg undergoes unique mass
independent isotope fractionation (MIF) during aqueous photoreduction of Hg(II)
when complexed by reduced sulfur ligands. Specifically, photoreduction of Hg(II)
bound to oxygen-containing ligands (e.g., carboxyl) leads to positive MIF
(enrichment of odd-mass-number isotopes, 199Hg and 201Hg in the residual
Hg(II)). In contrast, photoreduction of Hg(II) bound to reduced sulfur ligands
(e.g., thiol) produces negative MIF. Consistent with this rationale, a pilot
study on Hg isotope compositions in Mesoproterozoic shales showed zero to
slightly positive MIF in sediments deposited under oxic conditions and distinct
negative MIF under sulfidic conditions, thus supporting the hypothesis.
Researchers will further validate this emerging new proxy by: 1) investigating
Hg biogeochemical cycles and isotope fractionation in a modern shallow-water
sulfide-rich environment, which serves as a modern analog of PZE; and 2)
measuring Hg isotope compositions in ancient sedimentary rocks that have
documented evidence of PZE. This research will be complemented by the first
experimental studies on Hg photochemistry in sulfidic water and the
corresponding isotope fractionation, which will be carried out through a
collaboration. The researchers will also examine the new rhenium (Re) isotope
redox proxy in the same suites of rock samples that will be analyzed for Hg
isotopes, which might benefit the interpretation of both isotope systems. Re
isotopes are a very novel paleoredox proxy that can potentially distinguish
between suboxic and anoxic/euxinic conditions. Thus, the coupled study of Hg and
Re isotopes should provide a more complete picture of the redox structure of the
ancient ocean, providing better constraints on both
proxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.