* 1760582
* RAPID: Fast Reconstruction of Flood Hydrographs in the Houston Metropolitan Area during Hurricane Harvey Based on Image Processing and In-situ Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Navid Jafari, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 09/30/2018
* USD 61,167.00

The ability to construct flood hydrographs in urban areas in real-time during
flash floods, hurricanes, and other extreme weather events is difficult because
of the low spatial density of water level measurements and the complex
interactions of built infrastructure, ground topography, and natural landscape
with flowing water. The goal of this RAPID project is to leverage perishable
images and video footage from traffic intersection and interstate highway
cameras, major news media outlets, and social media along with reference
objects/points. Subsequent photo image processing, scaled to the reference
objects, will enable development of a more continuous, accurate hydrograph in
the Houston metropolitan area. By reconstructing the flood hydrographs at a
large number of locations in flooded highways, streets and residential
subdivisions, high-resolution, process-based urban inundation modeling from
hurricane-generated surge and rainfall will become significantly more accurate.
For example, it will facilitate a better understanding of transport of sediments
and pollutants in and out of Houston during Hurricane Harvey. Such a model
validated by the reconstructed hydrographs will also aid state and local
governments in making timely evacuation decisions for low-lying areas to
mitigate the impact of similar hurricane-induced
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project based on reconstruction of
flood hydrographs in Houston using image processing and in-situ measurements has
significant intellectual merit: (1) The proposed methodology is innovative and
creative because it does not employ any traditional stream gages. Instead, it
relies on a unique form of existing data employed for a new application. (2) The
reconstructed flood hydrographs will significantly improve the understanding of
the hydrological processes of this unprecedented flood event caused by the
extreme rainfall of Hurricane Harvey. (3) The data will benefit the development
of a new flood model for Houston. (4) The developed algorithms and software for
processing the traffic image data, which will be available on the NHERI
DesignSafe-CI platform, can be readily applied to many other flood-prone urban
centers, such as New York City, New Orleans, and Miami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;