* 1760185
* RAPID: Capital, Coping, and the Displaced: Health, Well-Being, and Resiliency Among Hurricane Harvey Evacuees
* SBE,SMA
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Kevin Fitzpatrick, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2019
* USD 124,527.00

This project will investigate the role of social ties/resources in helping
citizens recover from Hurricane Harvey. Social ties/resources in neighborhoods,
at work, through religious organizations and through other social groups are
vital for helping individuals and families navigate their daily lives. But when
disaster strikes, these resources can be disrupted. Given the magnitude and
duration of Hurricane Harvey, many citizens in the Houston area have experienced
severe disruption to these social resources, but some have been more affected
than others. This research will study how social resources are used by people
affected by Harvey, and whether they can create new social resources to assist
in recovering from the disaster when old ties are broken. It will also help to
determine whose social resources have been most adversely affected. For example,
is the loss of social resources more acute for lower compared with upper income
people, or for racial minorities compared to non-minorities? The research will
also determine whether social resources in neighborhoods, for example, have
suffered more damage than those involving groups that cross geographic places,
such as churches and work groups. The project will investigate several aspects
of citizen well-being, including nature and extent of social ties/resources,
anxiety, depression, adaptation and resiliency.

This project will develop a sampling frame that covers several of the hardest-
hit counties in the Houston and Corpus Christi areas, and will survey 300 people
using in-depth, 40 minute interviews. It will sample people who relocated easily
as well as those who had more difficulty. In addition, approximately half of the
sample will come from citizens located in shelters, churches, and other service
provider locations, and the other approximate half from citizens who relocated
to non-shelter locations including doubling up with friends and relatives. This
sampling strategy will result in considerable variation in strength of social
ties, depth of social resources, as well as differences in social background
characteristics. The survey instrument is well developed and relies on several
measures with proven records of producing reliable results. In addition, the 300
interviews will form a data base that the project will analyze quantitatively,
thus enabling use of well-established statistical tools to evaluate key
hypotheses. The project is an excellent candidate for RAPID funding because
social ties and social resources began to unravel even before the storm hit
since some could easily evacuate to safety as others remained because of a wide
array of physical, social, and economic burdens. Now, in the aftermath, social
resources continue to be fluid, with some strengthening and others
deteriorating. The study will provide a baseline for evaluating dynamic changes
in these resources, and address key questions in social science regarding the
patterns of how social ties/resources develop and decay in the midst of natural
disaster. Finally, gathering indicators of well-being, along with assessing
their impact provides valuable information to organizations directly and
indirectly engaged in disaster preparedness and response. It should not only
help us better understand how the victims of Harvey are currently coping, but
provide information as to how we as a society are addressing the needs of these
victims, thus demonstrating the breadth and wealth of America's social
ties/resources, as well its major deficiencies.