* 1760894
* Trajectories into Early Career Research
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Kimberly Griffin, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,474,180.00

The proposed project will examine the linkage between graduate skill development
and postgraduate career outcomes by (1) identifying the ways in which the
development of research skills and professional goals during graduate training
may predict postdoctoral career attainment and trajectories, (2) examining the
capacity of postdoctoral research positions to serve as inflection points in
early career researchers' career trajectories, and (3) characterizing the extent
to which demographic characteristics mediate the relationships between graduate
and postdoctoral experiences and subsequent professional trajectories of early
career researchers. The research team will follow a sample of biology Ph.D.
students through their final stages of graduate school and into early years of
their scientific careers to determine which skills acquired during graduate
education might predict and facilitate postdoctoral attainment and scholarly
productivity. The project also will provide novel insights into inequalities in
early career researchers' (ECR) trajectories and outcomes and inform policies
and interventions aimed at increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of
graduate training and postdoctoral support mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching framework for the study is Social Cognitive Career Theory. The
research team proposes to integrate the social cognitive, socialization, and
economic and sociological lenses to conduct a longitudinal study of 286 Ph.D.
students as they complete their degrees and enter the workforce in the
biological sciences. They will investigate four hypotheses: (1) Professional
trajectories within the cognitive, community, and organizational careers of ECRs
will reflect "Matthew Effects" in which small initial differences account for
increasingly large differences over time. (2) Research skills, self-efficacy,
and organizational career goals during graduate school will jointly predict
initial attainment and persistence in a postdoctoral position. Variance
explained by these factors for subsequent career trajectories will wane over
time, and variance explained by indicators of successes within the community and
organizational careers will increase. (3) The features and opportunities
associated with postdoctoral positions will predict both linear and geometric
trends in subsequent cognitive, community, and organizational career
trajectories of ECRs, as well as persistence in a research career path. (4)
Professional trajectories within the cognitive, community, and organizational
careers of ECRs, including persistence in a research career path, will vary as a
function of interactions between sociodemographic characteristics, skills
development, and environmental factors. The researchers will use longitudinal
structural equation modeling to estimate and characterize trajectories within
each career type and to quantify anticipated "Matthew Effects". Longitudinal
structural equation modeling also will be used to understand how trajectories
are related to each other and to participants' skill development, motivational
factors, and graduate/postdoctoral experiences, as well as how trajectories
could vary by demographic characteristics. They will estimate a latent growth
curve model for this purpose. The research results could generate new insights
and interventions for diversifying the scientific workforce by facilitating more
equitable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR
program that emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR supports
the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build
theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.