* 1760144
* Developing STEM Achievement and Motivation: The Role of Spatial Skills and Parent-Child Interactions
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Annemarie Hindman, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,434,948.00

STEM learning is crucial for a well-prepared workforce, yet many students do not
reach their potential in STEM. The roots of these individual differences can be
traced back to school entry. Spatial skills - mentally representing and
manipulating spatial information - strongly predict STEM achievement, course-
taking, and careers. By 1st grade, children vary widely in spatial skills,
pointing to the home environment's crucial role. The proposed research, led by a
team of researchers at Temple University, will investigate the impact of parent-
child interactions on spatial skills among 1st and 2nd graders. Importantly, not
only skill but motivation- perceived competence, enjoyment of challenges, and
low anxiety - impacts children's STEM trajectories. Unfortunately research on
parents' support for children's STEM skills and motivation has proceeded in
parallel, despite evidence that they reinforce one another. Prior research is
also limited by short-term outcomes, parent self-report measures, or non-causal
designs. The proposed studies will use longitudinal and experimental methods to
1carry out the following. 1) Identify specific aspects of parent-child
interactions that predict children's spatial skills and STEM learning and
motivation. 2) Establish causal relations between parents' cognitive support and
children's spatial skills and motivation. 3) Establish causal relations between
parents' motivational support and children's spatial skills and motivation. The
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work
that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will empirically test an integrated model of
parents' cognitive and motivational support for children's spatial skills and
STEM achievement. Study 1 will use video data from the NICHD Study of Early
Child Care and Youth Development to test whether directly-observed parenting
behaviors (cognitive and motivational support) during spatial activities in 1st
grade predict children's STEM achievement and motivation through age 18. Studies
2a and 2b will test causal effects of parents' cognitive support on children's
spatial and math skills and motivation via experimental parent-led spatial book-
reading and spatial activity interventions. Study 3 will test the impact of
increasing parents' motivational support on children's spatial and math skills
and motivation. Investigating these factors in a single conceptual framework is
crucial to understand whether they have additive, or possibly multiplicative,
effects on children's development. For example, a parent who provides high
motivational support may be more attuned to their child's level of skill, and
therefore provide higher-quality cognitive support. Further, receiving both
cognitive and motivational support may be especially impactful. Together, these
studies will not only directly test the integrated theory of parents' cognitive
and motivational support, but will have the added benefit of setting the
foundation for larger parent-directed interventions aimed at improving all
children's spatial skills and STEM achievement and
motivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.