* 1760554
* RAPID: Powering through the hurricane: self-organizing power electronics intelligence at the network edge
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Prasad Enjeti, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 60,000.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Texas experiences the strongest hurricane in
more than 50 years, communities are working tirelessly to rebuild homes and
infrastructure. As the lifeblood of modern civil society, electricity has not
been fully restored in many neighborhoods because of the long repair time for
the bulk power infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project aims at
collecting data of electricity needs in areas affected by Hurricane Harvey, and
developing fast reconfigurable power electronics intelligence at the network
edge (PINE). The objective is to enable end users to quickly restore prioritized
electric loads during the recovery phase. The approach is to integrate
distributed energy resources that are readily available, as well as to endow the
distribution grid with edge-based power electronics control, so as to provide
local communities with at least the critical portion of their electricity
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is three-fold. First, this project will
quickly collect data about the shortage of power in communities affected by
Hurricane Harvey. Second, based on the data, energy-constrained microgrid
scheduling will be formulated and computed in a distributed manner. Third, the
power-limiting control of power electronics interface at the end user level will
be designed and tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 45% of the Texas A&amp;M main campus
and 100% of Texas A&amp;M Galveston campus students were affected by the
Hurricane Harvey. This project provides direct benefits to the students and
their families in this rebuilding phase. This project also provides relief to
many remote areas which may have to wait for weeks or even months before the
full restoration of the bulk power infrastructure. This team will actively
participate in this state-wide Rebuild Texas Initiative. The research results
will be disseminated through publication and lecture&lt;br/&gt;notes, which can
benefit many other communities that are subject to the risk of natural
disasters.