* 1760537
* Donor-acceptor energy transfer in the presence of photonic and plasmonic structures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 433,001.00

George Schatz, of Northwestern University, is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry. They are
developing a theory and computational methods to enable calculating the rate of
energy transfer processes. Energy transfer processes play a very significant
role in telecommunications, in solar energy utilization, in photosynthesis, and
in electronic devices where energy is transmitted from one molecule to another
through the emission and then absorption of light. The theory that Schatz and
coworkers are developing is important for engineering applications in the design
of new devices. It provides a framework for organizing components so that energy
transfer between emitters and absorbers is selectively optimized. In addition,
the project enables an understanding of energy transfer involving quantum light
(i.e., light with intrinsically quantum properties). The research activities are
used in the training of graduates, undergraduates and postdocs. They are also
used in the development of software tools that are made publicly available. In
addition, there are several outreach activities that use material related to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program of research describes the
development of new theories and computational methods for determining the rates
of donor-acceptor energy transfer and related radiative processes associated
with emitters and absorbers that are in the presence of complex dispersive
optical structures, including semiconductor, dielectric and metallic
nanoparticles, surfaces, and other photonic or plasmonic structures. There are a
growing number of experiments where the complex optical environment plays an
important role in energy transfer, sometimes enhancing energy transfer rates by
many orders of magnitude and extending the range of energy transfer beyond the
point where electrostatic interactions are adequate. In this situation,
traditional F?rster theory and standard improvements thereto are inadequate.
Recently the Schatz group has developed a new approach to these problems, one
that is fully quantum electrodynamic in nature but which only involves classical
electrodynamics calculations for the optical response, making it possible to use
existing computational electrodynamics methods with relatively simple
modifications to calculate energy transfer rates. In addition, the method can be
evaluated in the time domain, which is important in the treatment of complex
structures, and allowing for the study of nonstationary donor and acceptor
states where coherences and entangled states are excited. The proposal describes
the development of theory that builds on this recent work, including (1) the
proper incorporation of competing radiative and nonradiative processes in energy
transfer, (2) the inclusion of donors and acceptors that are too large for point
dipole approximations, (3) the treatment of dielectric response in the optical
medium that goes beyond the standard Drude/Lorentz dielectric models, and (4)
the description of energy transfer processes associated with coherent
superpositions of quantum states, including entangled states. The proposal
describes a number of applications of the theory to recent and planned
experiments, by collaborators and others, involving donor/acceptor energy
transfer in the presence of particles and interfaces, including applications
that test all the proposed new elements of the theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.