* 1760931
* Nanomanufacturing of Atomically-Uniform Two-Dimensional Materials over Large Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Md Haque, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 325,000.00

This award supports research to overcome a challenge of mutual exclusiveness of
the crystalline quality and lateral size in the manufacture of two-dimensional
materials. Two-dimensional materials are atomically thin films with properties
that can revolutionize low-power electronics, biological detection, multi-
functional composites and energy storage applications that promise important
benefits for the US society and economy. The roadblock to these applications is
that, when grown in large size, the two-dimensional material's crystallinity is
poor and conventional heat treatment does not improve the crystallinity because
the materials are typically resistant to high temperatures. This award enables
the investigation of a fundamentally different approach, where a two-dimensional
material is grown over a large area with initially low quality, which is then
greatly improved through the combination of electrical and mechanical
treatments. This is a multi-disciplinary approach, which trains the graduate
students in cutting edge aspects of nanomanufacturing, materials science and
mechanical engineering. The project involves undergraduate, women and under-
represented minority students in research to better train the diverse work force
of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award investigates the manufacture of
atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials over large areas by atomic layer
or pulsed layer deposition. The as-grown nanosteets are usually of low
crystallinity. The crystallinity is enhanced with a combination of electron wind
force and mechanical stress. The electrons transfer their momentum at the
defects and grain boundaries to impart unprecedented atomic/defect mobility at
lower temperatures. The role of mechanical stress is to accelerate the
electrical annealing. The hypothesis is that the stress field around the defect
can intensify the local strain energy, which is a driving force for
crystallization and grain growth. Computational models, based on reactive
empirical bond-order potential with the electron wind force imparted to
individual atoms, are developed to guide the experimental research. Experiments
are performed inside the transmission electron microscope to understand the
synthesis of ultra-thin films and electro-mechanical annealing. The in-situ
microscopy reveals the transformation from a low quality amorphous phase to a
highly crystalline state. The research demonstrates that high crystallinity 2D
atomic layer materials can be achieved by a novel electrical and mechanical
treatment instead of conventional heat treatment. The research also investigates
scaling up of this technique by wafer-scale synthesis on a substrate coated for
high residual stress followed by electrical annealing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.