* 1760715
* RAPID: Collaborative: Data Driven Post-Disaster Waste and Debris Volume Predictions using Smartphone Photogrammetry App and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Anand Puppala, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 34,137.00

The goal of this proposal is to leverage photogrammetry from smart phones and
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to automate the quantification of waste debris.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey and associated rainfall-induced flooding, a
significant volume of waste and debris will be generated, especially in urban
areas such as Houston and Beaumont, Texas. The management of post-disaster
debris is an important issue faced by local and federal authorities: it
contributes a significant portion of disaster management costs, can generate
several times the annual waste generation rates of the affected community, and
leads to higher expenditures due to error prone initial debris estimations. The
current process to predict debris volume is inaccurate and inefficient, as it
utilizes qualitative data from visual observation. The results of this study
will improve the calibration of the flood debris estimation models by measuring
debris generation due to Hurricane Harvey. This will aid in decision-making
tools that ultimately will result in faster and more cost-effective debris
management operations for future rainfall, tropical storm, and hurricane-induced
flood events that continue to impact the Gulf, the US, and elsewhere around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project addresses the lack of post-
disaster debris volume dataset by collecting ephemeral data through an automated
smartphone photogrammetric app and UAV in Beaumont and other affected regions in
Texas, and making the data available through open-source cyber-infrastructure
databases. Debris volumes will be quantified by exploring the use of smartphones
to automate the quantification of waste debris. In particular, smart phone
images captured by the monitor, resident, or local government agency can be
processed and scaled to develop a 3-D rendition and an estimate of waste
volumes. These estimations will be validated using an unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) photogrammetry surveys and which in turn can be converted using volumetric
studies as well as other available debris volumes documented by monitoring
companies. If successful, smartphones and UAVs can be quickly used in future
natural disasters to analyze and characterize the digital images and then
accurately quantify waste debris volumes.