* 1760620
* RAPID: Hurricane Impact on Phytoplankton Community Dynamics and Metabolic Response
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Darren Henrichs, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2019
* USD 194,033.00

Hurricane Harvey is the strongest hurricane to hit the Texas coast in decades
and the resulting tidal surges, flooding and terrestrial runoff have had a
severe impact on the coastal ocean. The effects on the phytoplankton, the first
link in the food chain, may be unprecedented. To determine how the phytoplankton
community will respond to such drastic changes in salinity, nutrient inputs, and
potential toxins, immediate and continuous sampling is the only way to fully
capture the effects and to identify when conditions return to "normal". An
automated, continuous phytoplankton imaging instrument that is deployed on the
Texas coast records images of the phytoplankton and permits calculation of the
abundance of different species. Together with molecular information on the genes
that have been "turned on", or expressed, outcomes of this project will help
determine the responses of individual types of phytoplankton. Extreme storms are
expected to increase in frequency with future climate change, so the responses
identified now will be valuable in predicting how such events will affect these
primary producers, which in turn support most of the food webs in marine
ecosystems, in the future.

High temporal resolution observations from the Imaging FlowCytobot (IFCB) have
revealed that hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico cause drastic changes in the
phytoplankton community structure. The objectives of this RAPID project are: 1)
to characterize the dynamics of the phytoplankton species in relation to the
environmental variables along the Texas coast; 2) to assess the short and long-
term changes in the phytoplankton community; and 3) to identify the strategies
of the phytoplankton community for resource acquisition. To accomplish these
objectives, this project will utilize IFCB time series to follow phytoplankton
community structure during the recovery period from Hurricane Harvey. In
addition, two RAPID response cruises (in late September and early October) to
sample at 5 sites along a transect from Galveston to Port Aransas, TX. At each
station, CTD profiles and water samples from surface and the chlorophyll maximum
will be collected for nutrients, carbonate chemistry, and RNA sequencing for
metatranscriptomic analysis. Metatranscriptomics can provide an indication of
the metabolic strategies employed and functional relationships within the
plankton community in response to changes in the environment. The advantage of a
metatranscriptomic approach is that the entire molecular response to the
environment is captured. So, while the response of phytoplankton to increased
nutrient inputs from floodwater runoff is targeted, the responses to other
environmental stresses (toxics, hypoxia, acidification) are also captured.
Analyses of this time series using multivariate statistical techniques, such as
principal component analysis (PCA), and network analysis, a powerful technique
for identifying potential interactions among taxa, will provide insights on the
environmental factors and metabolic responses structuring the community during
the aftermath of the hurricane.