* 1760291
* The Role of the Eye's Peri-limbal Tissue and Integral Veins on Intraocular Pressure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sayoko Moroi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 460,194.00

The mechanical properties of the eye tissues around the outer rim of the cornea
(peri-limbal scleral tissue) contains veins that allow drainage from the clear
jelly (aqueous humor) of the inside of the eye. The peri-limbal tissues are part
of the mechanism that the eye uses to control eye pressure. This research will
test whether the mechanical properties of the peri-limbal tissues changes how
the veins control eye pressure. The research goals are to: (1) measure the
deformation in the tissues supporting the veins as outflow occurs; (2) determine
the relationships between peri-limbal tissue mechanical properties and
deformation with the eye's intraocular pressure; (3) determine the mechanical
mechanisms by which the peri-limbal scleral tissues influence the veins' ability
to carry fluid from the eye. The objectives will be pursued through microscopic
imaging of the deforming peri-limbal sclera of eyes under experimental
perfusion. Fluorescent nanospheres in artificial aqueous infused into the eye
will create trackable markers that will be used to measure deformation. A
computer model of the fluid-structure interaction based on the experimental data
will be created for the microstructural anatomy of the peri-limbal sclera and
the included veins. Elevated eye pressure is often implicated in glaucoma and
affects about 10% of the population over age 40, making it one of the leading
causes of irreversible blindness. This research will further public health by
discovering some of the basic causes of eye pressure increase in glaucoma.
Capstone design projects and educational module for the principal investigators
soft tissue class will be developed based on the research. More than six
students will work on this interdisciplinary project, as well as two
undergraduates for each year of the project. These students will come from
engineering, natural science and medicine on the two University of Michigan
campuses and neighboring institutions to expand the project's
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imaging will be conducted within the eye's
tissues, not on the surface. This will produce new knowledge about the
interaction of veins and the surrounding soft tissue as well as the transfer of
intraocular pressure through the sclera and to the veins. Other than
understanding that the aqueous venous system creates a back-pressure, little is
known about the relationship between its structural details and outflow; such
knowledge will be developed in this project. Knowledge will also result on the
relationships between the viscoelastic tissue properties, strains and eye
pressure. This knowledge has direct relevance to glaucoma in eyes having high
pressure. Furthermore, because the viscoelastic tissue properties are strongly
tied to components of the extracellular matrix and its remodeling, knowledge
will occur that has application to aging and tissue disorders. The techniques
and knowledge produced in normal peri-limbal sclera can be applied to diabetic
tissues to better understand the differences in biomechanics and deformation in
tissues with advanced glycation end products, a suspected cause of tissue
stiffening. The methods used and knowledge gained will inform understanding of
other tissues of the body where soft tissue and fluid acconveying vessels
interact such as the renal tubules, cerebral veins, and retinal
veins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.