* 1760540
* RAPID: Transportable Energy Storage for Enhancing Power Grid Resiliency to Natural Disasters
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Miguel Modestino, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 78,666.00

This project is motivated by the society-scale urgency of reducing the impact of
natural disasters on power grids in the light of increasing frequency and damage
of hurricane strikes in the US Atlantic and Gulf Coast region. One way to
enhance the ability of power grid operators to withstand such disasters is to
ensure availability of backup flexibility resources that can be timely deployed
prior to the disaster. This flexibility can then be used to prevent critical
equipment failures during the disaster and to accelerate post-disaster grid
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and validate the
concept of mobile energy storage (ES) units that can provide backup flexibility
to power grids. Provided a timely disaster scenario, these units can be moved
using public transportation routes from their stationary locations to the
locations, where they can enhance power grid resiliency. This objective requires
addressing two immediate research gaps. First, there is no decision-making
strategy that can optimally route, reconfigure and control mobile ES units as
needed to reduce the impact of the anticipated disaster. Second, existing ES
technologies makes it difficult to reconfigure ES units on a short notice. Using
the real-life predictions and ex-post data from Hurricane Harvey, this project
will design a data-driven approach to enable the optimal routing, reconfigure
and control of mobile ES units to enhance power grid resiliency. The proposed
approach will be accompanied by the development of a new electrochemical ES
mechanism that is capable of generating two transportable energy carriers:
redox-active species (such as those used on redox flow batteries) and hydrogen
(e.g. available in refineries along the US Gulf Coast). Methodologically, this
project will advance techniques for solving multi-stage optimization problems
with binary recourse decisions and grid-scale energy storage mechanisms based on
electrochemical water splitting reactions with solution-based redox couples as
intermediates for water electrolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
enhance the tool set and knowledge to mitigate the impact of natural disasters
and will be made available to educate power grid utilities just in time for the
following Atlantic Hurricane Season (2018). The PIs will aim to engage
underrepresented groups in STEM research activities.