* 1760653
* Evacuation Decision-making process of Hospital Administrators in Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Thomas Cova, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,301.00

Hospitals are a critical infrastructure during and after disasters to care for
vulnerable populations. The problem is that hospitals are also at risk to the
same disasters that the communities they are part of are. Just as hurricanes
prompt the evacuation of populations, hospitals also find themselves needing to
make decisions about whether to evacuate their patient population prior to
landfall or shelter-in-place during the storm. There is little evidence about
how hospital administrators make this crucial decision in protecting the health
and lives of their patients. This project will interview administrators and
emergency managers from a sample of hospitals affected by Hurricane Harvey in
Southeast Texas. The research will explore what information was considered in
the decision, how was the information obtained, and how are the dangers
associated with moving patients balanced against the dangers associated with
staying in a hospital that may be flooded or sustain other infrastructure
damage. The information gathered in this project will help emergency managers
better understand the role of hospitals as a critical infrastructure component
during a disaster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is a significant literature
on hospital evacuation, the majority of articles reflect case studies of the
evacuation process and do not discuss the decision-making process of whether to
evacuate or to shelter-in-place. The research objective of this project is to
collect the data needed to understand hospital administrators' decision making
processes when deciding to evacuate the hospital or shelter-in-place in advance
of or during a hurricane event. Understanding this process is important for
planning how communities will respond to disasters and their reliance on
hospitals as a critical infrastructure component. The research is guided by the
Protective Action Decision Model. The research will explore how the perceptions
of the severity of the hazard, the level of preparedness to evacuate or shelter
in place, characteristics of the patient load, the perceived net benefit of
evacuating over sheltering in place, the presence/absence of evacuation orders,
and environmental cues from the storm. The research team will conduct key
informant interviews with hospital administrators from a purposive sample of
hospitals in Harvey-effected counties. Online news articles suggest that 25
hospitals in the region evacuated at some point of the storm. The sampling
methodology will be stratified by hospitals in the coastal region that received
hurricane warnings based on predicted storm surge and those inland that were
primarily at risk from flooding, and also based on evacuation status (evacuated
pre-impact; evacuated post-impact; and did not evacuate). The research team will
select 25% of hospitals (42) ensuring that there are hospitals from each of the
6 defined strata. Questions will examine which individuals were included in the
decision process; what information was sought; where was the information
obtained from; and how did decision makers weigh the risk of evacuation vs.
shelter-in-place? Understanding the factors contributing to a hospitals ability
to stay open during a disaster is a critical component for the resilience of the
community.