* 1760726
* RAPID: Critical Infrastructure Disruption and the Food Distribution Network: The Implications for Food Security Following a Natural Disaster
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Nathanael Rosenheim, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 54,001.00

Food security in the form of access to nutritional and affordable food is a
chronic problem for a percentage of American households in normal times and this
percentage can dramatically increase after a natural disaster as local retailers
and food banks struggle to meet the needs of their customers and clients. Such
was the case after Hurricane Harvey made landfall on the evening of August 25,
2017 along the middle of the Texas coast. During the next five days it dropped
unprecedented amounts of rainfall throughout northeastern sections of the Texas
coast generating extensive flooding, massive power and water system failures,
displacing hundreds of thousands of households, and disrupting local food
retailers and food banks. Unfortunately, very little systematic research exists
on the consequences of disaster events for food retailers and food banks. This
research will address this deficiency by investigating the consequences of
Hurricane Harvey's impacts on local food retailers and food aid agencies. The
data captured will inform interdisciplinary models of community resilience.
Furthermore, results from this project will encourage and inform local, state,
and national policies that address chronic and acute food-security issues;
thereby reducing vulnerabilities and enhancing the resiliency of our nation's
food distribution network. Findings from this research will also be incorporated
directly into graduate and undergraduate courses on community resilience,
planning methods and measures, and disaster recovery and
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will gather data on the
consequences of direct damage to an establishment's physical structure and
inventory, temporary and permanent loss of staff and employees, and the
disruption of critical infrastructure systems (transportation, energy, water,
and communications) from businesses and organizations comprising local food
distribution networks. The project will assess the relative influence of these
impacts for business/agency continuity and survival and for changes in local
food distribution networks. To accomplish these goals, this project will conduct
in-depth structured and semi-structured interviews with food retailers and food
aid agencies in three counties -- Galveston, Harris, and Jefferson -- heavily
impacted by Hurricane Harvey's flooding. Together the study area has more than
3,500 food retailers and three food banks that serve over 270 food pantries. A
representative random sample of both large and small food retailers and non-
profit food pantries operating in both impacted and non-impacted areas and
serving populations of varying levels of food security will be surveyed.
Quantitative models assessing: 1) the relative consequences of direct damage and
infrastructure disruption for business failure and disruption and 2) changes to
local food distribution infrastructure networks and the potential consequences
for community food security will be developed utilizing these data.