* 1760467
* Role of Fiber-matrix Interactions During Failure in Fiber Reinforced Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Grace O'Connell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2022
* USD 362,859.00

Many biological tissues throughout the body are fiber-reinforced composites,
built primarily of water, collagen fibers, and a soft extrafibrillar matrix.
Failure or tearing of these tissues causes pain and disability. Tissue
composition and molecular architecture are important to the tissue mechanical
properties both during physiological loading and during failure. To date, there
has been insufficient research focused on molecular level failure mechanics of
fiber-reinforced tissues such as the intervertebral discs of the spine.
Determining tissue failure properties and the roles that the various molecules
of the tissue play in failure behavior is important for preventing disc disease
and to designing new medical approaches for repairing the disc. The goal of this
project is to determine how the fiber-reinforced tissue structure controls
damage mechanics. For this work the PI will focus on the annulus fibrosus of the
intervertebral disc because of its cross-ply fiber architecture and medical
relevance. The educational outreach effort in this project is an expansion of
the Girls in Engineering (GiE) Summer Program coordinated by the College of
Engineering at Berkeley. The PI also will train graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds in her laboratory during performance of the
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will evaluate
the role of the extrafibrillar matrix composition and fiber composition and
network on time-dependent and -independent failure behavior. She will combine
computational and experimental techniques to study failure mechanisms of fiber-
reinforced materials, such as stress distributions between fibers and the
extrafibrillar matrix. Her research team will leverage its previous work that
developed an experimental method for robust failure testing of the annulus
fibrosus. Data from tissue-level experiments will be incorporated into the
existing finite element model of the disc joint to elucidate the role of fiber-
matrix interactions during joint-level failure. In broader terms, the unique
computational model developed from this research, where the extrafibrillar
matrix and collagen fibers are described as separate and distinct materials will
be beneficial for material scientists outside of biomechanics research (e.g.,
carbon fiber reinforced polymers) and for scientists investigating the
contribution of fibers and extrafibrillar matrix on tissue mechanics (sub-
failure and failure mechanics) with injury, aging, or
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.