* 1760187
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Targeting Equity in Access to Mentoring (TEAM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jaye Cable, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 989,536.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill (UNC) ADVANCE Adaptation project is called the Targeting Equity in Access
to Mentoring (TEAM). The project will promote a culture of effective and
equitable mentoring programs. TEAM components include: mobilizing leadership by
the Provost, training and support for deans and department chairs, training for
faculty mentors, and additional programming including peer mentoring for
mentees. Objectives for the project include: 1) Establish a senior-level faculty
administrative position to ensure consistent mentoring implementation and
accountability across the University; 2) Empower deans, chairs, and other senior
leadership to establish mentoring programs in their departments; 3) Increase and
improve senior faculty members' mentoring capacity by providing education and
strategies; and 4) Provide cohort-based mentoring to junior and mid-career
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEAM offers three key interventions that will
advance current mentoring practices, drawing on work by the National Center for
Faculty Development &amp; Diversity (NCFDD) and the National Mentoring Research
Network (NMRN) as well as ADVANCE projects at Oregon State University and
Clemson University. The UNC project will: 1) Integrate intersectionality-
informed materials into the NMRN curriculum to address the unique needs of women
faculty in STEM fields; 2) Supplement formal, dyadic mentoring relationships
with peer networks; and 3) Include the lived experiences and holistic well-being
of women faculty in STEM fields as critical, measurable outcomes for faculty
success. It is anticipated that the UNC Adaptation project will add to the
knowledge base on faculty mentoring particularly mentoring targeting individuals
with intersectional identities in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.