* 1760158
* RAPID: Hurricane-Driven Beach Sand Sorting from Dune to Shoreline: The Case of Hurricane Harvey
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Firat Testik, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 38,662.00

This project will investigate the effect of Hurricane Harvey on the morphology
and sedimentary characteristics of the beach area extending from the dune tow to
the shoreline along selected beaches in Texas. Changes in sediment size and
sorting, in response to storm surge and large wave forcing associated with the
hurricane, are related to changes in morphology along the coastline. Hurricane
Harvey made a landfall near Port Aransas, TX on August 25th 2017, and beach
systems in this region were disturbed significantly. Field experimental
campaigns will be conducted at several of the affected beaches that cover the
region of Corpus Christi - Port Aransas - Padre Island - Mustang Island, TX.
Sediment samples and topographic data will be collected before the occurrence of
a significant beach adjustment and during the early phases of the natural
adjustment processes. This dataset will be used to develop a fundamental
understanding on the sand sorting characteristics during hurricane events. The
research questions that will be addressed are related to sediment size
distribution characteristics, responsible forcing mechanisms, and short term
beach recovery processes.

The scientific findings using this dataset will advance understanding on the
short-term beach dynamics during and after hurricanes, which will impact various
relevant applications. For example, this improved understanding may be
translated into more effective decisions related to the beach nourishment
projects and dune restoration/management, sediment transport predictions for
hurricane-impacted beaches, among others. Moreover, the developed dataset will
be very valuable for the calibration/validation of the numerical coastal
sediment transport models and it will contribute to the training of graduate and
undergraduate level students.