* 1760616
* Eradication of Biofilms in Metal Working Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christine Foreman, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,495.00

Metal working fluids are applied in many manufacturing processes to ensure
reduced tool wear and improved work piece quality. Worldwide, more than half a
billion gallons of metal working fluids are consumed annually. Microbial
contamination is a significant factor in the degradation of these fluids,
causing biofouling and corrosion of equipment, imperilment of product quality,
and posing occupational safety risks. Once metal working fluids are microbially
contaminated, removing bacteria is a difficult task. Residual bacteria can
quickly repopulate, even after meticulous cleaning and recharge procedures.
Microbial biofilms within the inaccessible regions of a working fluid system are
likely responsible for the rapid post-cleaning repopulation. Biofilms are
attached microbial communities whose function depends on complex social
interactions. Quorum sensing provides the means for biofilm cells to communicate
and collectively control group behavior. This award supports fundamental
research on quorum sensing inhibition strategies to reduce/eliminate biofilm
formation. Research results can help to increase the sustainability of metal
working fluids, reduce waste, and help limit occupational exposure to
potentially pathogenic bacteria inhabiting the fluids. This is a very large
concern in manufacturing, with applications in automotive, aerospace, medical
products and defense industries, and therefore directly and positively impacts
American economic welfare and national security. The award includes funding of
outreach activities, especially for attraction of Native American students into
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-year study at the Center for Biofilm
Engineering at Montana State University will be performed to improve metal
working fluid management using an eco-friendly alternative to remove biofilms
residing within metal working fluid circulation systems. Using a two-phase
approach, economically feasible agents will be screened for their ability to
effectively reduce/eliminate biofilm forming organisms in metal working fluids.
Phase one will involve screening a matrix of chemical/synthetic quorum sensing
inhibition agents, bacterial pigments, and bioengineered enzymes for their
ability to eradicate biofilm in microplate assays. The most efficacious agents
would be optimized to remove biofilm, both singly and in combination with
standard biocide treatments. Phase two would scale up experiments on selected
agents to determine suppression/removal of biofilm in MWF circulation systems
including CDC bioreactors and a fully functional, autoclavable model of a CNC
milling machine designed and built by a student capstone
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.