* 1760504
* RAPID: Disaster Preparedness and Response within Communities Affected by Hurricane Harvey
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Natalie Baker, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 74,372.00

This project will investigate emergent community actions to prepare and respond
to Hurricane Harvey and to explore the ability of groups to choose different
strategies in reacting to a disaster. By studying how and when people engage in
evolving instances of collective actions, the project will document the behavior
of people in disasters, what tools and technologies are being used, who becomes
neglected during a disaster and how this marginalization happens. The project
will also train graduate students in qualitative research methods and community
engagement. Research findings will be of interest to policymakers at the local
and federal levels, scholars and communities preparing for or responding to
disaster.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This rapid proposal will use auto-
ethnography and participatory action research to interview, observe and collect
data from homeland security institutions, citizen responders and affected
publics. Findings will be co-constructed by the two PIs in consort with a
variety of participants that are either affected by response and recovery, or
engaged in preparing, responding or studying it. Interview, observational, and
other data will be analyzed both individually and collaboratively using the
traditions of autoethnography and participatory action research. The research
will study the homeland security regimes that include socio-technical
outlets,security technology infrastructures and the relations between community
swarming and expertise. A question central to the project is how do processes
and structures of security regimes marginalize people in evolving disaster
contexts. The findings from the empirical work will problematize how
preparedness, response, and resilience may exacerbate social marginalization in
disaster. In addition, the findings will be of interest to policymakers using
practice-centric approaches wanting to broaden their work through theoretical,
humanistic, and critical lenses.