* 1760366
* Noise Influenced Energy Localization in Oscillator Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 609,113.00

Machinery with rotating blades is used in aircraft engines, power generation
turbomachinery, and several other commercial and industrial systems. The
performance and reliability of these systems depends very much, on how
individual components such as the blades respond to different conditions. Apart
from being detrimental to system performance and reliability, undesirable blade
dynamics may result in catastrophic damage to the engine or the machinery. One
type of undesirable response is where a motion that can cause catastrophic
failure is concentrated at a specific component of the system, such as blade of
a turbine. A measure used for quantifying this response concentration is the
energy of the system. Higher the energy concentrated or localized, higher the
rate and/or level of undesirable motions. While a high level of concentration of
energy can be detrimental to the health or performance of a system, an
appropriate level of concentration or localization can be beneficial for
applications, such as measurements of system response. This research will
innovate methods and tools to take advantage of such controlled localization of
system response for the benefit of measurements and health monitoring of
systems. The success of this research will promote the progress of science in
the areas of energy harvesting, rotary systems, and reflector arrays. This work
will usher in a new generation of researchers trained to use tools suited for
study of noise-enabled dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior efforts
on noise-influenced responses of nonlinear oscillators, the research team will
pursue the principal goal of understanding the physical foundations of energy
localization in a variety of coupled nonlinear oscillators and examining ways to
create, move, or suppress this energy localization with the influence of noise.
Fundamental studies will be pursued to develop and extend the knowledge base for
the use of combined deterministic and noise inputs to realize desired energy
formations in nonlinear systems. The project team will conduct original
experiments with different oscillator arrays to explore the possibilities for
control of energy localization. Informed by the experimental findings,
analytical and numerical studies will be initiated to uncover mechanisms
underlying the nonlinear phenomena and examine the effects of cyclic symmetry in
certain mechanical systems. The findings are expected to open the doors to the
combined use of noise and deterministic inputs for control of nonlinear
phenomena in systems with and without cyclic symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.