* 1760012
* Advancing the Northeast Combinatorics Network
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* William Martin, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/28/2019
* USD 13,000.00

The North East Combinatorics Network (NCN) will host several events: A spring
Discrete Math Days (DMD) conference at the University of New England (Maine) in
May 2018, Summer Combo at Saint Michael's College (Vermont) in July 2018, a fall
DMD at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (Massachusetts) in October 2018, and a
monthly (academic year) Virtual Colloquium Series commencing February 2018. This
project aims to further cultivate and enhance a network of students, post-
doctoral researchers, faculty and industry mathematicians spread across the
institutions in New England and New York working in the area of combinatorics
(discrete mathematics), which is a thriving and rapidly advancing mathematical
discipline. Motivated by applications to computer science, data science,
cybersecurity, bioinformatics and more, combinatorialists have developed
powerful new tools in recent years and have identified fundamental mathematical
problems that, if solved, will have far-reaching impact in these applied areas.
Connections to other areas of mathematics abound as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project puts particular emphasis on service to
students and faculty, particularly women and members of other groups under-
represented in STEM disciplines, at small, more remote institutions, a cohort
that has made significant contributions to the field. With three one-day
meetings as anchor activities, the project envisions an intentional
infrastructure that facilitates ongoing interactions among researchers
throughout the year. The PIs, together with the rest of the NCN leadership
(meeting hosts and Steering Committee) will advance a set of activities that,
while low in cost, provide key resources to researchers in the region. These
activities include: a central NCN website to improve communication and
collaboration, piloting a virtual colloquium series that allows remote viewing
and interaction, a series of "New Directions" presentations of accessible
problem areas to foster undergraduate research and also engage early career
faculty, and an on-line discussion forum that extends collaborative interactions
that may start at any one of the regular meetings. These activities, taken as a
whole, will both advance fundamental science and enhance outreach beyond the
traditional research university community. The event websites are
https://sites.google.com/site/summercombo2017/ (Summer Combo) and for DMD the
most recent are: https://www.smcvt.edu/academics/majors-minors-and-
curriculum/mathematics/discrete-math-day.aspx and
https://math.dartmouth.edu/~orellana/DMDS2017 . The overarching NCN website will
be hosted at WPI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.