* 1760950
* Spokes: MEDIUM: WEST: Breaking down barriers for reproducible neuroimaging data analyses
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Russell Poldrack, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,904.00

This project will enable the reproducible analysis and sharing of large human
brain imaging datasets. Imaging the brain using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is an essential tool for the study of the human brain, but the processing of
large neuroimaging datasets is often a difficult and time-consuming process.
This project will improve the ability of researchers to analyze these data more
effectively and share the results. This work will build upon the OpenNeuro
project, which provides researchers with the ability to easily upload and share
neuroimaging data. The first aim of this project is to develop the ability to
process these datasets using national supercomputing resources. Because these
resources are both much more powerful and more cost-effective than commercial
cloud computing resources, this extension will allow researchers to process
larger datasets using more sophisticated analysis procedures. The second aim is
to extend the reach of data storage and processing beyond standard neuroimaging
datasets to include heterogeneous datasets with clinical and psychological data
in addition to brain imaging data. A large study of human brain development will
be used as a test case for this extension. The third aim of this project is to
engage researchers and software developers in order to develop a broad community
that will further extend the reach and capabilities of the proposed technical
developments and promote the sustainability of the resources beyond the grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim will implement the ability to execute
computational workflows using national supercomputing resources through a
Science-As-A-Service model, via technologies such as the Agave API and the
Singularity container system. This will provide the ability for researchers to
execute complex containerized workflows using large datasets, providing a long-
term sustainable computational platform for analysis of open data. The second
aim will involve the extension of the current OpenNeuro platform to represent
data from a large longitudinal neurodevelopmental study, in order to allow the
joint analysis of imaging, clinical, psychological, and genetic data. The third
aim will engage the relevant user and developer communities through workshops
and code sprints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.