* 1760765
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Diversity and Equity in Promotion, Tenure, and Hiring (DEPTH) for STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Karen Kolehmainen, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 995,876.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State University, San Bernardino
(CSUSB) will implement an ADVANCE Adaptation project named the Diversity and
Equity in Promotion, Tenure and Hiring (DEPTH). The DEPTH project will implement
comprehensive policy changes concerning recruitment, hiring, and promotion and
tenure. In addition, the project will result in new processes and systems for
data tracking and monitoring at the institution. CSUSB identified these areas of
need through by reviewing institutional data and conducting surveys of faculty.
The CSUSB DEPTH project will adapt activities and strategies from the University
of Arizona, University of Wisconsin, and University of Michigan's past ADVANCE
Institutional Transformation projects to address CSUSB issues related to
recruitment, hiring, promotion and tenure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSUSB
project will result in: 1) A DEPTH Center at CSUSB; 2) A new data collection
system to track applicant and faculty data; 3) Policies and trainings aimed at
ensuring diverse applicant pools, effective faculty searches, and avoiding
biases; and 4) More standardized faculty evaluation processes across the
institution that promote equitable decision-making. CSUSB is in an ideal
position for the implementation of systematic change to address the issues of
diversity in STEM faculty. CSUSB has undergone recent changes in administration
and rapid student growth, and is about to enter a period of increased tenure-
line faculty hires. A diverse faculty at CSUSB will reflect the student body
which is primarily comprised of underrepresented and underserved populations in
STEM including racial and ethnic minorities, women, and low SES students. In
addition, CSUSB is part of the California State University 23 institution
system, which is the largest university system in the USA and will be able to
share and disseminate the content of its successful initiatives system-wide,
potentially influencing the outcomes of over 13,000 faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.