* 1760484
* RAPID:   A Longitudinal Assessment of Risk and Resilience in the Gulf of Mexico Following Hurricane Harvey
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Andrew Parker, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

In late August 2017, Hurricane Harvey became the first major hurricane to make
landfall in the United States in over a decade, wreaking havoc on Texas's
coastal communities. This project researches how Texas residents who encountered
the threat of the hurricane and its aftermath made decisions about how they
would prepare for and respond to it. This project advances core missions of the
National Science Foundation. This project does "promote the progress of science"
by examining the human dimensions of disasters and is one of the only studies
poised to gain insights from the same individuals shortly before and after a
disaster. This project does "advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare" by providing insights into how disasters affect peoples' decision
making and well-being and thereby informs policies to mitigate adverse effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project extends an existing telephone survey
administered originally to Gulf Coast residents in 2016 to investigate a range
of health, social, and economic factors related to individual and community
disaster resilience. The researchers re-contact respondents in Texas to collect
a second wave of data that captures longitudinal evidence regarding the impact
of Hurricane Harvey on risk perceptions as well as decision making about how to
ameliorate post-disaster adversities. In the second wave of data collection, the
research team combines questions from the original Wave 1 survey with new
questions assessing people's hurricane preparations before Harvey, their
exposures during Harvey, and their experiences immediately thereafter. In
addition, data from both waves of the survey are merged with county-level
variables that provide objective measures of hurricane exposure. Poised with
both pre-and post-event data from the same individuals, the researchers pursue
analyses to better understand behavioral, attitudinal, and other changes pre- to
post-Hurricane Harvey. These analyses are a marked improvement from past
research that typically has no baseline measures. Specifically, the team tests
three hypotheses: (1) adverse outcomes are caused by increased exposure to the
hurricane; (2) pre-hurricane conditions can amplify or suppress the effect of
hurricane exposure on outcomes; and (3) specific subgroups are at increased risk
of adverse outcomes in the wake of a disaster. The research addresses important
limitations of prior studies in the domain of natural hazards in at least two
ways:(1) by focusing on the human dimensions of disasters, particularly relating
to issues beyond emergency response, and (2) by providing longitudinal data on
how risk perceptions or other human experiences change in response to a disaster
and how, consequently, people engage or do not engage in mitigation behaviors.
The work will help to develop a realistic understanding of how people make
decisions about hazards that affect the health, the well-being of communities,
and the economy. Research that helps us better understand human disaster-related
behavior may also inform policy debates about how best to build community
resilience in the face of chronic exposure to trauma and stress.