* 1760235
* RAPID: Social and Geophysical Influences on Evacuation Decision Making for Hurricane Irma
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Robin Ersing, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 39,111.00

This RAPID award will support rapid-response research that documents and
analyzes the effect of social and geophysical influences on hurricane evacuation
decision making by collecting real-time data during an evacuation of people in
the days prior to the landfall of Hurricane Irma in Florida in September 2017.
The ephemeral data collected just prior to a disaster occurrence will enhance
basic understanding of the role that geophysical and social factors play in
influencing decisions by evacuees in the face of natural disasters. By
integrating both geophysical and social factors, the project will provide new
insights relating individuals to preparedness and recovery services as a way to
promote community resiliency. Hazard managers will be able to integrate this new
knowledge into more targeted disaster-education campaigns, and project findings
will provide new information and insights regarding the ways that the growing
interest in social media and mobile technology affects preparedness.
Furthermore, outcomes from this research will be useful to federal, state, and
local agencies and to first-responders to aid future decision making for hazards
other than hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regardless of investments in
resources to improve emergency communication and planning strategies,
understanding human behavior is paramount to a successful evacuation effort.
This basic research project will use real-time data collection to provide new
data and perspectives about the actual evacuation decision-making process rather
than a more traditional retrospective approach that relies on potentially
distorted memory recall. The investigative team will conduct surveys with
evacuees to learn about the geophysical and social influences that have factored
in their decision to evacuate. A mixed-methods approach will be used to analyze
factors that impact evacuation status as well as relationships between the
dependability of social connections and social demographics. New knowledge
regarding the closeness of social connections and dependability social networks
at the time when decisions are made to evacuate will enable hazard managers to
engage in more targeted and effective disaster education campaigns. The new
knowledge about factors that influence evacuation decision making also will be
valuable beyond disaster planning and management, providing new insights in
other domains, such as public health, social work, and behavioral health.