* 1760481
* Community Resources that Promote Mexican Origin Children's STEM Education across Diverse Families
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Robert Crosnoe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 05/31/2022
* USD 499,993.00

This project seeks to broaden the participation of an important underrepresented
group in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Mexican-origin
children, one of the fastest growing segments of the U.S. population, often come
from disadvantaged circumstances that increase their need to use public
education for social mobility while also posing challenges to navigating the
public education system. Yet, Mexican-origin families are rich in social
resources that can be leveraged to help children overcome obstacles in their
educational paths. This project will identify critical points in the K-12 system
and higher education when Mexican-origin children are at heightened
vulnerability of leaving the STEM pipeline and community resources that promote
their STEM persistence. Understanding the role that families and community
resources play in Mexican-origin students' participation in STEM courses and
careers is important for U.S. economic productivity and Mexican-origin
children's economic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organized around a conceptual
model drawing from theories on life course, educational inequality,
assimilation, cultural wealth, and community context, analyses will apply
multilevel modeling to a new data source that integrates (1) the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort of 1998-99 (covering the elementary to
middle school transition) and the Educational Longitudinal Study of 2002
(covering the high school to college transition) with (2) community resources
data from the National Center for Charitable Statistics, Institute of Museum
&amp; Library Services, Zip Business Patterns, and Bureau of Labor Statistics.
This comprehensive data source will include a range of STEM outcomes at each
pathway stage (test scores/gains, academic performance, course-taking,
degree/certificate), community resources hypothesized to be supportive of
Mexican-origin children's STEM education (nonprofit youth-serving or cultural
organizations, libraries, businesses/labor market conditions), and measures of
family context (SES, positive parenting). The merged databases will be available
through the National Center of Education Statistics (NCES). The research team
will also provide code written for statistical analyses upon request and
permission from NCES. This project exemplifies the Education and Human Resources
Core Research program's commitment to fundamental research on learning in STEM
that combines theory, techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of
disciplines and contexts. Further, by contributing to a cohesive, federated,
national-scale approach to research data infrastructure, the project exemplifies
NSF's larger aim of harnessing the data revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.