* 1760292
* RAPID: Hurricane Harvey: Experiences, Recovery and Future Policies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Stein, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This study investigates the behaviors and opinions of Hurricane Harvey survivors
living in the Houston metropolitan region including Harris, Fort Bend, Brazoria,
and Montgomery Counties. What actions did residents take in preparation of the
storm? How were evacuations and rescues completed? Since Hurricane Sandy, social
media has become an integral part of disaster response. How did residents use
social media before and after Hurricane Harvey? The study will identify the
characteristics and motivations of volunteers who participated in the
evaluation, clean up and reconstruction efforts, and whether social media played
a role in spurring individuals to act in support of their community. The broader
impact of this panel survey centers on not only the new data that can contribute
to basic research, but to the information it provides to policymakers as part of
the policy evaluation and policymaking processes and the information it provides
to private sector decision makers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this panel survey, because it surveys the same units over time, increases
direct scientific knowledge on the role of communication and response by
individuals during emergency situations. Another attribute of a panel study
would be the contributions to basic science. Specifically, this data can be used
to test important behavioral theories on crisis response and attitudes toward
government and help add to a literature in the political and social sciences
that links existing and proposed policies to outcomes. The initial survey of
active cell and landline telephone users living in highly impacted areas in
Harris, Fort Bend, Brazoria and Montgomery Counties. It is very important to
secure resources to field the survey instrument as soon as possible. In addition
to demographic characteristics such as race, education, income, gender and age,
the survey questions will cover topics such as: i) sources of information about
Hurricane Harvey; ii) damages due to Hurricane Harvey; iii) the use of social
media for seeking and sharing information, identifying rescue needs,
volunteerism, and donations; iv) evaluation of government responses; v) expected
policy changes. The project will also take advantage of previous surveys
conducted after Tropical Storm Allison, and Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and
Ike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.