* 1760879
* Collaborative Research:  Improving protein stability with non-traditional solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Silvina Matysiak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 284,378.00

Vaccines and antibodies are proteins. The effectiveness of every dose depends on
maintaining the three-dimensional structure of the protein. At room temperature,
dissolved in water, proteins can rearrange their structure, possibly denaturing
them. The strategy most often employed to preserve protein structure is
refrigeration. This slows but does not stop denaturing. The shelf-life of any
vaccine is therefore limited, leading to spoilage of millions of dollars of
vaccines and antibodies each year. Improving protein stability would provide a
great benefit to human health, especially if high stability could be achieved at
room temperature. This project will evaluate the use of novel solvents, called
ionic liquids, as a means to stabilize proteins in solution. The ultimate goal
is to maintain protein activity for extended periods of time. This project will
provide research experiences to undergraduates and high school students, with a
focus on recruiting participants from underrepresented populations. This
outreach will strengthen the pipeline of students entering and remaining in
science, engineering and technology (STEM) programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of a protein is defined by its local
intra- and inter-molecular interactions. These include the effects of the
solvent environment. The addition of ionic liquids (ILs) to the solution might
further stabilize the protein. The project objectives are to determine the
solvent role (i.e., IL-water composition) on protein stability and structure
using spectroscopy and atomistic simulations, to understand protein solubility
behavior, and to determine the activity of IL-recovered proteins. Specific goals
include extending the time-window of protein stability at both ambient and
elevated temperatures and increasing the retention of protein activity after
extended storage in IL-containing solutions. This project should provide
molecular-level insights into specific effects on protein structure and
stability. Simulations will amplify the interpretation of experimental results
and also serve as a guide to future experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.