* 1760889
* CAREER: Building Secure Wireless Communication Systems via Physical Layer Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Lifeng Lai, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 37,804.00

Due to the open nature of wireless communications, it is important to provide a
comprehensive security solution to protect information exchanged over the
wireless medium. Two approaches have been adopted in the existing studies. In
the first approach, physical layer properties of wireless channels are exploited
to achieve provably secure information transmission. However, the study of
practical models that involve active attackers and dishonest legitimate users
has been limited. In the second approach, cryptographic schemes that can deal
with general practical models are adopted. However, these schemes ignore the
physical properties of wireless channels and rely on unproved intractability
assumptions. It is critical to create synergies between these two approaches and
design secure wireless systems that can deal with general scenarios while
providing analytical security guarantees.

This project aims to systematically exploit wireless channel physical layer
resources to design secure wireless systems that provide provable
confidentiality, integrity and privacy. Two main thrusts are investigated in
this project. In the first thrust, a layered design approach, which uses
physical layer resources to generate information theoretically secure keys
needed for upper layer security primitives, is developed. In the second thrust,
a cross-layer design approach that explicitly exploits physical layer resources
in the design of upper layer security primitives is studied. This approach
involves the development of novel performance metrics that have elements from
both information theory and cryptography and the design of schemes under these
new metrics. The research is fully integrated with three phases of engineering
education: a) outreach to high school students; b) project- and research-
oriented undergraduate student education; and c) graduate students training
through new course development, mentoring and industry collaboration.