* 1760717
* RAPID: Tree Blowdown Impacts of Hurricane Harvey on Hydrologic Surface Connectivity in a Coastal River and Its Floodplain
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Inci Guneralp, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2019
* USD 28,754.00

Flood inundation typically enables the largest and most abrupt material and
energy exchanges between a river and its floodplain and the size of the area
affected is highly dependent on river-channel and floodplain geomorphology.
Given the vulnerability of coastal plains to the wind and rain impacts of
tropical cyclones with increasing strength and frequency, it is critical to
advance our understanding of these impacts on river-floodplain interactions in
these environments. This knowledge is also crucial to successful preservation
and management of the coastal plain river systems, their ecosystems, and
ecosystem services. The Mission River on the Coastal Bend of Texas, which is
also a part of the Mission-Aransas National Estuarine Research Reserve (MANERR),
was on the path of the destructive core of Hurricane Harvey, which made its
first landfall on Aug. 25, 2017. Hurricane driven heavy rainfall resulted only
in moderate flooding of the river; however, the extreme winds induced a
substantial amount of tree blowdowns and large woody debris (LWD) on the river
and its floodplain. LWD creates logjams and barriers that can alter the flow of
the river and redirect flood and river flow into floodplain environments,
resulting in erosion and reconfiguration of the river system. This rapid-
response research project will be the first assessment of the tree blowdown
impacts of Hurricane Harvey ? and one of the first of any hurricane? on a
coastal river system. The outcomes are expected to contribute to the very
limited literature in fluvial geomorphology on the subject by advancing the
knowledge-base on extreme wind impacts of tropical cyclones on river systems.
The findings will provide insights for developing successful landscape and
ecosystem management of the riverine habitats at the MANERR, with applicability
to similar systems which might include human habitation and infrastructure. This
research will establish partnerships with staff/researchers at the MANERR and
Coastal Resilience Collaborative (CRC) within Texas Sea Grant. The findings will
be disseminated via the MANERR environmental stewardship program and CRC
education and outreach communities with the aim of increasing awareness of
coastal communities, resource managers, and land-use planners on the impacts of
tropical cyclones on river and floodplain systems and associated ecosystem
services. The proposed study will provide training and mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.

This study aims to answer the question: What are the tree blowdown and LWD
impacts of Hurricane Harvey on hydrologic surface connectivity between the
Mission River channel and floodplain? The study is driven by two objectives: 1)
determine quantitatively the spatial extent and patterns of tree blowdowns on
the floodplain and LWD inputs into the river channel; 2) evaluate the impact of
tree blowdowns and LWD after an extreme event (i.e., hurricane-force wind) on
flood inundation and hydrologic surface connectivity between the river channel
and the floodplain in a spatial and temporal context. To address these
objectives, the study will integrate field investigations, high spatial- and
spectral-resolution geospatial data, and hydrodynamic modeling. Findings of the
study will advance our process understanding of how an abrupt change in
floodplain configuration due to hurricane-force wind influence the surface water
induced interactions within river-floodplain systems and how this influence
varies across a range of river-stage conditions.