* 1760839
* Versatile Synthesis of Chlorophylls and Bacteriochlorophylls for Fundamental Studies in Photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Jonathan Lindsey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Jonathan S. Lindsey. Professor Lindsey is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at North Carolina State University. He is developing
methods to create chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls (molecules that nature
used to harvest energy from light) in the laboratory from simple starting
materials in a straightforward manner. The synthesis of (bacterio)chlorophylls
has never been fully accomplished in this manner. The ability to build such
molecules along with analogues will afford a much deeper understanding of energy
flow in photosynthesis (an area that impacts biophysics, plant sciences, energy
generation), the nature of metabolic breakdown products (an area that impacts
ecology, global carbon balance), and the chemical properties of such compounds
(an area that impacts nutrition, medicine). The project mainly involves organic
chemistry but will also impact diverse areas of science including understanding
of photosynthesis. Thus, the project is well suited for the education and
training of scientists in a collaborative environment. Professor Lindsey's group
is well-positioned to provide this experience for students underrepresented in
science. In addition, outreach activities involving North Carolina teachers will
also be part of the funded project.

Chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls are the chief pigments in photosynthetic
organisms, including plants, cyanobacteria, and anoxygenic photosynthetic
bacteria. The lack of synthetic methods for preparing (bacterio)chlorophylls and
analogues constitutes an intellectual and technical deficit in the
photosynthetic sciences. The Lindsey lab proposes to fill this chasm by
developing robust methods for synthesis of such valuable macrocycles. The
particular challenges in synthesizing (bacterio)chlorophylls include (1) the
stereochemistry of substituents in the pyrroline ring(s), (2) the fifth
(isocyclic) ring, and (3) substituents arrayed about the perimeter of the
macrocycle. The intellectual merit of the work concerns the development of
routes for the synthesis of the key photosynthetic pigments and analogues; the
latter have broad impact (beyond the scope of the present grant) encompassing
studies of quantum coherence in photosynthesis and catabolism in ecology. A key
outcome is a methodology in heterocyclic chemistry for preparing pyrroles,
pyrrolines, dipyrromethanes, hydrodipyrrins, and phyllobilins relevant to the
(bacterio)chlorophylls of photosynthesis. The broader impacts entail
professional development of middle and high school science teachers to improve
teaching of photosynthesis (via a chlorophyll-based experiment) in schools and
to inspire middle and high school students to STEM, thereby broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.