* 1760980
* Developing the next generation of researchers investigating Khoisan languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Christopher Collins, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2024
* USD 196,229.00

Click sounds are some of the most complex and difficult to produce sounds of all
the languages of the world. Most scientific research on the Khoisan languages
(the non-Bantu click languages of Africa), has focused on their sound systems
because this complexity illuminates cognitive patterns and physiological
mechanisms relevant for human language. However, because far less attention has
been paid to their grammatical systems, Khoisan languages have had little or no
impact on current syntactic theories. To achieve a deeper scientific knowledge
of the Khoisan languages, this project will study morphosyntactic aspects of two
completely undescribed languages: Cua and Tshila (classified as central Khoisan
or Khoe-Kwadi languages). Such data sets will also clarify the linguistic
classification of the central Khoisan languages, and their historical
connections to other Khoisan languages. The project's training component will
bring advanced undergraduates and beginning graduate students to Botswana for
hands-on training in linguistic research on the Khoisan languages. This will
increase the number of researchers working on the highly endangered Khoisan
languages while simultaneously increasing scientific knowledge about the
linguistic properties possessed by these languages. The team will work closely
with the language communities in developing materials and resources, of value to
the communities and in educating participating students about broader impacts
and community-academic collaborations. Also, because the U.S. State Department
notes the importance of Botswana as a partner and as a model of stability in
Africa, the national interest is served by strengthening on the ground
connections and partnerships with the country and enhancing an international
collaboration with the University of Botswana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will investigate the unique syntactic and morphological structures of Cua and
Tshila, important for theoretical and typological syntactic work. For example,
the grammatical sketch will cover the complex system of pronouns. English has
handful of pronouns. In subject position, these are: I, you (singular and
plural), he, she, we, they. Central Khoisan languages have far more pronouns.
Kua (a related Khoisan language) has 31 subject pronouns (factoring in person,
number, gender). The same morphological features that characterize pronouns also
characterize the person-gender-number (PGN) markers found on noun phrases. For
example, in Kua &amp;#967;am=&amp;#449;oe includes two morpheme and is glossed
"lion=3MPS"; it means "male lions". The clitic (&amp;#449;oe) encodes both the
notion of plurality (more than two) and masculine reference. Understanding the
structure of pronouns and PGN markers and how they vary across the Kalahari Khoe
languages is one of the central scientific goals of the project. The project
will result in a dictionary, linguistically annotated recordings of texts,
literacy resources, and a grammatical sketch, as well as disseminating results
in journal articles. The project will also help to document the rich cultural
heritage of Botswana, and southern Africa more generally. All the documentation
and related materials will be archived in a public digital collection at ELAR,
the Endangered Language Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.