* 1760788
* Communicating Mathematically Across Student Differences in the Work of Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Maisie Gholson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,457,364.00

The fundamental demand of teaching is to see, hear, interpret, and extend
students' current ideas and understanding. Students differ from their teachers--
in age and gender identity, as well as racial identity, language, social class,
and experience. These differences compound the complexity of communicating
because implicit racial and gender biases affect teachers' orientations to
seeing students' capabilities. This project will focus on (1) understanding what
it is involved in communicating mathematically with students who represent and
come from a range of different communities in the work of teaching and, based on
this, (2) supporting teachers to do this work skillfully. This project seeks to
understand and support the work of communicating mathematically across
difference in ways that disrupt the marginalization of students underrepresented
in mathematics. In the first phase of the project, the project will study
teaching, with an eye to identifying the interactive mathematical work of
teaching across difference. The second phase will involve designing and enacting
specific interventions, based on progress in the first phase, to help practicing
teachers shift from predominant patterns of overlooking or misinterpreting
underrepresented students to focusing on students' strengths and developing
fluency and attunement in hearing and talking across difference. Teaching has
profound potential to support or impede students' opportunities to learn, as
well as to develop their sense of themselves as capable mathematical thinkers
and their interest in and persistence with mathematics in and outside of school.
Teaching can broaden how mathematics is represented in school and can directly
include rather than marginalize students. Project results will help focus
teacher education development on these crucial skills, potentially increasing
diverse participation in STEM education in profound and far reaching ways. This
project is supported by the EHR Core Research Program, which supports
fundamental research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify how a special kind of
mathematical fluency in action might contribute to improving both theory and
practice with respect to the mathematical work of teaching across difference.
The project team will analyze videotaped lessons grades 4-8 in a sample of
classrooms with significant racial and linguistic diversity. The focus will be
on listening to, interpreting, talking with, and responding to students to
identify patterns in the demands of such interactive mathematical work. Analysis
will focus on characterizing what mathematical fluency and attunement to
students might mean and entail in practice. In addition, we will observe and
document fifth grade and other mathematics instruction, similarly focusing on
communicative work across difference. For the additional data collection, the
project will interview samples of students in classrooms to learn how they are
experiencing and interpreting their teachers' mathematical communication and
interactions. The project will offer specific opportunities for teachers to
extend their ability to do this interactive mathematical work and will develop
and use tools for tracking their evolving mathematical fluency and
attunement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.