* 1760644
* RAPID: Quasi-Experiment on the Effect of Disaster-induced Displacement
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Christopher Fariss, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2022
* USD 92,681.00

Natural disasters often force immediate and large-scale displacement of
individuals from their homes and communities. These events result in more than
just the loss of physical property, as community and neighborhood attributes
encompass many different aspects of an individual's social relationships and the
cultural institutions. Moving to a new community changes these attributes and
will affect an individual's political attitudes and behaviors. This research is
therefore able to address not just the immediate policy implications of such
displacements but also a classic and important question in social science: how
does local context affects political opinions and behaviors? The ongoing post-
Harvey migration provides a unique opportunity to examine the effect of social
contact and political context in a case where these encounters could not have
otherwise been anticipated by the individuals affected. This project will
examine the political consequences of Hurricane Harvey by studying post-Harvey
migration patterns as an unexpected or exogenous shock. The exogenous shock will
allow an understanding of (1) variations in the decision of displaced
individuals to move to different areas and how this affects their associated
experiences once they move, and (2) how people's political attitudes and
behaviors change in response to rapid demographic shifts in their communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research holds great significance because geographic
residence is rarely if ever randomly assigned, which makes it difficult to
establish whether observed correlations are the result of contextual effects or
individuals' self-selection into particular ideological and social communities.
Similarly, social contact may have a positive effect because those individuals
willing to engage across social barriers are also the individuals who are more
likely to change their minds on political issues. This research project teases
apart these potentially confounding variables to truly understand their
independent effects. To study these relationships, publicly available data from
Twitter and the Texas voter registration file will be used. The ongoing post-
Harvey migration provides a unique opportunity to examine the effect of social
contact and political context in a case where these encounters could not have
otherwise been anticipated. This work will build on results on the political
attitudes of displaced individuals after Hurricane Katrina. As a result of New
Orleans? unique racial geography, Katrina evacuees were more likely to be people
of color and of lower socioeconomic status. The 2017 flooding in the greater
Houston area, however, affected both rich and poor communities alike, as well as
majority white and majority-minority communities. Examining the impact of these
evacuees on the communities to which they relocate allows estimations of the
effects of evacuee proximity separately from those of changes in racial
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.