* 1760258
* RAPID: Assessment of Risks and Vulnerability in Coupled Human-Physical Networks of Houston's Flood Protection, Emergency Response, and Transportation Infrastructure in Harvey
* SBE,SMA
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Philip Berke, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 188,873.00

Cities have a variety of infrastructure systems in place to deal with
emergencies and extreme events like hurricanes. The effectiveness and efficiency
with which these systems perform is, in part, a function of the severity and
characteristics of the specific event relative to the capacities of the
individual systems, but also the extent to which these infrastructure systems
effectively coordinate. In this Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID), the
Principal Investigators will collect time-sensitive data on the performance of
Houston's flood protection, emergency management, and transportation
infrastructure systems and processes in Hurricane Harvey. These data will be
used to help identify what inter-organizational planning, communication, and
coordination risks exist, what policies and strategies yield network resilience,
and which capital investment decisions are optimal. These findings will suggest
ways to improve decision-making processes, coordination, and network planning
among infrastructure designers and operators, city planners, and emergency
managers based on better understanding of the underlying interdependencies among
infrastructure systems and processes. Hence, the expected results will have
significant societal benefits that will help improve public safety and reduce
economic losses from extreme weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
tasks to be undertaken are to: (1) map, model, and analyze decision-making
processes and human system networks in interdependent infrastructure systems to
uncover inter-organizational risks; (2) specify and characterize infrastructure
disruptions and cascading failures and their relationships with inter-
organizational risks and decision-making processes; and (3) examine households?
physical and social vulnerabilities influenced by inter-organizational risks and
infrastructure disruptions and cascading failures. These tasks will be
accomplished through in-depth interviews and participatory workshops with
stakeholders and decision-makers (e.g., Flood Control District, Army Corps, City
Managers, Planners, Infrastructure Engineers, and Utility Companies), collection
of data to assess interdependencies and the subsequent impacts caused by
failures in critical infrastructure, and a household survey to determine the
impacts of infrastructure failures on households in two to three areas in
Houston.