* 1760845
* Literature Analysis and Synthesis of Women of Color in Technology and Computing
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 355,480.00

This project will review and synthesize existing literature on factors that
impact the interest, participation, retention and success of women of color in
computing and technology fields. This type of project informs areas for future
research and helps to identify promising practices that others can implement.
The project will result in a report to help inform those who are practitioners
in STEM education, STEM employers, and STEM policy makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a mixed-methods meta-synthesis that will
analyze and integrate the findings from empirical research on the factors that
affect the retention of women of color in technology and computing higher
education and careers. Focusing on literature produced since 2000, this
synthesis will address the main research question: According to the existing
empirical literature, what factors affect the experiences, participation, and
advancement of women of color in technology and computing from the stages of
early college education through their careers? The goals of the project are to:
(1) build new knowledge and understanding of the factors affecting the retention
of women of color in technology and computing; (2) identify gaps in research;
(3) inform leaders in the field about promising policies and practices that
retain women of color in technology and computing; and (4) make methodological
contributions through the testing and refinement of meta-synthesis tools and
processes. This project is supported by the Education and Human Resources Core
Research Program, which funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.