* 1760699
* RAPID: Differentiated Household Recovery Post-Hurricane Harvey
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Sheryl McCurdy, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 70,845.00

This qualitative research project will be conducted among Hurricane Harvey
repeat and first-time evacuees who are relocated in the Houston area. The goal
is to capture people's early reactions, feelings, observations, and household
negotiations as they plan how to move forward. The researchers particularly want
to understand how past experiences with floods and hurricanes affect current
planning and decision-making. The researchers anticipate that Houstonian
household responses to their third flood in three years is changed by that
previous experience of flooding and by memories of past hurricanes, including
Ike (2008), Rita (2005), and Tropical Storm Allison (2001). Harvey was not just
a catastrophic event, it was the cap on a cumulative 17 year series of flood and
hurricane incidents. The researchers are particularly interested in the question
of whether flood-fatigued households will have less conflict over decisions to
stay or leave than do households without prior flood experience. Findings from
this research will be used to develop appropriate primary and secondary
interventions to improve the provision of relief and support services in future
disasters. Findings also will help improve understanding of how people adjust
their assessments over time, which will enable policy makers to create
appropriate interventions to help households deal with repeat disasters.

Data collection for this study will consist of digitally-recorded face-to-face
in-depth audio interviews, field notes, and archival sources (newspaper reports,
internet sites dedicated to Hurricane Harvey evacuees, government and NGO
reports). A stratified sample of 80 men and women from 40 households that
represent with different backgrounds and circumstances will be recruited to
participate in this study. Half of the sample will be from a neighborhood that
has not been flooded in recent memory, and half of the sample will from a
separate neighborhood that that has been flooded many times. Ten key informant
stakeholders, affiliated with Houston government agencies, non-profit groups,
and religious organizations, will also be interviewed. The audio-taped
interviews will be transcribed and the digital files, along with the field notes
and relevant archival documents, will be coded for themes and emergent ideas
that will be followed up on in later interviews. The expected outcomes of this
research project are: 1) insights into the types of interventions and policies
that will help post-disaster households remain viable; and, 2) improved social
science theory about factors that produce effective household risk assessment,
coping, and survival strategies after repeated and cumulative disaster
experiences.