* 1760342
* Tropical Geometry and Moduli Spaces: Satellite Conference of the 2018 International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM)
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Sam Payne, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 10,760.00

This award will support US based participants and speakers at Tropical Geometry
and Moduli Spaces, a satellite conference of the 2018 International Congress of
Mathematicians (ICM), to be held August 13-17 in Cabo Frio, Brazil. This event
will leverage the assembly of a vast number of mathematicians at the ICM in Rio
de Janeiro as an opportunity to bring together a global community of leading
experts and early career researchers in an especially active and rapidly
developing field. This conference will be the largest ever in tropical geometry
with over 80 participants anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus
of the conference will be broadly centered on connections to moduli spaces,
including interactions logarithmic structures, Berkovich spaces, and enumerative
geometry. In just the past few years, there have been a number of significant
advances in building explicit links among these different geometric theories,
especially for curves and abelian varieties, using skeletons of nonarchimedean
analytic spaces as a shared common tool. These links explain many older
correspondence theorems, from the beginnings of tropical enumerative geometry,
and are being used to establish new correspondences and to prove new enumerative
results of classical flavor, e.g. for counting curves with fixed invariants, and
to prove degeneration formulas for logarithmic Gromov-Witten invariants as part
of a broader program linking tropical geometry to mirror symmetry. At the same
time, new algebraic foundations are emerging for scheme-theoretic tropical
geometry, built out of idempotent semirings, which will also be featured at the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.