* 1760859
* Tailoring the Composition, Morphology and Assembly of MXene Nanosheets
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Micah Green, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2021
* USD 544,785.00

MXenes are a recently discovered fascinating class of 2-D transition metal (M) -
carbon (X) nanosheets that hold promise to advance the national prosperity and
defense in numerous areas associated with advanced energy, electronics, and
defense applications. This grant advances the processing of MXene nanostructures
with different compositions and morphologies and their assembly into functional
nanofilms. The grant will address the major research challenges associated with
the production of MXenes and develop the processing techniques to form these
into usable films as well as determine the resultant process-property
relationships. A variety of MXenes are theoretically possible, but have yet to
be experimentally obtained. MXenes exist as 2D sheets and extending their
lateral dimension from nano-to-macro size remains challenging. This project will
develop processing methodologies for producing MXenes with compositions and
functional groups that have previously been impossible. The planned
incorporation of these interesting materials into polymer composites would allow
their integration into many coating technologies. The control over the material
properties through manipulation of composition, shape, structure, and multi-
layer architectures will allow an expansion of the range of their physical
properties. The researchers and students will engage in multiple outreach
efforts to foster education, research, diversity, and representation in
materials science at the graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 levels, with the
special focus on developing students entrepreneurship skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major current limitations in both MXene synthesis and
processing and the underlying process-structure-property relationships at both
the nano or individual nanosheet level and the macroscopic films and composites
level will be investigated. These materials are derived from layered ceramics
(i.e., MAX phases) and have a wide range of possible compositions and functional
groups. The "MX" name refers to the M (transition metal) and X (typically
carbon) in these layered structures; a common example includes Ti3C2Tx, where T
stands for various terminal groups. The specific research tasks include the
following: (1) The compositional space of existing MXenes will be extended by
altering the composition of the parent MAX phase to achieve easy etching of A
layers and by applying an electrochemical bias; (2) Capillary forces during
spray drying will manipulate MXene morphology and create shelf-stable 3-D MXene
particles; and (3) Properties and performance of macroscopic MXene-polymer
structures created using layer-by-layer assembly as a function of MXene
interlayer spacing and morphology will be determined. At each stage, MXene
composition, functional groups, and architecture will be connected to the bulk
mechanical and electrical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.