* 1760993
* Impact of Work-Based-Learning on Community College STEM Education and Careers
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Lois Joy, Jobs for the Future, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,465,787.00

Jobs for the Future is conducting a research project in collaboration with
Wested that will examine the impact of STEM work-based-learning (WBL) in
community colleges. The researchers will use social cognitive career theory
(SCCT) as a framework and mixed-methods design to investigate research questions
regarding (1) differences in student participants and motivation to participate
in community college STEM work-based-learning, (2) structures of community
college STEM WBL opportunities and their alignment to best practices principles
in WBL, and (3) the impact of participating in community college STEM WBL on
student outcomes, including certificate or associate's degree completion,
persistence in STEM, and broadening participation. The underlying assumption is
that WBL might serve as an antidote to negative social and cultural messages,
lack of support, lack of access to on-the-job STEM learning, and other factors
that influence students' decisions to remain in STEM. The study also will
contribute to career counseling research through the application of the SCCT in
the community college context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use a
mixed-methods research design that involves an analysis of two cohorts
(recession and post-recession) using data from the Florida Education Data System
(FEDS), case studies at two Florida community colleges, and transcript data for
the information technology and engineering technology students enrolled at the
case study schools. The study sample is expected to include a total of 8,665
community college students with 1,500 having participated in a WBL course.
Researchers will use exploratory and descriptive multivariate analysis of FEDS
to answer questions about WBL participation and impact. Case studies of WBL will
be conducted at two Florida community colleges to collect data about how
students learn about WBL, what influences their choice to participate in WBL,
how WBL influences their self-efficacy and expectations (per SCCT), and
perceptions of whether WBL improves student outcomes. In addition, they will
analyze extant data from the colleges to explore the impact of WBL experiences
on student completion and entrance into STEM careers and four-year STEM programs
of study. The interview sample for both colleges will include 60 students, six
administrators, 24 faculty, and 48 employers. The researchers will use the data
to test the best practice principles in WBL developed by Jobs for the Future as
bench marks for community colleges. The project fills a gap in the knowledge
about SCCT by applying it to WBL. It also will shed new insights about WBL in
the community college STEM context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.