* 1760838
* Collaborative Research: Bringing the Late Pleistocene into Focus: Better estimates of Ages and Ocean Circulation through Data-Model Comparison
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Charles Lawrence, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 263,503.00

Measurements of past climate changes are crucial for understanding the causes,
amplitudes, and rates of natural climate variability. Ocean sediments contain
abundant microfossils that are an important archive of past climate information
with near-global coverage. To place an ocean sediment sample into context,
researchers need two kinds of information: (1) an interpretation of the climate
represented by that sample and (2) the age of the sample. Age information is
crucial for reconstructing the rate and sequence of climate changes globally.
Some sediments are well-dated using radiocarbon. However, the ages of many
samples can only be estimated indirectly, resulting in age uncertainties as
large as 4,000 years. This research project aims to improve these indirect age
estimates using statistical analysis of the available radiocarbon-dated samples.
Improvements in indirect age estimates will be used to increase the accuracy of
global datasets of climate changes for the past 150,000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the aim of this project is to
improve indirect age estimates derived from the stratigraphic alignment of
benthic delta18O (a proxy for global ice volume and deep ocean temperature). A
major source of uncertainty in these ages derives from differences of up to
4,000 years in the timing of benthic delta18O change observed at a few core
sites with very accurate radiocarbon models. However, little is known about how
the timing of benthic delta18O signals differs at other locations. The research
approach for this project incorporates ocean circulation models, paleoclimate
data (benthic delta18O and 14C from ~100 globally distributed sediment cores),
and statistical inference. Phase one of the project is to characterize benthic
delta18O age differences (delta18O lags) globally using radiocarbon data from
~100 sediment cores in conjunction with results from ocean circulation models.
Phase two is to apply the results from phase one to develop improved methods for
delta18O alignment. Phase three is to generate a new database of improved
delta18O age models. Thus, the final products of the project will be (1)
probabilistic stacks (averages) describing regional and global patterns of
benthic delta18O variability, (2) probabilistic algorithms for multiproxy core
alignments and for generating Bayesian inferences of delta18O lags, (3) a
database of age models for ~300 cores with benthic delta18O data, and (4)
estimates of ocean circulation changes based on comparing benthic del18O data
with different circulation model scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has broader impacts for climate change research and education. Accurate
paleoclimate age estimates are crucial for creating data compilations that are
used to test the effectiveness of climate models and improve confidence in their
ability to simulate potential future climate changes. The spatial coverage of
paleoclimate data compilations is often increased by including data with
indirect age estimates that have large uncertainties. By improving age estimates
for benthic delta18O alignments and quantifying alignment age uncertainties,
this project will allow for more informed selection of which data to include in
compilations and overall better accuracy. Data-model comparison performed as
part of this project will also better constrain ocean circulation changes, which
could help describe the causal chain of events for past climate changes and may
identify isolated reservoirs of carbon sequestered in the ocean during
glaciations. This project will also provide interdisciplinary training in earth
science and mathematics to two graduate students. Research methods and findings
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate classes through the
development and dissemination of interactive computer lab
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.