* 1760221
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Field Study of Volunteer Convergence in Post-Disaster Relief
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Emmett Lodree, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2018
* USD 17,999.00

The emergency response to Hurricane Harvey involved not only traditional relief
agencies but many ordinary citizens and small groups who felt compelled to
assist the many residents who found themselves stranded in the face of rising
flood waters. Many volunteers brought personal watercraft and organized rescue
missions along flooded streets and bayous. Other groups, such as religious
organizations, small businesses, and service organizations, opened their doors
as informal shelters, with the congregations or organization members serving as
volunteers and providing food and shelter for displaced individuals. These
spontaneous volunteers represent a valuable source of labor but present
significant logistical challenges for central response planners. The spontaneous
volunteer labor force is largely unpredictable, may enter and leave at will, and
possess a variety of useful skills. Moreover, while individuals may have good
intentions in volunteering, they are largely untrained in emergency response and
may present dangers to themselves and to others. This RAPID award will provide a
better understanding of the dynamics of spontaneous volunteer response and
should improve the ability of response planners to effectively incorporate
citizen volunteers in disaster relief efforts. A graduate student and
undergraduate students will be involved in this effort and will be provided
valuable experience by working on this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for data collection
efforts in Houston, Texas in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey with several
research objectives in mind: (1) to understand the organizational dynamics
associated with volunteer intake and assignment; (2) to create and validate
analytical models for volunteer intake and service length; (3) to understand the
barriers to successful incorporation of spontaneous volunteers into the
emergency response to disasters. The PIs will collect data from a number of
groups involved in the relief effort, including religious organizations, local
businesses, ad-hoc groups, and traditional relief agencies. The PIs will observe
activities in active relief operations, interview relief staff and volunteers,
and collect and analyze volunteer logs and disaster management systems. These
data will provide valuable input for predictive models for volunteer
convergence.