* 1760260
* First-Principles Design of Charged Defects for Two-dimensional Quantum Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yuan Ping, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 353,130.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education to
develop computational methodologies aimed to investigate properties of defects,
a kind of imperfection in solid materials. The PI will focus on defects in
extremely thin materials, so thin that they are called 2D materials, and layered
materials made from stacking them. Computational methods based on advanced
theories can be used to help design defects in these materials so that they can
be used to emit a single-quantum of light or photon. These single photon
emitters can be the heart of building blocks for a new generation of information
technology devices. Two-dimensional materials have major advantages over more
traditional bulk materials, allowing, for example, easier production and
integration into solid-state devices. Computational methods play a key role in
designing 2D materials with defects for advanced sensing, computing,
information, modeling and communications technologies. This project is aligned
with NSF's Quantum Leap Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
educational activities aimed to increase participation and representation of
women in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines,
especially in the physical sciences. Efforts in this project are planned to fill
a significant gap in the physical and materials chemistry educational curriculum
at University of California, Santa Cruz and build up theoretical/computational
materials research on the campus under the umbrella of the Materials Science
&amp; Engineering Initiative. The activities include developing new
computational materials courses for upper-division undergraduate and graduate
students, providing undergraduate research opportunities through various
existing programs and organizing workshops and seminars that offer career
planning advices, especially for women students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research to
develop computational methods and to investigate materials with potential
application to quantum information technology. Defects in two-dimensional (2D)
materials, such as ultrathin hexagonal Boron Nitride, have been found to be
promising single-photon emitters with polarized and ultrabright single-photon
emission at room temperature. This discovery opens new possibilities for
emerging applications in nanophotonics and quantum information, with potentially
much better scalability than the long-studied nitrogen vacancy center (NV-) in
diamond. Despite the promising properties that have been experimentally
demonstrated to date, accurate first-principles prediction of defect properties
in 2D materials remains challenging. Difficulties arise mainly because of the
highly anisotropic dielectric screening in 2D materials and the presence of
strong many-body interactions, including electron-hole, electron-phonon, and
defect-exciton interactions, which are not included in standard density
functional theory computer codes. The plans to develop efficient computational
methods to accurately determine defect charge transition levels and excited
state lifetimes of defects in ultrathin 2D materials and heterojunctions, and
then to use them to design complex defects with ideal properties for quantum
emitters and quantum computation applications based on first-principles
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can contribute to resolving
long-standing issues of simulating charged defects in 2D materials from first-
principles, which necessitates proper treatment of electrostatic potentials of
charges near a 2D plane and of the screened Coulomb interaction in many-body
perturbation theory. Accurate electronic structure methods developed through
this project can be used for determining defect charge transition levels,
radiative exciton recombination lifetimes, and phonon-assisted non-radiative
lifetimes in defective 2D monolayer and heterojunctions. They will also enable
the rational design of quantum defects in 2D
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes educational activities
aimed to increase participation and representation of women in STEM disciplines,
especially in the physical sciences. Efforts in this project will fill a
significant gap in the physical and materials chemistry educational curriculum
at University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) and build up theoretical and
computational materials research on the campus. Students from physics,
chemistry, and engineering departments can join in the research and gain first-
hand experience in computational materials research in the PI's group. The PI
aims to recruit women and minority students to participate in these experiences.
This project will also strengthen the research infrastructure at UCSC, a
Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.