* 1760760
* Math Learning Disabilities among Young Adults in College: Structure, Identification, and Validation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ioannis Pavlidis, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,473,793.00

Many more students are enrolled in community college (CC) than in four-year
colleges and universities, and many more students take developmental (remedial)
math at CC than at four-year institutions. However, failure rates in these
courses are high, and failure of developmental math is a significant barrier to
STEM participation. There is surprisingly little data about the specific skill
deficits and sociodemographic and personal barriers that contribute to this
situation. It is likely that prior education, entry level mathematical skills,
motivation, self-regulation, and affective factors contribute, in conjunction
with work/family/financial considerations. However, these factors have not been
considered together. This project will seek to identify the factors that
underlie developmental math failure and how these factors fit together. It will
use this information to develop a novel approach to identify mathematics
learning disability (MLD). The project then aims to validate this approach by
monitoring physiological factors that may qualitatively differentiate MLD from
other difficulties. This project aims to enhance theories about how math skills
develop and are affected by these factors, and address how to identify MLD at
the college level. The results may point to potential avenues to identify and
remediate these difficulties, which would be useful for improving student
success in college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enroll three types
of first-time-in-college students: students in CC taking developmental math;
students in CC taking course-credit mathematics; and students in a four-year
university taking college algebra. The population is highly relevant to
broadening STEM participation among college students with math difficulty, since
it takes place within a highly diverse sociodemographic setting (Houston,
Texas). The team will enroll 1050 students (primarily those in CC developmental
math), and evaluate a model of how cognitive, mathematical, affective,
motivational, and demographic characteristics intersect, using structural
equation modeling. Data analysis plans involve latent class models to identify
potential MLD students, with key criteria being (a) demonstrated math weakness
as indicated by enrollment in developmental math; and (b) failure of that
course. The team will compare this method of identification with standard
identification models, specifically low achievement and discrepancy models.
Validation of developed models will involve qualitative comparisons between MLD
and other students with math difficulty, by observing and analyzing in-vivo math
performance using multimodal data capture and analysis focused on physiological
response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning
and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence
to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.