* 1760015
* I-Corps: Rapid detection of pathogens using microfluidic dielectrophoresis and dielectric spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Nadim Ajami, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to advance
microbiologists' ability to detect, characterize, and control microscopic
organisms such as bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Collectively, the planet's
microbiome makes up more than 80% of all living mass and it significantly
impacts human health and activities. Some microorganisms are beneficial,
providing useful industrial functions or therapeutic value; others can cause
severe disease and disrupt industrial processes. Currently, microbiologists grow
microorganisms in their laboratories to characterize molecular and cellular
mechanisms related to replication, pathogenicity, therapeutic and industrial
properties, and interactions with the host and the environment. These goals have
proven successful in the generation of diagnostic tools, new therapies, and
improving industrial processes. However, a vast proportion of microorganisms
remain unable to be efficiently cultivated. Particularly in clinical
diagnostics, the ability to detect pathogens accurately and in a timely manner
has a direct impact in patient health. This project seeks to address this
bottleneck by accelerating the time to detect and isolate microbes from clinical
and industrial samples. It is anticipated that reducing the time required to
analyze samples from days to a few hours will lead to significant improvements
in clinical outcomes and industrial microbiology.

This I-Corps project focuses on developing a miniaturized and disposable device
that automatically performs sample processing and analysis to isolate and
characterize bacteria. It features state-of-the-art microelectronic arrays
embedded in microfluidic channels. The array generates electrical force fields
having specific frequencies to selectively isolate microorganisms from
background debris and other undesired cells present in clinical and industrial
samples. Laboratory prototypes have demonstrated proof-of-principle for the
isolation and detection subsystems. In the next phase of the technical
development, these components will be integrated into a single device. This
project will inform the specific design criteria and requirements for this next
prototype through customer discovery work.