* 1760102
* A Graph Theoretic Approach for Spatial Dependence in Quality Control and Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Dorit Hochbaum, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2022
* USD 398,763.00

This project will contribute to the advancement of science and will benefit the
national prosperity and welfare, by enhancing manufacturing system monitoring
and quality control. Expensive high-tech manufacturing processes require early
detection of process disturbances and accurate yield prediction. Early detection
allows for faster diagnosis of the nature and cause of the disturbances and
their correction in order to improve quality and reduce production costs. This
project will devise and test new prediction methods for diverse applications
that exhibit spatial and/or temporal dependencies. By exploiting these
dependencies, this project is expected to enhance quality and reduce production
costs in manufacturing. The project also has relevance to other domains that
exhibit spatial and spatio-temporal dependencies, such as control of the spread
of communicable disease and enhanced protection of individuals on social
networks by detecting patterns of adverse link behavior, such as spam. The
fundamental concepts of this work and the new outlooks on prediction approaches
will be incorporated into educational course materials. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in the research and implementation in the
areas of manufacturing and health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
utilizes graph theoretic optimization techniques to explicitly incorporate
spatiio-temporal dependencies in problems of prediction and estimation. The
graph-theoretic approach employs a separation-deviation model where the
objective is to minimize a penalty function involving deviation functions
associated with nodes and separation functions associated with edges. Efficient
parametric cut algorithms for convex deviation and bilinear separation will be
extended and improved. Separation functions for integrated circuit manufacturing
yield prediction based on priors from actual wafer defect data will be examined.
This work will make fundamental contributions to the theoretical development of
models and computational algorithms for extensions of the basic separation-
deviation model, which is used extensively in Bayesian estimation, machine
learning, and isotonic regression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.