* 1760534
* RAPID: Transformation of Elemental Mercury Dispersed by Flooding During Hurricane Harvey
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* John Reinfelder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey caused catastrophic flooding in southeastern
Texas and dispersed liquid elemental mercury [Hg(0)] from an unknown source to
an area east of Houston. Preliminary measurements performed days after the
hurricane showed mercury concentrations exceeding 2500 mg/kg in floodplain
sediments of the San Jacinto River. Because mercury is a highly toxic element,
the hurricane-induced contamination may pose a significant threat to public
health. This project aims to elucidate the geochemical controls on the
methylation of elemental mercury [Hg(0)] in San Jacinto River sediments.
Floodplain and river sediment samples will be collected and analyzed for mercury
methylation activity. NSF funds will be used to train graduate and undergraduate
students at Rutgers University to carry out field work and laboratory mercury
analyses. An examination of the transformations of elemental mercury in San
Jacinto River sediments dispersed by Hurricane Harvey is a unique opportunity to
investigate the fate of elemental mercury in sediments shortly after release and
will provide critical information for the development of accurate contaminant
transport models and future remediation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
laboratory experiments have shown that certain anaerobic bacteria can take up
dissolved Hg(0) and transform intracellular Hg to methylmercury. However, the
occurrence of this microbial process in contaminated sediments has not been
investigated, and anaerobic methylation of liquid Hg(0) by microbial communities
remains poorly understood. In this project, floodplain and river sediment
samples collected along the San Jacinto River will be used to test two
hypotheses: 1) Elemental mercury in contaminated sediments is converted to
methylmercury under anoxic, water-saturated condition; under oxic conditions,
elemental mercury is oxidized, but not methylated; and 2) Elevated mercury
concentrations in sediments inhibits mercury methylation due to toxicity effects
on the microbial community. Laboratory experiments carried out by the research
team and students at Rutgers University will test these hypotheses with the goal
of obtaining new insights into the geochemical controls on Hg(0) oxidation and
methylation in contaminated sediments. NSF funds will be used to train 2 Ph.D.
students and 2 undergraduate students. The students will gain interdisciplinary
experiences in geochemistry and microbiology as state-of?the-art disciplines in
environmental geosciences. The results of this project will be disseminated
through peer-reviewed publications and presentations at national conferences. By
elucidating the geochemical conditions that promote methylmercury production,
the investigators aim to better inform local public health officials and
environmental managers about the possible dangers associated with this
contamination event.