* 1760662
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RAPID: How decision-making about risk and interdependencies impact well-being: A baseline study of communities affected by Hurricane Harvey.
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Caela O'Connell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 51,738.00

The research supported by this award will develop comparative cases of disaster
recovery outcomes to assess best strategies for fostering adaptive resilience in
at-risk communities. All proposed sites are located in southeastern Texas and
were affected by Hurricane Harvey. They include low-lying coastal and rural
agricultural and ranching areas, towns around Beaumont exposed to petrochemicals
and flooding, and core urban areas of Houston that were flooded and exposed to
contaminated waste waters and industrial refuse. These sites were chosen to
represent a range of socioeconomic statuses, ethnic compositions, livelihoods,
and exposure risk. The project is innovative in adapting formal decision-making
techniques from agricultural contexts to identify factors situated within
stories of recovery experiences and overall wellbeing, especially related to
risk and the many interdependent factors that produce decisions in the real
world. The research will identify variations and similarities in the clusters of
salient factors impinging on decisions in order to locate critical points in the
recovery process that can support or create barriers to recovery and long term
wellbeing. These will begin with the initial big decisions, such as whether or
not to evacuate and will progress over the year as new choices arise. Findings
from this research will contribute insights into the science of disaster
recovery management in the United States, which can lead to more robust, humane,
and sustainable recoveries.

The researchers will employ a combination of anthropological qualitative and
quantitative methods. Through interviews and participant observation, they will
track pivotal moments and everyday life in survivor households, visiting ten
households in each of six communities four times over twelve months. In addition
to the ethnographic data collection, the investigators will carry out two
quantitative household livelihood and well-being surveys at the beginning and
the end of the study, and track changes in household and occupational finances.
They will also collect biosocial data, including water quality testing to detect
the presence or arrival of industrial pollutants, oil or gas residues, and
unusual microbial activity. The sum of these household-level data will position
this research to develop a series of decision-making models for different
categories of choices made by individual survivors and scaled up to model
decision-making made by communities, livelihood groups, and other categories of
analysis such as class and ethnicity, over the course of the first year of
recovery. The project will also provide field-based research experience for two
graduate students.