* 1760016
* International Conference on CRISPR Technologies 2017; Raleigh, NC; December 4-6, 2017
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Chase Beisel, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 10/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award will help support early career researchers who will speak and give
poster presentations at the first International Conference on CRISPR
Technologies, which will be held December 4-6, 2017 in Raleigh, North Carolina.
The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and posters, which will
promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. A panel
session will be devoted to the discussion of ethical and safety concerns related
to CRISPR-Cas technology. There will be ample opportunity for sharing the latest
research results and for networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) technologies are powerful tools
for genome editing in animals, plants, and microorganisms. This meeting provides
a venue for biologists, chemists, engineers and clinicians to discuss CRISPR-Cas
genome editing and its applications to human health, biotechnology and
agriculture. The conference has the following overall goals: 1) to facilitate
scientific exchange among Genome Engineering (CRISPR) researchers; 2) to have
scientific presentations from a diverse group of researchers who study, design
and use CRISPR technologies; 3) to promote interactions between clinicians and
scientists, and to promote discussions of the applications and implications of
CRISPR technologies; 4) to provide a forum for early career scientists to
present their research and to network, since they represent the future of the
Genome Engineering field.