* 1760453
* RAPID: The Changing Nature of "Calls" for Help with Hurricane Harvey: Comparing 9-1-1 and Social Media
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Keri Stephens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 09/30/2019
* USD 168,508.00

RAPID: The Changing Nature of "Calls" for Help with Hurricane Harvey: 9-1-1 and
Social Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Harvey is the first big-data
disaster where social media "calls" for help appear to have supplanted the
overloaded 9-1-1 call systems; social media provided a visible, dialogic link to
help. But this form of help-seeking behavior on public social media is
relatively new. This project (1) captures the voices of hurricane victims and
emergency response workers (both governmental and volunteer) (2) uses captured
data to characterize the language present in actual social media calls for help,
and (3) applies a big-data approach to a new emergency situation to assess that
situation's calls for help. This project paves the way for new ways of thinking
about how first-responders can utilize social media alongside traditional 9-1-1
when dispatching in future emergencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current practice in the crisis informatics literature is to mine social-media
data during the disaster/aftermath around disaster-related keywords. However,
such data collection pulls in everything--from solicitations for donations, to
news stories--and it is challenging to filter signal from noise in such broad
data sets. It is important to identify common threads in the language disaster
victims use in their public "calls for help" to allow emergency managers to
rapidly pinpoint these needs across varied communication channels and save
lives. The approach in this project is unique because the combinatorial method
isolates the signal of conversations by disaster victims on social media by
understanding the specific keywords disaster victims use when requesting help.
Using field interviews and surveys with Harvey and Irma victims, emergency
response organizations, and organizations like the Texas/Cajun Navy--volunteer
groups who organized their efforts through social media--the project will
characterize what was posted, where calls for help were posted, and how these
requests generated responses. The interview protocol will elicit examples of
interviewees' social media posts to help develop ontologies of this content. In
combination with historical data across several platforms (YouTube, Twitter,
Reddit and Facebook) that will be purchased, the second phase of this project
will match precise search queries (narrowed using boolean operators). The search
mechanism will be driven by victims' social media behaviors and language
specific to their experience of Harvey and Irma, rather than catchall hashtags
and search terms. These types of victim-driven ontologies developed around
specific experiences of a disaster are seriously lacking and understudied.