* 1760212
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Model Theory of Differential and Difference Equations with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Anand Pillay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 528,404.00

This project is concerned with differential equations, which relate a quantity
to its rate of change with respect to continuous time; difference equations,
which relate a quantity to its rate of change with respect to discrete time; and
combinations of these. Systems of such equations describe or model behavior and
phenomena throughout the sciences; epidemiology, population dynamics, mechanics
etc. The project will use methods from model theory, a branch of mathematical
logic, to develop or improve procedures for showing consistency (existence of
solutions) of systems of such equations, for identifying auxiliary parameters in
systems of such equations, and for eliminating unknowns from such systems. The
project will also extend the existing classification of sets of solutions from
the case of over-determined (or finite-dimensional) systems to under-determined
(or infinite-dimensional systems). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this focused
research group project, the team of researchers studies differential,
difference, and differential-difference equations, from the point of view of
model theory in the sense of mathematical logic. Among the aims is to provide
decision procedures or improve existing decision procedures regarding
consistency and elimination. Applications to a variety of modelling problems for
physical systems are expected. The proposed research is threefold. The first is
to develop efficient algorithms in cases where the existing methods from
theories of differential or difference fields provide algorithms in principle.
The second is to extend the existing model-theoretic classification of finite-
dimensional solution spaces of systems to infinite-dimensional solution spaces,
as well as developing methods to apply the classification in practice. The third
is to introduce and study new first order theories of rings with operators,
whose decision procedures will apply to new examples arising in
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.