* 1760058
* The Sixth Module of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES)
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Kollman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 756,177.00

The 1990s witnessed a dramatic increase in the number of democracies around the
world. The independent watchdog organization Freedom House estimates that as of
2016, nearly two-thirds of the world's countries are electoral democracies,
nearly doubling the number of democracies from just two decades earlier. More
recent years have witnessed new challenges to the democracies. The largest
movements of refugees since World War II, for example, has put great pressure on
new and established democracies alike. Will this and other pressures decrease
popular satisfaction with democracy? Will it initiate a turn to authoritarian
leaders or to populist leaders? The CSES research project, a collaboration of
scholars in more than 60 countries, is designed to be able to address these
questions and many more that are equally important to science and society. CSES
collaborators conduct high quality, nationally representative surveys after
elections in their countries. CSES combines these surveys along with additional
information about the country and electoral system into a single dataset for use
- at no cost - by academics, students, policymakers, journalists, and the
public. At nearly 25 years of service to science and society, CSES has already
yielded many important results about electoral democracy and is poised to tackle
these and other new questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freedom House estimates that
as of 2016, 123 of the world's 195 countries are electoral democracies,
approximately double the number of democracies just two decades earlier. The
early twenty-first century, however, has witnessed challenges to the success of
this great experiment. One of the largest massive movements of refugees in human
history, for example, has put great pressure on new and established democracies
alike. How much has this pressure been manifested in increasingly authoritarian
leaders (even those elected via democratic procedures) and how much has been
manifest in the spread of populism are questions that are ideally suited for
study through the CSES. CSES advances the understanding of enduring and
fundamental questions about electoral choice. The goals of this unique research
program are threefold: to illuminate how societal, political, and economic
institutional and structural contexts, most especially electoral institutions,
shape the beliefs and behaviors of citizens, thereby conditioning the nature and
quality of democratic choice as expressed through popular elections; to
understand the nature of political and social cleavages and alignments; and to
shed light on how citizens, living under diverse political arrangements,
evaluate democratic institutions and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.