* 1760238
* CAREER: The Developmental Origins of Human Cooperation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Felix Warneken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 192,866.00

Humans share valuable resources, assist others who need help, and work together
in teams to produce outcomes that lie beyond the capabilities of any one
individual. Yet the origins of these cooperative abilities are a puzzle. Other
species do not seem to engage in similar behaviors--indeed, humans have been
characterized as a hyper-cooperative primate. One way to address why humans show
these cooperative patterns is to examine how young children acquire these
skills. Are young children initially selfish, and must be taught to become
altruistic? Or do humans have a biological predisposition for altruism that even
children exhibit? How do children learn to share a common resource and acquire
ideas about fairness? With support of a NSF CAREER award, Dr. Felix Warneken
(Harvard University) will conduct a comprehensive developmental study of
children's cooperative behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
investigate the fundamental psychological processes that enable young children
to cooperate with others. How do children detect that another person is in need?
Under what circumstances are they motivated to help? By using experimental
studies of young children, this research can address important questions about
the interplay of biological predispositions found early in development and the
socialization practices that influence the further development of these
behaviors. In particular, the research will investigate when social expectations
and norms that characterize cooperative behaviors in adults begin to play a role
in child development. For example, adults often expect others to reciprocate
favors and have norms about what constitutes a fair share of a valuable
resource. Therefore, this research is to determine when during development
children begin to attend to these norms when they cooperate with others. By
integrating insights from evolutionary theory, social psychology, and child
development, this project provides a comprehensive study of the skill-set for
cooperation that children acquire across development. In addition, this research
program will provide a wide range of training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students in developmental psychology, including active
participation of students in research, and a summer internship program with
stipends for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups. It will also
educate the broader public about psychological research through freely available
educational material about the research projects for classroom instructors and
the greater public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.