* 1760710
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Enhance the Resilience of Water Infrastructure in Mid-sized Cities Adjacent to Energy Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Helen Lou, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 125,018.00

1759542 (Lou)/1760673 (Reible). At the heart of U.S. energy and chemical
processing industry, Hurricane Harvey caused multiple chemical
spills/explosions, flooding of superfund sites, and even the flooding of a
primary pump station, which draws river water to a drinking water treatment
plant (WTP). If the source water is contaminated by hazardous chemicals released
from multiple sources, compounded by the failure of a WTP, public health, and
also productivity of the local industry will be severely threatened. This study
will address drinking water safety issues under threats of the release of
hazardous chemicals during major natural disasters, and identify strategies to
improve infrastructure resilience in mid-sized cities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will obtain extremely valuable data relating
to the drinking water quality and the release and transport of hazardous
chemicals caused by Harvey. The investigation will provide answers to the
following critical questions: 1) What kind of hazardous chemicals in an energy
production region have the highest risk to be released and contaminate source
water under major natural disasters? 2) What are their distribution, fate and
transport patterns from the source point to WTP intake spots? 3) What strategies
should be taken to enhance the resilience of the drinking water system in mid-
sized coastal cities adjacent to energy industry? The research results will
provide communities a better understanding of the risks and how to manage them.
The contingency plan can be applied to small and mid-sized cities, which often
have limited resources and few alternatives. The strategies identified will
enhance the integrity of urban infrastructure, as well as the normal production
of industrial activities.