* 1760940
* The Role of Visual Representations in Children's Learning about Biological Variability
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Charles Kalish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,078,736.00

Biological variation is among the most important ideas in modern science.
Variability among members of a species provides the foundation for theories of
genetics, natural selection, and evolution. However, people typically
underestimate the amount of variability that occurs within a species over the
life span of animals and from one generation to the next. Children especially
seem to have cognitive biases that members of a species are largely identical.
To improve children's learning about biology, educators need better ways to
scaffold children's understanding of biological variability. Diagrams and other
visual representations are useful in promoting learning about biological
variability, but diagrams can also be confusing. This project focuses on
designing better visual representations of important types of variability, such
as variability across life stages (e.g., in metamorphosis) and variability
between parent and offspring (in genetic transmission). By studying how to make
more effective visual representations, this project will inform efforts to
improve science education, and will also provide information about the ways in
which children's cognitive biases influence their scientific thinking more
generally. This project is supported by an award to the University of Wisconsin
by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
investigate how visual representations can be used to promote learning and
transfer about biological variability, researchers in cognitive development and
education will focus on two types of visual representations: life cycle diagrams
and genetic diagrams. The research will investigate three key issues. First, 6-
to 12-year-old children's beliefs about inheritance will be investigated to
examine how strongly they expect consistency of traits from parent to offspring
(i.e., in genetic transmission). Second, a series of studies will investigate
how features of diagrams affect children's learning and transfer of knowledge
about the life cycle and about genetic transmission. The studies will address
whether highlighting generality, avoiding extraneous details, and highlighting
variability in diagrams lead to optimal learning and transfer. To investigate
these issues, lab-based experiments will be carried out that compare children's
learning from visual representations that vary in targeted ways. The data
analysis will address how children transfer their knowledge beyond the exemplars
that are the focus of the learning tasks. Third, the results of Studies 1 and 2
will be used to inform the design of optimized diagrams, and the effects of
these optimized diagrams on learning about biological change will be
investigated during science workshops at a children's museum and during
community-based science events using a pre-test - intervention - post-test
design. This aspect of the research will also examine whether effective learning
activities about within-species variability support children's reasoning about
natural selection, evolution, and inheritance. The potential for broader impacts
is substantial. Enabling children (and adults) to recognize different types of
variability could have a significant impact on their biological thought and on
the design of biology instruction. Better understanding of how specific visual
features of diagrams contribute to or detract from science understanding may
have important implications for the design and use of visual representations to
convey scientific information in both formal and informal learning environments.
This project also supports collaboration between science educators and
researchers in cognitive development, providing training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. Results will be shared with academic
researchers, and with educators in formal and informal science learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.