* 1760479
* RAPID: Human-Robotic Interactions During Harvey Recovery Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Ranjana Mehta, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 117,579.00

Effective and efficient disaster recovery is necessary for individuals, the
community and businesses to return to normal functioning from large-scale
disasters, like hurricanes Harvey and Irma. In recent years, unmanned robots
have been used to facilitate rescue, response, and recovery and have been found
invaluable in these efforts as they can go where humans cannot. Although these
robots do not have someone on the vehicle itself, they do require humans to
operate them, and little is known about the demands of this technological work
environment on the humans during disaster recovery. What is known is that the
pilots often work: in high work demand stressful environments; outside (often in
the heat, as hurricanes happen in the summer); require ambulation or prolonged
standing in awkward postures for extended periods of time; and sometimes these
operators live in the affected area themselves and thus maybe experiencing
psycho-social stressors due to the disaster. Given the finite number of trained
operators, the availability of different types of robots, and the increasing
areas of the country needing assessment of damages using robots due to large-
scale disasters, there is a critical need to examine naturalistic human/robotic
interactions during recovery operations in affected regions. The study will
create a fundamental, principled understanding of attributes of collaborations
between human and robot teams that are resilient during disaster recovery
operations to minimize costly errors and improve effectiveness of future
disaster robotics response and recovery operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RAPID award will provide critical and timely information on human/robotic
interactions during robot-assisted Harvey recovery operations in the Texas Gulf
Coast and surrounding locations impacted by flooding. The study will examine
recovery operations that focus on inspections of critical infrastructure
affected by the flooding and to assist with economic recovery across different
types of structures (homes, factories, neighborhoods, etc.). The objectives of
this study are to 1) document the relationships between the human (e.g., pilot)
and the robot (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicle) to achieve specific recovery tasks
(surveillance and inspections) in dynamically changing and unstable environments
(e.g., flood-damaged infrastructure); and 2) determine the key contributors of
poor human/robotic interactions to provide heuristics/guidelines for improved
human/robotic interactions. Both qualitative and quantitative data collection
and analyses techniques will be used: video observations to document the gamut
of human/robot interactions during recovery operations, perceptions of
workload/fatigue, trust in robots, usability, communication, and training gaps
through surveys and interviews from the human teams, types and functions of
robots used, operator physiological responses, and task productivity metrics.
Findings obtained from this study will be rapidly disseminated to appropriate
stakeholders (industry, government, public safety) for developing effective best
practices in disaster recovery operations.