* 1760402
* Midlatitude Storm Track Dynamics on a Cloudy Earth
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Tapio Schneider, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 599,257.00

Large-scale wind storms in the extratropics occur preferentially in regions
known as storm tracks. In the Northern Hemisphere, storm tracks span the North
Pacific and North Atlantic, and the storms in them shape the regional weather,
for example, in the Pacific Northwest, the eastern United States, and Europe.
Because storm tracks are the principal conduit through which energy and moisture
are transported in the climate system, they are also crucially important for
controlling climatic features such as the global distributions of rainfall and
surface temperature. Recent observations and simulations with numerical
atmosphere models have revealed that climate changes modulate various aspects of
storm tracks. For example, storm tracks generally shift poleward as the climate
warms and equatorward as the climate cools. However, fundamental questions about
the structure and variability of storm tracks and their response to climate
changes remain unanswered. For example, it is unclear what controls where storm
tracks terminate over the North Pacific and North Atlantic, what their observed
low-frequency variations depend on, and how these and other aspects respond to
climate changes. Answering such questions requires an improved understanding of
how storm tracks interact with stationary weather patterns, such as the Aleutian
Low, and how they interact with clouds which on one hand are products of storms
and on the other hand modify, through their absorption/reflections/emission, the
environments where storm tracks operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to answer such questions, using observational data and targeted experiments with
idealized atmosphere models that serve as a computational laboratory. The
project will examine the processes responsible for controlling storm tracks by
analyzing observations and simulations with an atmosphere model that is
simplified in some respects (e.g., it may simplify or eliminate continental
effects altogether) but contains relatively sophisticated representations of
clouds. The goal is study the fundamental processes controlling the structure
and variability of storm tracks and their interactions clouds, culminating in
theories and conceptual models of storm track dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will bridge the gap between state-of-the-art
comprehensive climate models and fundamental physical understanding. The
conceptual models to be developed under this project will provide a framework
for assessing weather forecasting and climate models and will suggest ways for
improving them. The project will assess and potentially enhance predictability
of major weather hazards in mid-latitudes, including extreme storms, droughts,
and floods, on sub-seasonal and longer timescales. It will also train a new
generation of scientists who are fluent in the use of the full breadth of state-
of-the-art tools in atmosphere and climate dynamics, from theory to
comprehensive numerical models. This will be achieved by directly funding a
postdoctoral scholar, who, by the end of this project, will be ready to commence
her independent career in climate and large-scale dynamics; by partially funding
a graduate student at the start of his or her research career; and by
disseminating results through publications, conference presentations, colloquia,
and classroom teaching. The research project will also broaden the range of
available research tools by making the program code of models used and developed
in this research publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.