* 1760447
* Evacuation mobilization, coordination, and decision making in the context of companion animals for Hurricanes Harvey and Irma
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Sarah DeYoung, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 94,085.00

During hurricanes, residents continue to refuse mandatory evacuation orders
because of their pets. In other cases, evacuees leave animals behind. Both of
these issues are a problem for emergency managers and households because both
scenarios can lead to loss of life, considerable distress among pet owners, and
logistic challenges for first responders and shelter coordinators. The PETS Act
(2006) was designed to solve some of these problems, especially as they were
highlighted after Hurricane Katrina. During Hurricane Matthew -- and more
recently with Hurricanes Harvey and Irma, however, the evacuation of people and
their companion animals still presents on-going challenges. Communication about
pet-friendly sheltering, the distance and resources required to travel to these
locations, and time spent preparing for evacuation with animals all present
significant evacuation barriers to residents. This project explores the
strategies used by groups amidst Hurricanes Harvey and Irma that resulted in the
successful and timely evacuation of companion animals and also explains the ways
in which residents made decisions based on their animals. The benefit of this
research is through the potential to enhance evacuations by identifying "best
practices" for stakeholders managing pets. The researchers may also uncover
issues related to social vulnerability, organizational coordination, quick
response fieldwork strategies, and other aspects of the research that could be
considered important for methodological advances in disaster research and the
broader body of knowledge on disasters.

Companion animals are connected to human residents and families. When people
refuse or delay evacuation because of their pets, this may lead to loss of life.
Therefore, improving evacuation compliance levels associated with the management
of pets is a matter of risk reduction. Situated in the broader work on
evacuation, disaster policy, and protective action, the three main purposes of
this project are to: 1) expand the definition of Focusing Events Theory through
group mobilization after policy change in the context of the PETS Act 2)
identify and measure the protective action aspects of pets and evacuation from
an evacuee perspective, and 3) to use the theoretical model components to create
tangible strategies for improved evacuation of companion animals and evacuees.
The data from the project involve mixed-methods and are collected in areas
heavily impacted by Harvey and Irma in Texas and Florida. Qualitative data
ensure the richness of narratives connected to the evacuation decision making
surrounding pets, while the quantitative data ensure that the research variables
can be measured in multivariate statistical analyses. Results are disseminated
to emergency managers and other groups working with understanding and managing
and helping people and their companion animals in disasters.