* 1760906
* Investigating the Balance of Passive and Active Mechanics in Vascular Remodeling: An Integrated Experimental and Computational Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Tarek Shazly, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2022
* USD 423,761.00

The blood vessels of the body often change in order to maintain health. This
process, called "vascular remodeling" is a long-lasting alteration in structure,
geometry, or mechanical properties of adult blood vessels. Both too much and too
little remodeling occur in different diseases, for example, in high blood
pressure and in the formation of an aneurysm. In addition to the forces of blood
on the vessels, the cells also pull on the vessel to maintain function. The
investigators recently showed that the cells change how they pull on the cell
walls in response to diet and age even when the blood forces aren't changed. The
experimental results of changes in the vessels walls caused by the cells was
successfully modeled for normal mice and makes a prediction on how the blood
vessels will change in experimental mice missing an important chemical message
in the blood vessels (nitric oxide deficient mice). This project is to
experimentally test the model prediction to determine whether the model is
correct. The educational and outreach aspects of the project include
undergraduate and graduate training in biomechanics and mechanobiology, course
development, research experiences for high school students, and outreach to high
school teachers in STEM subjects through Project Lead the Way. Blood vessel
remodeling is a key part of common vascular diseases. The research project will
improve the ability to predict disease progression and improve public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical and computational approaches to analyze
vascular remodeling using continuum mechanics have often suffered from a lack of
experimental data to provide quantitative descriptions of active biological
contributions to remodeling, such as the contribution of activated smooth muscle
cells. By providing an innovative, tightly integrated framework incorporating
both experimental and mathematical analysis, this shortfall will be addressed in
the context of age-related vascular remodeling and its response to endothelial
dysfunction. This work is potentially transformative in its ability to identify
and characterize a novel mechanism of age-related vascular remodeling
independent of hemodynamic changes, and to provide a theoretical and
computational framework with the power to predict a wide spectrum of remodeling
outcomes, including reorientation of collagen fibers, and their effects on
vascular biomechanics. The time course of aortic remodeling will be
characterized in terms of changes in vessel geometry, composition, and collagen
fiber orientation. Hemodynamic contributions to remodeling will be tracked by
measuring blood pressures and volumetric flow rates. Nitric oxide synthase 3
protein expression and nitric oxide production by aortic segments will be used
as measures of endothelial function. The researchersa will develop and
independently validate a mathematical framework that incorporates a combined
passive and active constitutive model of arterial tissue to explain the process
by which changes in smooth muscle cell contraction contractile tone drive
vascular remodeling in the absence of significant hemodynamic
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.