* 1760585
* ADVANCE Adaptation -- AMP-UP Continuous Improvement Process to Transform Institutional Practices and Culture
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricia Sotirin, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan Tech ADVANCE Adaptation project
will address three issues: 1) research credentialing disparities across multiple
intersecting factors as well as unnecessarily rigid perceptions of quality
(Research and Scholarship); 2) academic and research unit practices and
perceptions contributing to inequities (Unit Climate); and 3) faculty partners'
long-term challenges (Dual Career)). Michigan Tech will adapt evidence-based
strategies to address these issues from existing and past ADVANCE institutions
including the University of Michigan's STRIDE program, North Dakota State's
Allies program, and Iowa State's Department Enhancement Program. In addition,
Michigan Tech will incorporate management strategies from NASA (a matrix
organizational approach) and the auto industry (a Lean Continuous Improvement
culture) while adapting these strategies to the unique context of Michigan Tech.
Michigan Tech is a STEM-dominant university nationally ranked for research and
undergraduate education and is a major employer in an isolated rural setting in
Michigan's Upper Peninsula. If successful, Michigan Tech ADVANCE project may be
a model that can be adapted by other isolated rural universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan Tech ADVANCE Adaptation project is called the
Advanced Matrix Process for University Programs (AMP-UP). The AMP-UP project
will result in a matrix structure with cross-functional teams to address change
initiatives. This model helps to ensure the involvement of diverse perspectives
as well as enhance organizational knowledge building and transfer within the
organization. This is overlaid with the LEAN Continuous Improvement (CI) model
which supports the development of a culture of improvement through reflective
self-study, data gathering and analysis, and strategic interventions. The three
initiative areas (Research and Scholarship, Unit Climate, and Dual Career) will
be the column backbone of the AMP-UP program, featuring cross-functional teams
of administrators, faculty, and staff. One of the benefits of this model is that
programming is dynamic and tailored rather than static and prescriptive, thereby
increasing acceptance and sustainability. The lessons learned through adapting
CI to Michigan Tech will contribute to the research literature in the areas of
organizational change, continuous improvement, and STEM faculty career
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.