* 1760296
* RAPID: Potable water hazards and resource needs in private well communities  impacted by extreme flooding events
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Adrienne Katner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 199,879.00

Texans are starting to recover and rebuild from Hurricane Harvey, which caused
record-setting flooding and widespread destruction. While efforts are underway
to restore drinking water supplies and notify residents of potential
contamination concerns, a significant percentage of the impacted population in
Texas has complete responsibility for ensuring the safety and integrity of their
own water supplies coming from private wells. Safe drinking water regulations do
not apply to residential private wells in the United States. After the Great
Louisiana Flood of 2016, the investigators' team learned that that even six
weeks after the height of the flood, 20% of wells still tested positive for
total coliform bacteria, and DNA markers for opportunistic pathogens were
detected in 75% of wells for Legionella spp., 15% for L. pneumophila, and 20%
for the brain-eating amoeba Naegleria fowerli. Such public health risks
associated with flood-impacted wells have been widely unaddressed. Standardized
communication and remediation strategies for private wells affected by natural
disasters are urgently needed. Through this RAPID grant, the research team will
collect microbial water quality data, and characterize resources and
informational needs as residents in Texas (and Florida, following Hurricane
Irma) return home and begin to use their private wells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID grant will help assist the private well owners
impacted by Hurricane Harvey (Texas) and Hurricane Irma (Florida) in assessing
and addressing the current safety of their potable water supply. Results from
this research will inform whether one-time disinfection protocols should be
recommended to private well residents for recovery, and also provide insight to
impediments to disaster recovery when considering the microbial contamination
encountered after severe flooding events. Results will aid the development of
guidelines for government and public health officials, emergency responders, and
private well owners, on well water hazards after floods and the resource needs
of well owners. More effective intervention strategies will help well owners to
protect themselves and their families from flood-associated hazards.