* 1760032
* Decadal Assessment and Outlook on Biological Physics/Physics of Living Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2022
* USD 682,750.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in a collaboration
between the Board on Physics and Astronomy and the Board on Life Sciences, will
organize and conduct a first decadal survey of biological physics/the physics of
living systems (BPPLS). The study will assess the progress and developments in
BPPLS over the past decade and explore promising new directions for the period
2020-2030. The proposed activity and report will have a significant impact on
the future of research at the interface between the life sciences and physics
across the field. It will identify new directions and new perspectives for the
field and formulate guidelines for pursuing it to advance science efforts in the
United States and abroad. The committee will include scientists with expertise
to analyze and demonstrate the impact of the physics of living systems in modern
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity has
intellectual merit in several capacities: (1) Identification and articulation of
the scientific opportunities in the physics of living systems and science at the
interface between physics and biology. The resulting report from the project
will offer clear and broad guidance to those within these disciplines, to
policymakers, and to other interested parties; (2) Participation in the
assessment process for key questions and the applicability of physical tools and
methods to biology can lead to fresh insights and new perspectives on compelling
new areas of science; and (3) Using information on the impact that research on
the physics of living systems has had and will continue to have will help
identify opportunities and challenges associated with pursuing this research and
ultimately place the field in the broader context of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly co-funded by the Physics
Division, The Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division, and the Integrative
Organismal Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.