* 1760739
* RAPID: The Role of Emergent Organizations in Hurricane Harvey Response
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Margaret Hinrichs, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Disaster response has always included both formal organizations, such as the Red
Cross, National Guard, and municipal police, fire, and emergency medicine teams,
and informal groups, such as neighbors, families, and community or social clubs.
In the case of Hurricane Harvey, however,new social media platforms allowed an
unprecedented level of coordination among ad hoc or informal disaster responders
exemplified by #RedNeckNavy and @CajunNavyRelief that blurred the lines between
paid and volunteer responders. These emergent response organizations are
typically characterized by fluid memberships, dispersed leadership, and unstable
task definitions. While these decentralized attributes may be at odds with
official responders, their grassroots, flexible, and locally-informed expertise
represents an important source of community resilience. The increasing
importance of social media in emergency response organizations presents a
serious challenge to existing approaches to planning for and understanding
resilience, because these organizations are not created through formal
procedures, official assignment of membership, or legal entitlement. Rather,
they are constituted through communication among individuals with shared goals.
This research fills a critical national need related to disaster response by
applying the military doctrine of "command and control" to examine the
allocation of decision rights, patterns of communication, and access to
information in the use of social media to organize the volunteer response to
Hurricane Harvey. The research has the potential to improve the effectiveness of
emergency response, thereby saving lives and hastening recovery from disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the role of
emergent response organizations in mitigating disaster risks during the
Hurricane Harvey relief effort. To achieve this goal, the research team explores
the development and subsequent role of emergent, volunteer response
organizations like #RedNeckNavy in the disaster relief effort. Such
organizations were constituted by communication on social media platforms such
as Twitter and Zello. The team uses a mixed-methods approach to understand how
these organizations used social media platforms to establish three
organizational dynamics that translated into successful disaster relief action
on the ground: distribution of information, patterns of interaction, and
allocation of decision rights. Such organizational dynamics did not exist a
priori in regard to the hurricane. Each process was created and substantiated
through members' communication practices. The research includes social media
scraping, linguistic analysis, and data visualization tools to identify the most
influential members of the online community and the ways in which the three
dynamics listed above came into being and changed during the relief effort.
Because the scholars also seek to understand how organizational members made
meaning of events, the researchers combine quantitative data analytics with
qualitative interviews, participant observation, and focus groups of the
influential emergent organization members. The meaning making constructs and
orientations present among emergent response organizations contributes to
understanding how and why some organizations make meaning of threats and crises
as debilitating, where others are capable of overcoming threats in favor of
response and recovery. Given the leadership role of military organizations like
the US Coast Guard, National Guard, and US Army Corps in response to natural
catastrophes and the pervasive military metaphors which inform the culture of
these organizations, the researchers adapt the military doctrine known as
"Command and Control" to describe the levels of organizational maturity extant
in social media-enabled emergent response organizations and to characterize
their internal and external communicative practices, particularly as compared to
those of the more formal, federal and municipal organizations present, such as
FEMA and the Red Cross. The results of this research will contribute to improved
response technologies and better integration of community-based, ad hoc, and
emergent organizations with formal response efforts.