* 1760761
* Understanding Centrality and Marginalization in Undergraduate Physics Teaching and Learning to Enhance Student Persistence and Success
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Amy Robertson, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 513,283.00

This ECR project will explore the extent to which educational strategies, tools,
and materials in undergraduate physics classrooms and laboratory sessions center
some students and marginalize others. This project will identify teaching
strategies, tools, and materials that communicate who is welcome, important, and
influential in physics and what characteristics are valued and necessary for
success in physics. The ways that undergraduate physics is taught may lead to
reduced persistence and interest of women and underrepresented racial and ethnic
minorities in physics, which is important because diversity in the STEM
workforce at all levels has been shown to benefit the outcomes of scientific
research. Physics has among the lowest representation of women and people of
color of all the sciences compared to the total population in the country as
well as the population enrolled in higher education. African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, and Native Americans collectively earn only 11% of undergraduate
physics degrees in the US and only 6% of doctoral degrees, and women earn about
19% of degrees at both levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the ECR focus areas of STEM learning environments and broadening
participation in STEM. The aim of this project is to develop a knowledge base
that could lead to awareness of how power relations may be embedded in the way
physics is taught and learned. Data for this project will include video of
undergraduate physics classes, reflective interviews with physics instructors
and learners, and instructional artifacts. Methods will include empirical
observations of who is centralized (or marginalized) and how they are made
central (or marginal) in instructional settings, using Situated Learning Theory
(SLT) methodology and Critical Whiteness Studies (CWS). This project will draw
on CWS perspectives to show how privilege operates in undergraduate physics
teaching and learning. SLT offers a vision of power relations, in which power is
indicated by centrality and learning is a process of STEM identity development
that moves learners from peripheral to central participation in learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.