* 1760802
* Mechanisms of Mantle Wedge and Intraslab Earthquakes Beneath Southwestern Colombia From Analysis of Earthquake Source Properties
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Linda Warren, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2021
* USD 245,805.00

The occurrence of earthquakes below 50 kilometers depth, and as deep as 700
kilometers depth, is unexpected because of the high pressure and temperature at
those depths. Such deep earthquakes, which represent ~25% of all earthquakes
globally, occur in subduction zones and occasionally cause damage at the
surface, so better understanding of why they occur will help with seismic hazard
analysis and preparation. It will also help us to better understand the variety
of conditions under which earthquakes can occur. This work will provide new
constraints on the possible mechanisms of such earthquakes by studying the
properties of a unique cluster of earthquakes that occur beneath northwestern
South America. This project benefits society because of its focus on earthquake
occurrence and hazard and because it enhances STEM education by training a
postdoctoral fellow in seismology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cauca cluster of
intermediate-depth earthquakes, which is located beneath Colombia between at
depths of 50-200 kilometers, has ~58 earthquakes per year with local magnitude
ML greater than or equal to 2.5. The earthquakes are located both in a planar
seismic zone in the subducting slab and in two distinct columns, or fingers,
extending 30-40 kilometers normal to and above the slab and into the mantle
wedge. Using seismic data from 2010 to the present from the Colombian National
Seismic Network, the Cauca cluster earthquakes will be characterized by
precisely relocating the earthquakes, inverting waveforms to calculate focal
mechanisms for many of the larger earthquakes, and estimating static and dynamic
source properties for the earthquakes. These analyses will provide the first-
ever characterization of mantle wedge earthquakes and a comparison of the source
properties of earthquakes in two settings, thus enabling the testing of
different hypotheses --- such as dehydration embrittlement, shear instability,
hydrofracture, and collapse of fluid propagation pathways --- for why these
earthquakes occur. The new constraints on the mechanisms of intermediate-depth
earthquakes and fluid migration pathways through the mantle wedge will be
applicable to all subduction zones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.