* 1760225
* A Longitudinal Study Predicting Postsecondary STEM Readiness Among Low-Income Minority Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Bethany Rittle-Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,520,724.00

This study continues a longitudinal study that began with students in preschool
and will follow them into high school in a large, urban school district
including a large number of African-American students and low-income students.
The study is a unique opportunity to learn about how the students go through
school from preschool through the end of high school. This opportunity will
examine how their readiness for STEM careers and their beliefs about STEM. Their
path through school will particularly focus on the connections to mathematics
learning and achievement. This project will collect new data to make connections
to data collected during the students elementary and middle school years. An
important contribution to educational research, policy, and practice will be
understanding math knowledge development and readiness for STEM careers over
students' entire preK-12 experience. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to identify growth
trajectories and predictors of more and less successful students. This work
continues a study of approximately 500 low-income, predominantly African-
American students who have been followed from preschool through 8th grade in a
large urban school district. The goals are to (1) examine students' growth in
math achievement across high school and related high school growth to previous
patterns, (2) identify predictors of math achievement and other indicators of
postsecondary readiness, and (3) describe low-income and minority students'
beliefs about careers in STEM in high school, including how their beliefs have
changed since middle school. The students are predominantly African American
(80%) and over 90% eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. In each year of the
study, the project team will conduct individual student assessments of math
knowledge and collect administrative data on ACT math and science scores as well
as course enrollment, grades and end-of-course exam scores, graduation rates,
and students' intent to attend college after high school. During the fall of
eleventh grade, focus groups with students will ask about their plans after high
school and their beliefs about careers in STEM. Similar focus groups were
conducted with the students in eighth grade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.