* 1760458
* Creating a Theoretical and Empirical Foundation for Better Non-Equivalent Control Group Designs in STEM Research
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Thomas Cook, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,176,628.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Random assignment of a STEM innovation to participants
(students, teachers, schools) affords the researcher the opportunity to estimate
an unbiased estimate of the effect of an intervention. However, random
assignment may not be possible for ethical and practical reasons. Consequently,
it is often difficult to build statistical knowledge of the impact of a STEM
innovation without introducing bias into the process. The research to be
conducted here will build and test a framework that will allow researchers to
minimize statistical bias and better understand the impacts of STEM innovations
(e.g., a new curriculum, a new way of teaching, or a change in policy) in
settings where random assignment is not possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal uses advances in statistical theory and past empirical findings to
craft testable hypotheses that, if validated, will improve causal hypothesis
testing in STEM education research. The main hypotheses speak to reducing, and
perhaps eliminating, the selection bias in quasi-experiments. The proposal
focuses on the bias-reducing role of three design elements: a comparison group
that is local to the treatment group, a pretest measure of the study outcome,
and a rich set of pre-intervention covariates that are multi-dimensional (cover
more than one substantive domain), multi-temporal (cover more than one time
point) and multi-level (available at both the student and school levels). Each
of these elements often reduces some bias and sometimes eliminates it entirely.
How do they combine to reduce bias? The proposal will test (1) which
combinations of the elements reduces most bias; (2) how often the bias reduces
to close to zero; (3) do they do so robustly across STEM datasets with diverse
interventions and students; and (4) is bias inadvertently introduced, rather
than reduced, when the 3 design elements are combined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.