* 1760497
* RAPID: Low-cost Smart RF Sensor for Autonomous Floodwater Level Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2019
* USD 41,690.00

This project aims to experimentally investigate the efficacy and reliability of
low-cost portable wireless radar sensors for floodwater monitoring in realistic
environment by collecting real-time on-site data of receding floodwater at
multiple locations after hurricane Harvey and Irma. The proposed automatic water
monitoring solution is based on portable radio frequency sensors that can be
quickly deployed and integrated into a wireless sensor framework. Compared with
traditional water gauging technologies that are typically based on acoustic
sensors, pressure sensors, or older float and shaft angle decoders, the proposed
solution does not require contact with water and thus offers larger measurement
range and robustness against biological buildup and corrosion. Compared with
existing microwave technologies being investigated for water monitoring, the
proposed solution features much lower cost and smaller hardware size taking
advantage of advanced semiconductor technology, high-linearity demodulation,
adaptive DC-tuning architecture, and embedded signal processing. Furthermore,
the proposed system can operate with battery power and thus does not require
continuous connection to powerlines, which could be vulnerable in the event of
hurricanes. Field tests of monitoring receding water after hurricane flood and
comparison with results from conventional measurements will validate the
proposed approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If proven to be successful based on
measurement in realistic environment, the proposed technology can be widely
deployed as a sensor network in many urban, suburban, and rural communities to
help government and homeowners automatically and accurately obtain real-time
flood level information across a large region, without sending volunteers to
dangerous areas for manual check. In addition to benefiting the national
infrastructure, it will be valuable to many households for local flood
monitoring and home protection. Furthermore, the big data collected from a
network of such sensors will serve as a valuable resource for the understanding
of the history, pathways, and extent of floodwater. It may enable strong
interdisciplinary collaborative effort between researchers from electrical and
coastal engineering and may result in transdisciplinary tools in sensor
technology and coastal science.