* 1760953
* Optimization and Application of Next Generation Steels in Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Schafer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This research aims to advance knowledge leading to buildings with sustainability
and structural resilience, while maintaining economic efficiency and the
competitiveness of domestic steel production, by advancing the application of
next-generation steels into building construction. A large class of new, high-
performance steels has been developed for automotive applications to great
success, but various technical challenges must be overcome before these steels
can be widely integrated into building construction. A potential application is
cold-formed steel studs and joists in buildings that employ sheet steels with
thicknesses similar to next generation automotive steels. The possible benefits
of using these next-generation steels include more efficient material use and
construction, and lower initial and life-cycle costs. These steels also offer
the potential for structural engineers and architects to create novel solutions
in design and construction. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to overcome the barriers in the application of next generation
steels to cold-formed steel building construction and begin the optimization of
the uses of these steels in this building system. Optimization and application
of the use of next generation steels in cold-formed steel framing requires
overcoming scientific barriers: generalized strength prediction of these
uniquely strong but slender members is needed for engineering design, a deeper
understanding of the material ductility that structural applications require is
needed so that the new steels can be tailored to their demands at minimum cost,
optimized shapes specific to construction applications are needed for
efficiency, and prototyped solutions are needed to provide experimental evidence
of superior performance. A series of targeted experiments at the material,
connection, and member scale will be studied along with computational nonlinear
collapse simulations and shape optimization to address the barriers to the
adoption of next generation steel in construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.