* 1760254
* RAPID: Public Perceptions of Success and Failure in the Governmental Response to Natural Disasters
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* William Jacoby, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2018
* USD 178,490.00

This project examines the nature, sources and consequences of citizens'
perceptions regarding the governmental response to Hurricane Harvey. Public
opinion data, collected from an online survey at several points in time will be
matched to government activity and media coverage during the same time periods.
We will examine the degree to which the latter two factors, along with personal
political predispositions, sociodemographic characteristics, and prior
experience with disaster situations, influence mass beliefs about the
effectiveness of governmental response operations. We will also determine
whether citizens' feelings about the disaster response affect their broader
orientations toward government and the political system. The findings from this
study should benefit disaster training programs and help emergency management
agencies develop stronger response systems. The public response to governmental
efforts can have profound consequences for citizen evaluations of incumbent
public officials. At the same time, the perceived effectiveness of the response
can be a major factor in determining more general feelings about governmental
performance. That, in turn, affects the ``leeway'' that is accorded to public
officials in subsequent policy making. The distribution of mass responses to
governmental disaster policies also affects the public itself. Perceptions of
governmental effectiveness feed into the willingness to comply with future
directives. Feelings of vulnerability to disasters are related to a sense of
social connectedness or social capital. And, the issues associated with disaster
response often divide along racial and ethnic lines. The proposed study will
provide useful insights for dealing with these kinds of societal problems.

The study will rely on data collected from three sources. First, public opinion
on perceptions and evaluations of the disaster response, along with other
relevant beliefs and attitudes, will be obtained from a nationally
representative online survey conducted by NORC's AmeriSpeak program. This will
be a panel study in which a sample of respondents is interviewed at several
points in time. Second, information about specific governmental actions carried
out by FEMA and other agencies will be coded from daily government reports.
Third, information about the extent, content, and tone of media coverage
accorded to the government response to Harvey will be obtained by monitoring
major outlets over the same time period. The use of multiple time points will
show how the distribution of public opinion corresponds to variability in both
government actions and media coverage of the disaster response. Most of the
survey questions will be repeated at least twice on different waves of the
panel, thereby enabling cross-lagged models to evaluate causal relationships in
the determinants and consequences of individual opinions about the governmental
response process.