* 1760687
* Collaborative Research: A RAPID response to Hurricane Harvey's impacts on coastal carbon cycle, metabolic balance and ocean acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Brian Roberts, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2019
* USD 42,686.00

Understanding how extreme events, like hurricanes, impact coastal ecosystems and
the cycling of elements like carbon and oxygen, is important for improving our
ability to predict how the global carbon cycle will respond to climate. This
team of investigators, who have already been working together on understanding
the carbon cycle in the Gulf of Mexico continental shelves, have important
recent data against which to measure the effects of the passage of Hurricane
Harvey in August, 2017. They will sample the waters and sediments of the
northwestern Gulf of Mexico in September, October, and January to assess
Harvey's impacts on a timescale of weeks to months. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers pose three specific questions: 1. Will the region become a major
source of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, releasing carbon accumulated in the
bottom water and sediments, and will this potential impact be faster and greater
than during normal fall and winter mixing events? Will this process acidify the
surface water and for how long? 2. Will the metabolic balance be substantially
pushed toward net heterotrophy as a result of the storm in comparison to other
years? 3. Can the amount of material delivered or redeposited across the
continental shelf by a tropical cyclone be considerably larger than that related
to winter storm systems? The PIs will measure water column nutrients, oxygen,
organic carbon, and inorganic carbon system parameters; determine water column
and benthic metabolic and nutrient flux rates; and sediment organic matter
deposition rates. They will also collect end member river samples. They will
compare the immediate (mid-Sept) but limited post-hurricane data and one-month
post-hurricane, more detailed data with those collected in July and April to
study the impacts of the storms. they will also compare 2017-2018 seasonal data
to seasonal data over the same region collected in the past (2006-2008 and
2009-2010). They will also compare the impacts of Hurricane Harvey to those of
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (2005) and Tropical Storm Cindy (June 2017). The
project will involve graduate and postdoctoral research and work to communicate
results to the public.