* 1760491
* Developing, Field-Testing, and Validating An Elementary Algebra Concept Inventory Database For Use In The College Context
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2024
* Claire Wladis, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

This EHR Core Research Project at Manhattan Community College aims to contribute
new knowledge and build new theory about students' understanding of the concepts
traditionally learned in a college algebra course. College algebra has
consistently been identified as a barrier to student degree progress and
completion, particularly for groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM
fields. One part of the barrier to student progress is the lack of validated
assessments to measure understanding of algebra concepts. The project will
undertake this important work by building a pool of items to assess conceptual
understanding and then testing and validating the database at seven different
colleges and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
generate a calibrated item pool of 200 validated questions that assess
conceptual understanding in college algebra. This calibrated item pool can then
be used by: 1) researchers to assess the effectiveness of curricula and teaching
approaches in improving algebraic conceptual understanding; and 2) practitioners
to generate diagnostic tests, the results of which could then be used to target
instruction to address specific student misconceptions. This research will
create the first validated calibrated item pool to test elementary algebra
conceptual understanding in the college context. The research builds on initial
successful work developing and validating a 22-question elementary algebra
concept inventory. A calibrated item pool also will allow for multiple versions
of the test to be equated, so instructors or researchers can give different
students different test forms but equate the scores, thus improving exam
security and the reliability of results. The concept inventory database will be
validated with students from the City College of New York system, where the
student population is roughly 80% non-white, 60% female, 60% Pell-grant
recipients, 50% first-generation college students, and 40% for whom English was
not their first language. The instrument will also be tested at six other
colleges across the country to ensure generalization to different institutional
contexts. The project will also produce a conceptual framework for college
students' understanding of elementary algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.