* 1760689
* GOALI: Toward Improving Quality and Yield of Large-Area, Single-Crystal Sapphire Wafers via Fundamental Understanding of Bubble Engulfment During Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* David Joyce, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 403,118.00

Single-crystal sapphire has numerous potential applications ranging from armor
to electronics. The cost of this material is dependent on the cost of
processing, which is complicated by the presence of bubbles during growth of the
crystal. A fundamental understanding of the behavior of bubbles during the
growth of single-crystal sapphire is needed to enable the manufacture of high-
performance materials at a low cost. This Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports fundamental research to understand
the mechanisms of bubble growth and diffusion in sapphire single crystals.
Computational models of the process will be developed to describe the formation
and motion of these bubbles during the growth process, and provide insight for
strategies to eliminate these defects. The work?will be carried out in
consultation with GOALI partner, Crystal Systems?Innovations, LLC, who will
provide?valuable, practical insight and supporting?sapphire crystal growth
experiments.??New knowledge from this work has relevance to the?manufacturing
of?single-crystal sapphire material, and has benefits in potential applications
including transparent armor for national defense applications, touch-
screen?faceplates in smart?phones, and substrates for the fabrication of energy-
saving white?light-emitting-diodes (LEDs).??This?project?will fund the training
of a graduate student who will be?proficient in multi-disciplinary
and?technologically relevant issues involving?advanced manufacturing, materials
engineering and processing,?and crystal?growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research program, investigators will?develop, validate, and apply computational
models to elucidate the?mechanisms?of bubble inclusion during sapphire crystal
growth. This research will build?upon prior steady-state and dynamic models at
the continuum level that have?been developed to study the physical
mechanisms?that determine the pushing or?engulfment of a solid particle at a
moving, solid-liquid interface. These?studies?will be carried out in
consultation with GOALI partner, Crystal Systems?Innovations, LLC, who will
provide?valuable, practical insight and supporting?sapphire crystal growth
experiments.??This work will probe the?fundamental mechanisms by which
bubbles?are engulfed during solidification, which is a particularly?challenging
problem?associated with sapphire crystal growth. In addition to addressing
the?underlying?scientific phenomena of heat transfer, fluid mechanics,
phase?change, and particle-solidification front?interactions, a
computational?approach of unprecedented rigor and accuracy will be developed to
probe?nonlinear and dynamical aspects of these extremely complex
phenomena.?Finally, a?deeper understanding of bubble and particle?engulfment
phenomena during solidification will impact other?areas as diverse?as geological
materials, reinforced metal-ceramic composites, multi-crystalline?silicon,
and?biological cryo-preservation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.