* 1760400
* RAPID: Recovery, Relocation, and Alluvial Awareness in Post-Hurricane Houston
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 03/31/2019
* USD 95,054.00

As post-hurricane recovery efforts in post-Harvey Houston turn toward future
planning, state and local authorities are evaluating multiple proposals to
increase the area's resilience to future storm and flooding events. A particular
focus is what to do about neighborhoods that have flooded multiple times in the
past three years. Some experts recommend expanding buyout programs. But short of
widespread use of eminent domain eviction, any such program will require consent
and participation from residents. The proposed research seeks to investigate how
residents of flood-prone areas decide whether to remain and rebuild, relocate to
other areas of the city, or relocate outside the city altogether. What factors
do they consider important? What experiences make a difference in their decision
making? What information and whose recommendations do they trust and use as they
reach decisions about whether to remain or leave? The researchers suggest that
accumulated alluvial awareness, which they define as attention to past and
possible future flooding experiences, is increasing and that this awareness
affects how attached residents feel to certain neighborhoods, communities, and
the city itself. The significance of the proposed research also extends beyond
Houston as coastal communities across the United States are beginning to see new
rainfall and flooding patterns, whether associated with extreme rainfall events,
the increase of "normal" rainfall, or with sea-level rise and subsidence.

The proposed research will take place in two Houston neighborhoods that were
severely impacted by Harvey flooding, Greenspoint and Meyerland. Even before
Harvey both neighborhoods already counted among the three Houston neighborhoods
with the greatest number of repetitive assistance payouts from the National
Flood Insurance Program. Although the two neighborhoods share a vulnerability to
major flooding, they are in many ways demographically distinct in income,
education levels, ethnicity and race, housing stock (rental housing complexes
vs. single family owner-occupied property). This contrast increases the
probability that the proposed research will be representative of the economic
and ethnic diversity of Houston as a whole while also making it possible to test
the concept of alluvial awareness while controlling for other variables. The
research team will consist of the anthropologist PI, Dr. Dominic Boyer, one
postdoctoral fellow, and four undergraduate students, divided into two
neighborhood-based teams. The researchers will employ a mix of social science
methods. Working together with district council offices, neighborhood
associations, environmental justice NGOs and faith-based communities, the
research team will work to encourage community participation in a survey. They
will select a sub-sample of individuals and families willing to participate in
longer and more in depth semi-structured interviews. The project research team
will seek volunteer families to be shadowed by researchers involving
participant-observation in order to gain more intimate familiarity with
individual and family decision-making processes. The project will contribute new
insights to two highly theoretically generative areas of contemporary
anthropological research: (1) the anticipation and temporalization of disasters;
and (2) infrastructural arrangements and their influence on social
identification and political subjectivity. It will also focus attention on
chronic flooding as both a temporal and infrastructural phenomenon. The concept
of "alluvial awareness" will be tested with the data gathered in the course of
research. Findings will give anthropology and the social sciences a better grasp
on the emotional and epistemic impacts of flooding in newly chronic flood zones.
The proposed research will provide actionable data to local government and urban
planners in terms of understanding the criteria according to which residents in
coastal areas everywhere elect to remain or leave areas affected by chronic
severe flooding.