* 1760918
* RUI: Accessing Asymmetric Carbon Atoms by Samarium(II)-Water Allylic Benzoate Reductions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Gregory O'Neil, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,500.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gregory O'Neil. Professor O'Neil is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry at Western Washington University. He is developing new reactions
that allow access to one mirror image of a carbon atom over another. Many
important molecules (e.g. medicinal natural products) and materials exist as a
single mirror image with their activity directly related to that specific mirror
image. Hence, methods to control which mirror image of a carbon atom is formed
are essential for the construction of molecules that have the correct biological
activity. Accordingly, Professor O-Neil and his group are harnessing the unique
chemistry of samarium(II)-water complexes to achieve this goal. The reactions
were chosen because samarium(II) is readily available, and the ability to
perform the reactions in water obviates special handling or equipment
requirements. Thus, the chemistry is readily adoptable by others, well suited
for research at a primarily undergraduate institution, and compatible with
incorporation into an Introductory Organic Laboratory course. In addition,
student participants are learning a variety of research methods including
organic synthesis and advanced analytical techniques. They become integrated
into the scientific community through attendance at professional meetings and
dissemination of results using both standard (e.g. scientific papers and
posters) and less traditional outlets (e.g. podcasts, videos, magazine
articles). Professor O'Neil's group is well positioned to provide this
experience for students underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to generate stereogenic carbons with absolute stereocontrol is a
requirement for many compelling synthetic targets. The goal of this project is
to investigate the use of SmI2(H2O)n for allylic benzoate reductions. The
combination leads a highly versatile and accessible method for the synthesis of
asymmetric carbon atoms. The reactions are potentially powerful because they
provide a solution to an existing challenge that does not require the use of
specialized reagents, is easy to execute, and has a broad substrate scope and
functional group tolerance. The methods are capable of generating asymmetric
carbon atoms that can be difficult to construct with other methods, they
consistently and predictably lead to stereoselectivities that are controllable
by starting substrate structure and independent of the groups attached to the
newly formed stereogenic carbon, they are straightforward to conduct using
readily available reagents/substrates and with water (thereby allowing for
functional groups (e.g. -OH) often not tolerated), and they are controlled by a
stereo-differentiating group that can either be incorporated into the final
target or be recycled as a chiral auxiliary. Broader impacts and educational
components of the project include the development and implementation of a 4-day
undergraduate laboratory experiment that teaches concepts related to
stereochemistry and the methods needed for isomer ratio determination. This work
will also create a repository with optical activity data for various chiral
aldehydes available for use by other groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.