* 1760577
* ADVANCE Adaptation:  Advancing toward Equity for STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Chrysanthe Demetry, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 998,853.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse STEM faculty in academic
institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies,
processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE
"Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-
based strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) ADVANCE
Adaptation project will produce systemic change within WPI by implementing
activities designed to: 1) clarify promotion criteria and processes for both
tenure track (TT) and non-tenure track (NTT) faculty; 2) mitigate implicit
biases related to gender, identity, workload, forms of scholarship, and faculty
work; and 3) institutionalize a system of ADVANCE coaches in each academic unit
to guide mid-career faculty toward promotion. WPI data analysis indicates that
STEM faculty gender equity issues are attributable to implicit biases and a
"foggy climate," a research-based metaphor for ambiguity in promotion processes,
in valuing of different types of work, and in work distribution that
disadvantages women. The process and outcomes of this work will be disseminated
to multiple audiences who can be change agents at other institutions, including
STEM Deans and Chief Academic Officers in the Association of Independent
Technological Universities, and through WPI's Institute on Project-Based
Learning which reaches more than one hundred educators at dozens of other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to advance
knowledge by serving as a case study of Boyer-inspired promotion reform aimed at
addressing gender inequity and marginalization of intersectional identities at
WPI. WPI is an institution that integrates project-based learning into their
undergraduate curriculum which is a factor that may impact STEM faculty equity
issues in unique ways that this project will help to identify and understand.
For example, faculty promotion systems are a perceived barrier for other
institutions interested in increasing the use of project-based and community-
engaged learning. A combination of formative and summative evaluation, with
quantitative and qualitative methods, will determine the extent to which
interventions are effective and why. Overall, the project will provide increased
knowledge regarding mechanisms to decrease systemic
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.