* 1760985
* Understanding Mist Flow Dynamics in Through-tool Minimum Quantity Lubrication Drilling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Richard Furness, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 05/31/2023
* USD 344,939.00

This award develops knowledge required to design cutting tools and select flow
parameters for minimum quantity lubrication (MQL) machining. MQL is known for
its advantages of significant reduction in water waste, energy use, and overall
costs as compared to traditional wet processes. This research project will
investigate the science behind MQL machining and rapidly implement the results
into production-level operations through the collaboration with Ford Motor
Company. Since the project has broad applicability to automotive, aerospace,
electronics and defense industries, it directly and positively impacts American
economic welfare and national security. Additionally, the project includes plans
for hands-on training and research experience on advanced machining processes
for undergraduate students via course integration, summer internship, and
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs. By leveraging an on-going
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program at Texas A&amp;M, this project
also includes outreach activities to high schools on design of modern cutting
tools to promote STEM field. The close collaboration with the industrial partner
also provides a unique environment to align these plans with the needs in the
manufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research incorporates
experimental and numerical approaches that address the fundamental science of
minimum quantity lubrication. Drilling is the target process as it is common in
manufacturing, whereas drilling is complex and cannot be observed visually. The
project has three main objectives: Objective 1 characterizes the flow out of
internal channels based on geometrical, system, and machining parameters. An MQL
flow testbed will be used to emulate the mist flow in machining and allow visual
access to the cutting zone with a high-speed camera. Objective 2 addresses
interactions between flow structure and drill-workpiece motion and thus will
predict the fluid coverage on the tool edges and faces. The flow test results
will be compared with computational fluid dynamics (CFD) using both single- and
dual-phase flow analyses. Objective 3 will determine the effects of mist flow on
drilling performance, including torque, thrust force, built-up edge, and wear,
on production systems at the Ford AME MQL laboratory. The knowledge generated
will enable MQL-specific tool design and selection, adaptive MQL systems, and
process development. The broader impacts include improved MQL implementation in
the manufacturing industry and collaborative activities between the industry and
academia for the workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.