* 1760634
* RUI: Comparing Age Selectivity in Modern Extinctions and the Fossil Record
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Steve Wang, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 54,059.00

The Earth may be entering a modern extinction, on par with mass extinctions
known from the geologic past. It appears that many long-lived groups are
becoming threatened, even ones that have survived for millions of years. This is
in contrast to the findings of previous studies of the fossil record, which have
shown that older groups were generally less likely to go extinct. The only
exception to this pattern is during periods of mass extinction. This project
will compare modern and ancient extinctions to better understand extinction risk
and threats to current biodiversity. The project also will provide research
experience for undergraduate students and contribute to an outreach program for
underserved middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have
compared the magnitude or rate of modern biodiversity loss with those of ancient
mass extinctions. To improve our understanding of modern extinctions, this
project will compare extinction selectivity with respect to genus age in modern
and fossil classes. Extinction risk will be assessed at the generic level using
the IUCN Red List for modern classes, and using the Paleobiology Database for
fossil classes. Ages of both modern and fossil genera will be determined from
the Paleobiology Database. The relationship between extinction risk and genus
age will be quantified and provide a basis for comparing modern extinctions with
those in the fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.