* 1760512
* RAPID: Hurricane Harvey and Organizational Resilience
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Marya Doerfel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 10/31/2018
* USD 168,608.00

This project examines organizational processes associated with building stronger
and more strategic communication networks to enhance the ability for
organizations to adapt to significant changes wrought by disruptive events. The
project is novel in its way to develop understanding of the characteristics of
how organizations communicate and how information flows within and among
organizations dealing with natural disasters. When communities experience
disruptive events like natural disasters, the organizations that are part of the
community also suffer. How do organizations recover in the short-term and long-
term and what role does their recovery play in the community's recovery and
resilience? While it seems obvious that organizations, such as businesses, civil
organizations, and public agencies, would have a significant role, that role is
not as well understood as it must be for the benefit of communities,
organizations, and recovery efforts. The tendency is to focus on developing
strategies for single organizations without sufficient consideration of the
inter-organizational networks that are a pillar to the whole community. This
work involves an innovative combination of qualitative interviews, participant
observation, and social network analysis techniques to identify the key roles of
brokers, isolates, and cliques in the immediate and long-term recovery of
organizations within the community. The results will contribute to practical
strategies for building organizational and community capacity in the aftermath
of disruptive events. This work will also advance theory and method generally
about interorganizational networks while developing the science of resilience
using a network based approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Harvey
represented a significant and disruptive natural disaster that seriously
affected business and community organizations around the Houston area. This
project takes a network-based approach to understand organizational resilience
against disruptive events, and how communication networks within and between
organizations facilitate or hinder the immediate and long-term recovery from the
disruptive event. Communicating through social networks and the way in which
organizations are linked through their information sharing can inform national
efforts to strengthen the ability of communities and organizations to function
effectively in challenging circumstances. The project will use a mixed-method
approach to characterize organizational communication characteristics. In
particular, it will analyze existing organizational documents as one way to map
out the basic social networks the organization employs to support information
flows with key stakeholder groups. The research will then use in-situ
observations and interviews with key organizational partners that make up
stakeholder networks of impacted organizations to develop further understanding
of resilience in terms of communication and network characteristics within and
between organizations. Interviews with the stakeholders will also be used to
determine the criterion of effective recovery. Network analysis will be
conducted to link communication patterns with recovery outcomes.