* 1760947
* Collaborative Research: Fostering conceptual understanding and skill with an intelligent tutoring system for equation solving
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Martha Alibali, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 524,049.00

This Education and Human Resources Core Research project addresses a persistent
challenge in designing effective mathematics instruction: how to foster deep
learning of concepts and skills, with strong connections among them. This
challenge arises especially in middle school and high school algebra; far too
often, students in algebra courses come away with only a moderate level of skill
at procedures (e.g., equation solving) with almost no conceptual understanding
of why these procedures work. This lack of deep understanding is unfortunate,
because algebra is an important stepping stone to advanced mathematics as well
as to future educational and employment opportunities. Thus, there is a great
need for algebra instruction that helps students acquire well-integrated
knowledge of key concepts and problem-solving procedures. This project tackles
this issue using, as a platform, a software-based intelligent tutoring system
that will extend an existing tutoring system for algebra. The new, enhanced
tutoring system will support both practice in solving equations and new
conceptually-oriented algebra activities. It will provide detailed and targeted
guidance that adapts to individual students' errors, strategies, and developing
algebra knowledge. Lab-based and classroom studies will investigate three key
questions: (1) What mix of conceptual and procedural activities best helps
students acquire deep skill and conceptual knowledge of algebra? (2) How
frequently should students shift back and forth between the two types of
activities? (3) How effective is the new tutoring system compared to commonly-
used software, namely, Khan Academy, or a standard intelligent tutoring system
that provides procedural practice only? The project will lead to new knowledge
about how to create effective instruction for middle school and high school
algebra, together with new intelligent tutoring software that embodies this
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on past research, it is commonly accepted
that in many domains, gains in conceptual knowledge can lead to gains in
procedural knowledge, and vice versa. Further, there is some evidence that
instruction that shifts back and forth between conceptually-oriented activities
and procedurally-oriented activities is especially effective. However, it is not
yet known what sorts of activities best support the development of conceptual
knowledge, or how they should be integrated with activities that target learning
of procedures so that students might make connections between the two. To
address these issues, the project will extend existing tutoring system for
equation solving (called Lynnette) with conceptual activities, based on past
research that suggests that worked examples, self-explanation, visual
representations (namely, bar diagrams), and activation of prior knowledge can be
effective for promoting gains in conceptual knowledge. In doing so, this will
leverage an established technical infrastructure for intelligent tutoring
systems research and development, called CTAT/Tutorshop. The project will
conduct two lab studies and two classroom studies to investigate what mix of
conceptually-oriented activities is the most effective complement to the
system's current set of procedurally-oriented activities, how frequently
students should shift back and forth between procedurally- and conceptually-
oriented activities, and how effective the resulting tutoring system is,
compared to two control conditions in which students work with commonly used
types of software for algebra learning (Khan Academy and Lynnette). The project
will generate new knowledge about how to design effective instruction that helps
students acquire well-integrated conceptual and procedural knowledge that is
effective in real educational settings. This knowledge could lead to better,
more conceptually-oriented instruction in algebra, and it has the potential to
improve instruction in other STEM learning environments. The project will also
create a new intelligent tutoring system for algebra that is much more effective
than current systems. The system will be made available to teachers and schools
free of charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.