* 1760713
* RAPID: Hurricane Harvey Rapid Response: In-Situ Barrier Island Storm Impact and Recovery Measurements of Hydrodynamics, Morphodynamics, and Sedimentation Acr. Hog and F. Island TX
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Jens Figlus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2018
* USD 36,207.00

Rapid response field measurements of extreme storm impacts to coastal systems
are difficult to obtain due to short advance notice times for deployment,
potential for instrument failure or loss, and uncertainty in actual storm impact
for specific locations. This project advances capabilities to measure detailed
hydrodynamic processes (currents and waves) across the surface of barrier island
systems impacted by extreme events. The data will provide unprecedented
information to enhance and ground-truth predictive modeling capabilities of
storm impacts. Detailed analysis of immediate and medium term (weeks to months)
recovery of the two selected field sites (Hog and Folletts Islands) will shed
further light on post-storm recovery dynamics of barrier island systems that are
critical to understand in the context of relative sea level rise and the
potential for more frequent and/or intense tropical storms. In turn, this
knowledge can help bolster the resiliency of coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team was able to deploy a set of
five "Rapid Response Units" (RRUs) along the central and upper Texas Gulf
coastline three days prior to Hurricane Harvey's landfall as a Category 4 storm
on August 25, 2017. The RRU sites provide detailed measurements at two locations
roughly half way between the landfall point and Galveston, and enable detailed
comparative studies of the storm's impacts on these two systems. The RRUs
contain pressure transducers to record water level fluctuations and wave
heights, tilt current meters to measure current and orbital wave velocities,
acoustic Doppler velocimeters, and GoPro time-lapse imaging systems. These data
will be interpreted in the context of pre- and post-storm digital elevation
models (DEMs) generated using an unmanned aerial system (UAS) and standard
photogrammetric processing algorithms. Post-storm rapid response activities also
include subaerial and wading-depth real time kinematic (RTK) beach profile
transects and surface sediment sampling and coring of washover deposits. An
initial program of weekly UAS flights, followed later by monthly surveys, would
document recovery of the barrier system following the hurricane.