* 1760556
* Hurricane Harvey Impacts on Local and Landscape Scale Salt Marsh Carbon Storage
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Jaye Cable, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2019
* USD 86,762.00

Coastal wetlands store more than 20% of global carbon, and salt marshes are
estimated to have the highest carbon burial rates of all coastal wetlands.
Disturbances, like large storms, have the potential to reduce the storage of
carbon in salt marshes and lower their overall impact on the global carbon
cycle. Previous studies have shown that large quantities of sediment were
deposited on salt marshes in Louisiana after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in
2005, but little was known about the state of the marshes before these impacts.
Consequently, we can only speculate about the true impact of those storms on
sediment carbon storage. Comparing pre-storm carbon storage to post-storm
storage immediately (weeks to months) following landfall allows us to quantify
the storm impacts and capture critical data before inventory signals are lost to
the next event. This project will take advantage of the fact that the
investigators have recently (2014) sampled salt marshes near both of the
locations where Hurricane Harvey made landfall in August, 2017. They will
collect new salt marsh sediment samples and compare their data to 2014 data in
order to study the impact of storm passage on these important systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Harvey made landfall as a Category 4 storm at
Rockport, TX, on 25 Aug 2017, moved inland, circled back, and made a second
landfall as a tropical storm east of Port Arthur, TX, on 30 Aug 2017. These two
major storm landfalls coincide with locations of salt marsh carbon burial
studies performed in 2014 by this research group at the Aransas National
Wildlife Refuge (NWR) and the Anahuac NWR. These data provide a baseline against
which to assess the impacts of recent major storm landfalls on marsh accretion
and carbon burial. It is imperative to return to these study sites as soon as
possible to ensure that the perishable data resulting from the impacts of this
storm on these marshes are not altered by other meteorological events or human
disturbances. The investigators hypothesize hurricanes redistributed sediments
from offshore and within the fringing salt marsh onto the marsh platform,
increasing the elevation of the marsh and burying organic matter as stored
carbon. The objectives of this research are 1) to quantify the impact of
extratropical storm sediment accretion on carbon storage in two salt marshes at
the local scale using 2014 baseline data; and 2) to extend these local storm-
induced carbon changes to the landscape scale using pre- and post-storm LiDAR
and satellite imagery. To address these objectives and preserve the perishable
data, field work will take place at the Aransas and Anahuac NWRs during the week
of 16 Oct 2017. Four 50 cm cores, two from each site, will be collected and
sectioned based on stratigraphic changes. Sediment will be analyzed for total
organic carbon, carbon-14, lead-210, and sediment physical properties (Obj. 1).
Ground-truth measurements across the marsh will be obtained using a Macaulay
auger and used to validate post- hurricane LiDAR measurements, which will be
compared to pre-hurricane measurements from 2014 (Obj. 1 &amp; 2). Freely
available archived and new satellite imagery and LiDAR will be used to measure
changes in marsh height and area (Obj. 2). The project will form part of the
doctoral research of a graduate student, and will also support a senior
undergraduate student.