* 1760584
* RAPID: Investigating the Impact of Hurricanes and School Responses on Students in Texas and North Carolina
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Sarah Fuller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,934.00

In the wake of a significant natural disaster, schoolchildren experience
substantial disruption to their lives and psychological impacts at greater rates
than adults do. However, studies of the effect of natural disasters on students'
functioning in schools are rare and studies of the responses of schools and
districts are even rarer. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is a
unique effort to collect data across diverse school districts with varied
degrees of impacts from Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 and Hurricane Matthew in
October 2016. The project will provide an understanding of the current
strategies employed by schools for disaster recovery and their effectiveness as
judged by school and district personnel. This study will also provide data that
is critical to the pursuit of the larger study to understand the impact of
hurricanes on the school functioning of students and the role of disaster
recovery in mitigating that impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
conduct interviews, focus groups, and surveys with personnel from schools,
districts, and state agencies in a sample of 20 districts in Texas and North
Carolina that were heavily impacted by the hurricanes. The research questions
the proposed study will seek to address are: (1) What impacts did the storms
have? (2) How did schools respond to support students? and (3) How successful
were those responses? The researchers will conduct 90-100 interviews and 20
focus groups with personnel from schools, districts, and state agencies in Texas
and North Carolina to collect data on the effects of the hurricanes and the
types of relief efforts undertaken at the school and district level. The
research team will use the Constant Comparative Method to categorize and compare
qualitative data, to assign codes and to develop subsequent themes found in the
data. Coded themes will be related to (1) impacts of the hurricanes on students
and schools (e.g., physical destruction of the schools, homeless students, and
psychological distress), (2) school responses and supports provided, and (3) the
perceived success of the recovery efforts and support from federal, state, and
local agencies. Researchers will use the codes to identify and compare themes
across different levels of government and across states. Similarly, researchers
will use codes indicating school demographics to identify themes at the school
level. Additionally, the research team will use codes to identify and tally the
use of various strategies across sites. In North Carolina, researchers will
administer closed-ended surveys to school personnel in 10 districts to collect
perceptions of the success of the recovery in mitigating effects on students
one-year after Hurricane Matthew. Survey data will be combined with school and
district level data on demographics, grade levels served, and community
characteristics. Also, data from the qualitative analysis will be used to create
categorical variables to group districts and individual schools within districts
by the types of impacts on students and schools (e.g., physical destruction of
the school) and the school response and supports provided to students (e.g.,
provision of counseling services). The research team will use z-tests of
proportions, chi-squared tests, and multivariate regression models to
descriptively compare the perceived impacts on students and perceived success of
the recovery efforts across schools and districts with different demographics,
community characteristics, grade spans, impacts, and response and support
strategies. Researchers in Texas and North Carolina will discuss findings and
use the combined results to generate scientific publications and policy reports
that can inform future disaster planning and recovery.