* 1760348
* Multi-scale Nanotextured Surfaces by Tribo-Electrohydrodynamic Lithography for Controlled Drug Release
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Rana Biswas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This grant supports research that creates a disruptive nanoscale manufacturing
technology for rapid fabrication of multiscale nanostructures, promotes
scientific progress, and advances national prosperity and health. Realization of
multiscale nanostructures with existing nanofabrication methods is a challenging
endeavor. For example, electron beam lithography is limited to very small scale
structures, whereas nanoimprint lithography requires very elaborate master
patterns. This project explores the technique of nanoscale replica molding as a
rapid and inexpensive way to form intricate master nanostructures from large-
area templates. The accompanying formation of surface "tribocharges" are
utilized to fabricate multiscale nanostructures with sub-100 nanometer sub-
structures. By this means, nanotextured surfaces having biomedical uses are
possible. With elaborate plans to stimulate nanomanufacturing and bring the
resulting surface-patterned biomedical devices to the people with heart-disease,
this work aligns well with the nation's efforts to boost manufacturing in the
U.S. and to innovate biomedical technologies. This research involves several
disciplines including manufacturing, surface physics, electromagnetics, and
materials science. This multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in research and
positively impacts engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
enables highly controlled nanopatterning of tribocharge distribution on polymer
substrates through nanoscale replica molding and provides a deeper understanding
of the underlying mechanisms for generation and patterning of tribocharges.
Investigations of the tribocharge's longevity, spatial stability, and
nanotexture dependence are performed. The nanopatterned tribocharges are then
used as the source of nanoscale-modulated electric fields for
electrohydrodynamic lithography, by which 3-level hierarchical multiscale
nanostructures are fabricated. The target nanostructures include nanoscale
volcanoes with sub-100 nm-scale nanocraters and multiple-period nanostructure
arrays. The drug release from such multiscale nanotextures made of biocompatible
polymers are also studied for emerging applications such as stents for cardiac
therapies. The fundamental research outcomes widen the knowledge required for
the realization of multiscale nanostructures in general, eventually enabling the
synthesis of new materials and structures with novel
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.