* 1760311
* Enhancing Underrepresented Boys' Engagement in STEM through Mentoring and Father Involvement
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jerrod Henderson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,099,975.00

This project will advance the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program's efforts to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The STEM Engagement
through Mentoring (SEM) project adds to the current research landscape in two
ways. First, it relies on an intentionally designed partnership among the
University of Houston's College of Education, College of Natural Science &amp;
Mathematics, and College of Engineering. Second, the program focuses on
interactions among underrepresented fourth and fifth grade boys, their male STEM
mentors and their fathers / male caregivers who participate in an afterschool
and Saturday program that provides engaging, hands-on STEM experiences.
Undergraduate student mentors are also drawn from groups who have been
traditionally underrepresented in STEM. Grounded in pilot work, the project
focuses on (a) improving interactions between pre-service teachers (who lead the
program sessions) and undergraduate mentors (who support the students) and (b)
creating hands-on STEM lessons that are aligned with Texas standards and the
Next Generation Science Standards. The project has potential to inform theories
of how mentoring relationships impact learners' motivation, knowledge and skills
while at the same time, illuminating how the mentoring process and relationships
affect mentors themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project pursues three
research questions: 1) In what ways do the fathers/mentors motivate students to
become aware of, interested in, and prepared for STEM careers? 2) To what extent
does involvement in the SEM program shape boys' and mentors' STEM identity? And,
3) What impact does the SEM program have on pre-service teachers' self-efficacy
for teaching engineering content? To answer these questions, the project will
use a mixed methods approach including interviews, focus groups, observations,
and surveys. Results of an external program evaluation will be used for program
improvement and expansion, and to evaluate the early promise of the program for
student outcomes in science and mathematics. The SEM team will initially work
with four schools in the Houston region to directly impact 120 fourth and fifth
grade students. Subsequently, the project aims to expand its impact to a
national scale by formalizing and strengthening its partnership with the
teachHOUSTON secondary STEM pre-service teacher training program at the
University of Houston. SEM's overarching goal is to scale to 45 additional
universities that are part of the national UTeach network. By leveraging the
strategic partnership with a UTeach implementation site, SEM has the potential
to reach thousands of underrepresented fourth and fifth grade students across
the country.