* 1760867
* Numerical Intuition Training as a Potential Tool to Improve Children's Math Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Brannon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,478,640.00

Early mathematics learning for children provides the foundation for multiple
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) interests and careers.
However, early math experiences in school and at home differ dramatically among
children. This project explores whether the numerical intuition that children
possess before they learn formal mathematics can be harnessed to improve math
performance. Two studies will examine the connections between children's
informal numerical intuition and formal mathematics. The first study includes
pre-school children performing addition and subtraction. The second study
includes upper elementary children, the understanding of ratios and how this
relates to fractions. An important question for mathematics teaching and
learning is how to connect intuitive aspects of quantitative reasoning with the
use of math symbols to represent numbers and operations. This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of the project is to assess whether
training with non-symbolic mathematical operations facilitates performance on
the equivalent symbolic operations. Prior research suggests that primitive
number sense is foundational for symbolic mathematics. The first study examines
addition and subtraction in pre-school children. Children are shown how to
combine dot arrays in an imprecise approximation of addition and subtraction to
assess whether this improves symbolic addition and subtraction performance. The
second study examines ratio reasoning in second and fourth grade students. This
study investigates whether training with non-symbolic, approximate ratio
reasoning facilitates symbolic manipulation of ratios and how this relates to
children's knowledge of fractions. Both studies use an experimental design with
randomized assignment of children to training conditions and include pre-test
and post-test assessments of mathematical knowledge (including symbolic and non-
symbolic representations of number) and executive
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.