* 1760006
* RAPID: Capturing the Signature of Hurricane Harvey on Texas Coastal Lagoons
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Xinping Hu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,790.00

Hurricane Harvey made landfall Friday 25 August 2017 about 30 miles northeast of
Corpus Christi, Texas as a Category 4 hurricane with winds up to 130 mph. This
is the strongest hurricane to hit the middle Texas coast since Carla in 1961.
After the wind storm and storm surge, coastal flooding occurred due to the storm
lingering over Texas for four more days, dumping as much as 50 inches of rain
near Houston. This will produce one of the largest floods ever to hit the Texas
coast, and it is estimated that the flood will be a one in a thousand year
event. The Texas coast is characterized by lagoons behind barrier islands, and
their ecology and biogeochemistry are strongly influenced by coastal hydrology.
Because this coastline is dominated by open water systems and productivity is
driven by the amount of freshwater inflow, Hurricane Harvey represents a massive
inflow event that will likely cause tremendous changes to the coastal
environments. Therefore, questions arise regarding how biogeochemical cycles of
carbon, nutrients, and oxygen will be altered, whether massive phytoplankton
blooms will occur, whether estuarine species will die when these systems turn
into lakes, and how long recovery will take? The investigators are uniquely
situated to mount this study not only because of their location, just south of
the path of the storm, but most importantly because the lead investigator has
conducted sampling of these bays regularly for the past thirty years, providing
a tremendous context in which to interpret the new data gathered. The knowledge
gained from this study will provide a broader understanding of the effects of
similar high intensity rainfall events, which are expected to increase in
frequency and/or intensity in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research hypothesis is that: Increased inflows to estuaries will cause increased
loads of inorganic and organic matter, which will in turn drive primary
production and biological responses, and at the same time significantly enhance
respiration of coastal blue carbon. A secondary hypothesis is that: The large
change in salinity and dissolved oxygen deficits will kill or stress many
estuarine and marine organisms. To test these hypotheses it is necessary to
measure the temporal change in key indicators of biogeochemical processes, and
biodiversity shifts. Thus, changes to the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen cycles,
and the diversity of benthic organisms will be measured and compared to existing
baselines. The PIs propose to sample the Lavaca-Colorado, Guadalupe, Nueces, and
Laguna Madre estuaries as follows: 1) continuous sampling (via autonomous
instruments) of salinity, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, and depth (i.e.
tidal elevation); 2) bi-weekly to monthly sampling for dissolved and total
organic carbon and organic nitrogen, carbonate system parameters, nutrients, and
phytoplankton community composition; 3) quarterly measurements of sediment
characteristics and benthic infauna. The project will support two graduate
students. The PIs will communicate results to the public and to state agencies
through existing collaborations.