* 1760055
* Collaborative Research:  Adapting Reading Comprehension Strategies for use in Elementary School Computer Science Instruction to Educate Tomorrow's Computational Innovators
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Cathy Thomas, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2021
* USD 228,102.00

In order to produce a more competitive, computer-literate domestic workforce
ready to be computational innovators, this project seeks to improve computer
science instruction at the upper elementary school level. It will create
strategies for teaching a diverse set of students, including students with
learning disabilities, English language learners, and students with a variety of
ethnic, gender, and socioeconomic backgrounds. It will draw on decades of
research on reading comprehension to drive our exploration into metacognitive
learning strategies for computer science. While many computer science
educational activities focus on older students, this project addresses the need
to enhance computer science education for elementary school students and does it
in a way that is accessible and effective for diverse student populations. The
researchers will explore how reading skills, reading comprehension, and computer
programming skills can be related. The ultimate goal will be to identify and
develop techniques, including teacher and student resources, for learning to
program in the early years. The strategies involved in the project support
improving computer science instruction and expanding access to computing for all
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study skills that are
correlated with success in programming, especially as they relate to reading
comprehension and metacognitive strategies. It will then modify and pilot-test
strategies for use in programming instruction. More specifically, the goals of
this project are to: (1) Assess a variety of skills and abilities (e.g. reading
comprehension, mathematics, and cognitive skills) to correlate with successfully
learning programming. (2) Explore metacognitive strategies used by successful
college-level novice programmers. (3) Perform a theoretical analysis of several
existing metacognitive learning strategies and how they relate to code
comprehension. (4) Develop two promising metacognitive strategies as code
comprehension strategies, including teacher modeling and guided instruction
resources as well as student resources. (5) Implement new strategies in the
classroom to evaluate for usability, fidelity, and impact. This project
represents foundational work in understanding the relationship between non-
programming skills and learning programming in upper elementary students, as
well as the metacognitive strategies that successful learners employ while
reading code during the programming learning process. This research represents
the beginning of a rich agenda that strives to better understand how to adapt
teaching techniques and learning techniques, not just content, for the
elementary school audience. Funding for this project comes from the NSF ECR
Program.