* 1760643
* Collaborative Research: Math Cognition In Toddlers From Latino and White Families: Contributions Of Home Experiences With Mothers and Fathers
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Natasha Cabrera, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The proposed research, led by a team of investigators from New York University,
the University of Pittsburgh, and the University of Maryland, will address the
persistent problem of low representation of particular US minorities STEM
fields. Already by school entry, children display striking individual
differences in math skills that can set them on a path for high or low math
performance and participation in STEM disciplines. Latino children, who are
disproportionately from low-SES households, are largely vulnerable to delays in
math in the school years relative to non-Latino white children, making it urgent
to examine when and why this gap emerges. To this end, this project will examine
the early math skills of 300 Latino and non-Latino White toddlers and their
relation to the quantity and quality of math-related learning opportunities that
mothers and fathers provide for their children during everyday interactions. In
addition, mothers' and fathers' math abilities, attitudes toward math, and
beliefs about the importance of math for children will be examined to determine
which of these factors may explain variation in the provision of math-related
learning opportunities in the home. Findings of this project will be
communicated to educators, practitioners working with parents, staff at
community agencies, and parents of young children. The project is funded by the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning, research on workforce
development, and research on broadening participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to advance science on early math cognition and aspects
of the home environment that support math learning across three core systems:
(1) the approximate number system (ANS), an imprecise, nonsymbolic
representation of number, (2) the exact number system, a precise, symbolic
representation of number, and (3) spatial math, a system that represents shapes,
space, and relations among objects in space. These core systems of math are
building blocks to mathematical cognition throughout the lifespan. This project
will investigate core math skills in toddlers from Latino and non-Latino white
backgrounds and the factors that contribute to individual differences. In a
sample varying in ethnicity and SES, investigators will describe individual
differences in mathematical cognition in 2- to 3-year-olds from Latino and non-
Latino white backgrounds, document the roles of mothers' and fathers' math-
related practices in children's math skills using new video coding tools and
measure, test associations between parenting practices and toddler math skills,
and identify the factors that explain variations in mothers? and fathers? math-
related practices. This project will inform the design of interventions to
support emerging math skills and address the participation of members of groups
underrepresented in STEM related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.