* 1760094
* Collaborative Research: The origin and propagation of shallow water microseisms: a multidisciplinary study at Yellowstone Lake
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Keith Koper, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 176,563.00

Microseisms are very small displacements (micrometers) of the Earth's solid
surface that have been detected since that advent of seismometers, but the
source of these vibrations was a mystery to scientists until about 60 years ago,
when it began to become clear that they are largely generated by ocean waves.
There are two main ways that ocean waves can generate microseism energy: 1) the
interaction between waves traveling in different directions in the open ocean
(secondary microseisms), and 2) the interaction of waves with the seafloor in
shallow areas near the coast (primary microseisms). We presently have a good
understanding of secondary microseisms, but the generation and propagation of
primary microseisms is not well understood. Recently, it has been discovered
that several large lakes around the world also produce microseism energy,
including Yellowstone Lake in Yellowstone National Park. Yellowstone Lake
provides a unique opportunity to study microseisms because, unlike the large
oceans, it is relatively small and can be completely surrounded by seismic
instruments, which gives us the opportunity to pinpoint the locations where
microseisms are being generated and to study how they propagate into the
surrounding regions. Our project will take advantage of the ongoing HD-YLAKE
project, which deployed an array of seismometers on the floor of Yellowstone
Lake, by supplementing those instruments with arrays of seismometers on the
lake's perimeter and islands. In addition, we will also deploy instruments to
simultaneously measure key atmospheric information (air temperature, pressure,
wind speed, and wind direction) and the lake waves (amplitude, period, and
direction) while the seismometers are recording. This combination of
atmospheric, wave, and seismic data has never been collected in one place
before, and it will provide an unprecedented opportunity to understand the
processes that generate microseisms. Our results will have broad implications
for the study of microseisms, and ultimately, we want to develop the ability to
use these naturally occurring seismic waves to image the Earth's structure. This
is an exciting possibility in Yellowstone Lake, because it hosts active
hydrothermal systems that are believed to create large gas pockets in the lake
floor sediments, and the microseism propagation velocity should be very
sensitive to the presence of gas. As a broader impact, the investigators will
work with Yellowstone Park educators to make their results accessible to the
wider public through their exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: It
has recently been found that many lakes generate observable microseisms at
periods near 1 s. Observations from land-based seismometers deployed near lakes
show that the microseisms propagate as short-period Rayleigh waves (Rg), often
with prograde particle motion because of the low velocity of lake sediments.
However, it is unknown if the source process is linear, corresponding to primary
ocean microseisms, or non-linear, corresponding to secondary ocean microseisms,
or both. It is also unknown whether the source regions are predominantly in the
open water or near the shoreline, and how the microseismic wavefield evolves as
it crosses the shoreline. Yellowstone Lake is an excellent natural laboratory
for understanding shallow water microseisms because (1) there are no potentially
confounding swells from distant storms, as there are in the oceans, (2) the
source region is geographically small and can essentially be surrounded with
seismometers, and (3) the Yellowstone Lake microseisms are a regular, repeatable
phenomenon associated with diurnal wind variation during the summer and fall. An
understanding of the source mechanism of Yellowstone Lake microseisms will
likely be applicable to other shallow water regions around the world and could
lead to improved imaging of very shallow Earth structure. The proposed work
involves a monthlong deployment of (1) 40 three-component, autonomous, 5-Hz
geophones around the perimeter of Yellowstone Lake and on islands within the
lake, (2) four weather stations collocated with selected geophones, and (3) two
wave-height recorders in the northern portion of the Yellowstone Lake. The
deployment is planned for the summer of 2018 so that it can overlap with the
ongoing, NSF-funded, HDYLAKE experiment, which deployed an array of 10 lake-
bottom seismometers around an active hydrothermal site. The PIs and a graduate
student will analyze the interdisciplinary data set in an effort to determine
the origin and generation mechanism of the short-period (~1 sec) microseisms
that were recently observed to originate from Yellowstone Lake during periods of
open water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.