* 1760598
* RAPID: Changing perceptions of causes and consequences in the immediate aftermath of a disaster
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Raja Swamy, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 83,833.00

The research supported by this award will investigate how perceptions of a
disaster are formulated in the immediate aftermath of the event. The researchers
will investigate the proposition that social and economic position affects
understanding of the disaster and thereby produces variable goals and plans for
disaster mitigation and post-disaster reconstruction. Previous research has
shown that disasters can reveal strengths and weaknesses in the behaviors
influenced by social and cultural factors. In this project, the researchers
explore how those revelations are produced in the immediate aftermath of making
sense of what has happened and how they vary across different stakeholders.
Findings will be disseminated to organizations that explore and manage the
causes, consequences, and complexities of disaster management and recovery.
Funding this research also trains students from underrepresented groups in
social science research.

This RAPID award supports the collection of data in Houston using
anthropological ethnographic methods. The researchers will conduct saturated
interviewing of city officials involved in land use planning, disaster
reduction, disaster response, and disaster recovery. A stratified (by socio-
economic, racial, and other variables) sample of community leaders will be
researched through participant observation and interviews. The objective is to
document how perceptions vary, how they develop over time, and how they affect
the eventual mitigation and prevention plans that are produced. The research
will produce a baseline ethnographic map (an ethnographic narrative that
connects the social production of space with the social production of social
difference and disaster vulnerability) of Houston that identifies city
residents' varied problematizations of the disaster. This will provide a
database baseline for future research and for stakeholders.