* 1760961
* A Model to Explain the Institutional and Student Characteristics Related to STEM Baccalaureate Graduates from Historically Black Colleges and Universities Who Earn Doctoral Degrees
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Cynthia Overton, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 09/30/2023
* USD 839,575.00

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network, in collaboration with the
American Institutes for Research (AIR), is studying a model aligned with the
successful graduation of undergraduate STEM students at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who go on to earn doctoral degrees. The
primary objective of this research is to advance understanding about the
characteristics of HBCUs that enable STEM undergraduate students to thrive and
prepare them to subsequently pursue and obtain doctoral degrees. It is also
important to understand which student subsets, such as those who are
historically underrepresented minorities (URM), succeed in HBCUs at the highest
rates. As the nation addresses a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM
undergraduate and graduate students, the number of students who are URMs and
receiving undergraduate and advanced degrees in STEM is, by all accounts,
disproportionately low. This is also true of students who are educated at our
nation's HBCUs, with a select group of students that are successfully completing
STEM undergraduate and doctoral degrees. In order to engage all U.S. citizens in
our nation's effort to advance STEM education and the scientific enterprise, we
must also understand what variables are enhancing the pathways for student
success. This research project is helping to advance knowledge about these key
mechanisms for STEM degree production. The research will be conducted using data
from the U.S.'s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS); student
survey; and student, faculty and administrator
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are working with an evaluator,
who is implementing formative and summative evaluations. The project's advisory
board includes experts who have knowledge about HBCU scholarship and who are
familiar with current and relevant theory, methods and research. The board is
providing feedback to the researchers and suggesting adjustments to the
project's management, research implementation, and interpretation of the results
and findings. For dissemination purposes, the QEM/AIR team is using a web site,
publishing in peer-reviewed journals, and presenting at national professional
research conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is supported by the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources' (EHR) Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation. Additional support is provided by EHR's Historically Black
Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which enhances STEM
education and research at HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.