* 1760404
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Ultrasensitive frequency domain spectrometer for high throughput bacteria detection in floodwater
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Shayla Sawyer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 147,451.00

An award is made to Tufts University and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to
develop a frequency domain spectrometer for high throughput tracking of bacteria
in flood water in real time. In the aftermath of major catastrophic hurricanes
like Harvey and Irma with winds that pull trees from their roots and roofs from
houses, danger quietly continues at the microscopic level in the remaining
floodwaters. This EAGER research project will advance fundamental research on
sensing technology for rapid characterization of pathogenic bacteria in
floodwater generated by future catastrophic events. Covering the spectrum from
hybrid materials to system, there are variables and trade-offs that can only be
clearly defined through methodical, directed experimentation. With this
knowledge, synergistic innovations at material, device and system architecture
are pursued to affect unprecedented sensor performance. The proposed cross-
disciplinary research and education program will have significant broader
impacts on fluorescence spectroscopy and optical sensor technology based on
heterogeneous integration of nanocomposites on silicon. Instrument
miniaturization will enable new studies correlating factors in water quality.
Interactive workshops with biochemists and students will be organized to guide
spectrometer development. There is a strong mentoring and training component for
students at all levels at Tufts, RPI and the broader community.

The objective of this proposal is to develop a highly sensitive frequency domain
spectrometer instrument for high-throughput tracking of bacteria to quantify and
identify bacteria in floodwater in real time, which significantly reduces labor,
time, and cost. The proposed work focuses on the spectral and temporal
characteristics of intrinsic fluorescence and the material, device, and circuit
innovations needed to detect them. Significant technical barriers must be
overcome including optical sensitivity, wavelength selectivity, environmental
robustness, interference, low-noise signal amplification, and power consumption.
The proposed instrument is built on enhancements from the synergistic properties
of new nanocomposites that comprise an ultrasensitive device while remaining
compatible with large-scale, silicon fabrication processes. The proposed
research work will benefit studies of pathogenic bacteria in floodwaters. The
frequency domain spectrometer device is realized using a hybrid system-on-chip
approach combining nanocomposite optoelectronic devices integrated with silicon
CMOS technology for low-power, complex signal processing and bacteria
classification. Silicon integrated circuit technology enables system
miniaturization, resulting in an overall reduction in power consumption and
parasitic components that contribute to system noise and performance
degradation. This project is well suited to an EAGER grant given the innovative
aspects of the proposed research program involving the merger of self-assembled
nanocomposite structures, high sensitivity analog electronics, ultra-low-power
multiplexing and digitization circuitry, and emerging nanofabrication
techniques. The project will realize a new class of portable fluorescence
spectrometers, enabling high throughput spatial and temporal correlation of
fluorescence emission data for bacteria characterization unachievable with
current systems. Motivated by the need to detect low level, RF-modulated optical
signals over a wide dynamic range, this research project will explore the design
of novel bipolar front-end analog circuitry with advanced features, including
programmable gain, chopper stabilization, and offset compensation. Low-power
circuit architectures for on-chip signal quantization and digitization will be
explored to enable back-end digital processing for bacteria classification.