* 1760874
* Determining the foundational properties of numerical development
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Steven Piantadosi, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,820,710.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project, led by a team of researchers
at the University of Rochester, is to answer important questions about
fundamental cognitive capacities underlying number learning. The team will
examine abilities assumed by prevailing theories to be universal by studying
mathematical learning in the Tsimane', a unique population of farming-foragers.
The extreme variability in their exposure to formal education will provide the
researchers with an opportunity to evaluate the roles of education, age,
maturity, and core cognitive systems in driving early mathematical development.
The project will involve multiple methodologies from ethnographic studies of
number use in Tsimane' life, to assessments of basic cognitive resources such as
working memory, to tests of mathematical knowledge. The team will conduct
studies of matched samples of children from 2 to 12 years of age in the US who
grow up in impoverished learning environments. The goal is to identify which
cognitive components of number competence ought to be targeted by future
interventions so as to improve learning in US children living in poverty or who
face learning delays. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature
on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many abilities are related to numeracy
and number sense, including knowledge of sets, the number words, counting, 1-1
correspondence, spatial relations, and approximate number estimation. Yet, it is
not known which of these capacities are the foundations of early number growth
and which are the consequence of number acquisition or other cultural factors.
This proposal will seek to discover the cognitive underpinnings of number in an
indigenous population, the Tsimane'. The key scientifically-relevant features of
this population are the extreme variability in their formal educational system
-- some children receive no formal education -- and that they progress through
the stages of number learning at a protracted timescale, taking 3-4 times as
long other children in the locale and children in the United States. Other
children have longer, formal education. The high variability in education, age,
and parental numeracy in this population will allow many of the components
related to number growth to be disentangled as causal factors to an unusual
extent. The team will use anthropological methods to document the cultural
context and use of number in order to understand what practices support its
acquisition and predict children's knowledge. They will also use a series of
simple experimental tasks drawn from the mathematics education and cognitive
science literatures to assess numerical development and chart the trajectory of
Tsimane' number learning in detail. The goal is to develop a unifying
computational model of number learning that can be used rapidly to predict which
future interventions will be most promising in helping to improve learning in US
children, especially those living in disadvantaged learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.