* 1761022
* Collaborative Research: Optimizing Trauma Care Network Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nan Kong, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 265,560.00

This award advances the national health by supporting research that will improve
trauma care network design. Trauma is a leading cause of death in younger
populations. Trauma care networks include trauma centers, staffed and equipped
round the clock to treat the most severely injured cases, community hospitals,
equipped to stabilize and transport patients to appropriate trauma centers, and
air/ground transport services. The trauma care network should ensure that
severely injured patients receive the right care in the right amount of time,
but maldistribution of trauma care facilities can result in undertreatment of
severely injured patients as well as expensive overtreatment of less-severely
injured patients. This project will facilitate coordinated network design
between state agencies and hospital networks, two key stakeholders in the trauma
care system. It will enable trauma policy makers to quantitatively benchmark
trauma care regionally and nationally in terms of triage errors and costs. The
research team will collaborate with state officials, hospitals, and emergency
care providers to validate the network optimization methods. The award will
support graduate student research and provide experiential learning
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in operations research
related to healthcare policy and management. Research findings will be widely
distributed to both the academic and practitioner communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative optimization methods to coordinate the bilevel
decision making process for trauma center location are developed in this
project. The research frames the trauma network design problem as a bilevel
biobjective optimization problem to capture the hierarchical interaction between
the upper level (regional authority) decisions involving subsidy allocation to
improve social wellbeing and minimize public spending, and lower level (hospital
networks) decisions involving upgrade or downgrade to maximize revenue. Novel
techniques for cross-decomposition to bound the combinatorial lower level
problem and adaptive scalarization to approximate the entire Pareto set of
nonlinear nonconvex multiobjective bilevel programs will enable efficient
problem solution. Robustness will be evaluated in response to spatial variations
in on-scene decisions, and temporal deviations in projected trauma demand and
transport resource availability. New surrogate modeling-based algorithms will
help solve the resultant maximal parameter subspace identification problem. Data
from two states will be used to validate the approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.