* 1761683
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Leveraging hardware acceleration for accurate particle dynamics in turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kyle Niemeyer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 268,612.00

Nanoparticles are present in many aspects of everyday life, from food, drugs,
cosmetics, textiles, and wood preservatives to tires, electronics, and engines.
Regardless of a nanoparticle's type, its formation, growth, and eventual
destruction involves physical processes that lead to distributions of particles
of many different shapes and sizes. In most cases, industry wants better means
to control the particle distributions; in other cases, the objective is to
prevent the formation of particles. Either way, one needs to understand how
particles behave and evolve over time to accomplish those goals. This project
aims to improve the predictive capabilities of software for simulating the
transport and evolution of populations of nanoparticles in complex flow fields
(e.g., nanoparticles in a combustion engine). The improved tools developed in
this project will benefit the combustion field by enabling better predictions of
the formation, growth, and destruction of soot particles. This will support the
design of cleaner internal combustion engines, gas turbine engines, and
furnaces. Beyond combustion, the tools developed and understanding gained
through this project could advance manufacturing by identifying which
environmental properties can be leveraged to enhance/trigger certain particles,
increase the formation of certain types of particles, or suppress them
altogether. Finally, the software to be developed is not limited to solid-oxide
nanoparticles and soot. In fact, any dispersed phase of nano- to micro-size
materials can be described by the tools developed here, including dispersion of
aerosols, dust, charged particles in plasmas, and even "particles" representing
large objects in astrophysics. In addition to the scientific objectives of the
project, the PIs will engage in public outreach and education efforts, including
producing videos explaining computational fluid dynamics for the public, running
workshops teaching software skills to researchers, and involving undergraduate
students from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds in research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the predictive capabilities of numerical
frameworks for simulating the transport and evolution of populations of
nanoparticles in complex flow fields. The research objectives include: (1)
Solving the population balance equation (PBE) for nanoparticle number density
functions with no compromise in physical accuracy. The approach provides not
only the full distribution of particles but also all their relevant properties;
(2) Evaluate a computationally efficient numerical implementation of a coupled
flow solver and PBE solver; and (3) Enable new physical and chemical insights
into nanoparticle distributions across a wide range of fields by sharing the
software developed and working with other research groups. These objectives will
be achieved by leveraging the strengths of the underlying computer
architectures: using traditional central processing units (CPUs) to solve the
flow fields and particle transport, while performing the temporal evolution of
the population of particles on graphics processing units (GPUs) using a Monte
Carlo solver. The PIs plan to release the NGA software as open source and build
a user community around NGA by ensuring that interested researchers are able to
contribute to the codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This
aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.