* 1761320
* Kinetics-Driven Drug Discovery Using Persistent Homology, Rare-Event Molecular Dynamics and Experimental Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Guowei Wei, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,100,000.00

In this project a team of investigators from mathematics, molecular biology and
medicinal chemistry will develop mathematical and computational tools to predict
the efficacy of compounds that may help treat neuropathic pain in diabetics.
Pharmaceutical drugs are mostly made up of very small molecules, which take
their effect by binding to target biomolecules in our bodies and perturbing
their functions. A major challenge in designing new drugs - such as treatments
for cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer's disease - is figuring out how to bind a
particular target both accurately (with little off-target binding), and
effectively (a high percentage of targets occupied by drug molecules). A key
quantity to maximize the effectiveness of a drug is its "residence time," the
average amount of time the drug will remain in the binding site after each
binding event. However, little is known about how the structure of a drug
molecule determines its residence time, and this hinders our ability to
incorporate residence time predictions in the drug design process. This research
will predict the residence times of compounds binding to a pharmaceutical target
molecule that affects diabetic neuropathic pain, as well as test those
predictions experimentally. This study will potentially result in new treatments
for diabetic neuropathic pain and also serve as a blueprint for future drug
discovery efforts focused on residence time. To facilitate adoption of this
approach the team of investigators will disseminate their results via a
dedicated website, online servers and participation in world-wide competitions
for predicting drug binding properties. This project also involves the training
of graduate students with unique interdisciplinary backgrounds, and will inform
the development of graduate courses at the intersection of mathematics and
biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a pipeline
of mathematical and computational tools to enable kinetics-based drug discovery.
The studies will be conducted on soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), an established
pharmaceutical target for diabetic neuropathic pain for which only limited drugs
have yet been approved. This project will use an integrated approach that
encompasses topological modeling, machine learning, virtual screening, molecular
simulation, as well as in vitro and in vivo assessment of compound efficacy. In
PI Wei's laboratory, persistent homology will be used together with deep
learning to abstract topological information from protein-ligand complexes and
predict stable binding poses, binding affinities, and binding kinetics. It is
believed that the combination of topological analysis and deep learning will be
transformative: it will bring a surge in similar approaches in 3D biomolecular
data predictions in the near future, as well as applications to other fields,
such as chemistry, and material science. PI Dickson will use rare-event
techniques in molecular modeling to simulate ligand release events, and identify
the rate-limiting transition states of the ligand binding and release process.
This project will also examine the robustness of ligand binding transition
states for the first time, which is the key quantity to enable kinetics-based
drug design. Thirdly, PI Lee will continually assess the binding affinity and
residence times of the predicted compounds. Selected compounds will be tested in
vivo with a novel mouse model, to determine the limits of the benefits of long
in vitro residence times. This collaborative project will achieve synergistic
benefits by bringing together expertise from advanced mathematics, computational
biophysics, and molecular pharmacology. The collaborative tools for sampling and
prediction resulting from this work can then be applied to the discovery of
novel long residence time compounds for other targets of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.