* 1761012
* Vocabulary and Reading Difficulties in Preschool and 1st Grade and their Consequences for Mathematics and Science Achievement in 1st-5th Grade
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Paul Morgan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,495,255.00

Oral vocabulary difficulties before or soon after kindergarten are thought to
result in reading difficulties during the primary grades, which in turn are
thought to result in mathematics and science difficulties during the later
elementary grades. To date, however, most empirical studies investigating the
theorized inter-relations between oral vocabulary, reading, and mathematics and
science difficulties have used small clinical or convenience samples of limited
generalizability, included relatively few covariates, and examined the relations
concurrently or only over short time periods. Thus, whether and to what extent
oral vocabulary difficulties result in reading difficulties and, in turn,
mathematics and science difficulties across the elementary grades in the U.S. is
largely unknown. This project will examine the inter-relations between oral
vocabulary, reading, mathematics, and science difficulties throughout the
elementary grades, yielding greater scientific knowledge about the early onset
and over-time dynamics of these types of learning difficulties. Doing so should
help identify the cognitive, behavioral, affective, and social conditions that
collectively interfere with STEM learning including early in children's school
careers. These analyses should also inform the delivery and design of STEM
interventions at time periods when such interventions may be the most
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze two nationally
representative and longitudinal datasets (i.e., the Early Childhood Longitudinal
Study-Birth Cohort and Kindergarten Cohort of 2011, or ECLS-B and ECLS-K:2011)
to investigate risk factors for oral vocabulary difficulties prior to or by
kindergarten. The team will also examine to what extent oral vocabulary and
reading difficulties during kindergarten and 1st grade increase children's risk
of experiencing mathematics and science difficulties in later grades. To best
address the project's research aims, a range of advanced analytical methods will
be used including multilevel modeling, latent growth and growth mixture
modeling, and structural equation modeling with random and fixed effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.