* 1761713
* NSFGEO-NERC: Physical and Chemical Constraints on Large-volume Pyroclastic Blasts: The Campanian Ignimbrite Eruption, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Michael Ort, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2022
* USD 290,655.00

Pyroclastic density currents, mixtures of volcanic ash and pumice (also known as
pyroclasts) and gas that move at high rates of speed, are some of the most
destructive forces in nature. The Campanian Ignimbrite, which erupted from the
Campi Flegrei near Naples, Italy, 40,000 years ago, is the deposit from one of
the youngest truly large pyroclastic density currents on Earth. The currents
reached over 80 km from the vent and devastated an area currently occupied by
more than 4 million people. Traditional models for these currents assume they
are tens to perhaps 100 meters thick, but our past work shows the Campanian
current moved as a kilometer-thick flow across the landscape, overtopping ridges
1.5 times that height. This great mobility makes this sort of "expanded"
pyroclastic density current much more hazardous and the damage less predictable.
This dilute current required an enormous amount of gas, more than can be
explained by the amount dissolved in the magma prior to eruption. Two other
possible sources are the entrainment of air and the involvement of water from a
hot hydrothermal system within the volcano. This project will determine the
amounts of gas from the magma, air, and hydrothermal system involved in the
current. This information will be used to make better predictions of which
volcanoes might produce highly mobile currents and design hazards maps that take
this mobility into account. Two undergraduate students, two graduate students, a
post-doctoral researcher, and a professor will work on this project at Northern
Arizona University and a graduate student and a professor will work at Oxford
University. Three Italian researchers will also collaborate in this project. The
results may be used for hazards assessments and response plans, including for
the US Naval Support Activity in Naples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent thermal
magnetization study of the Campanian Ignimbrite (CI) found the temperature of
emplacement was above 580 oC even at 80 km from the vent. This limits how much
air could have been incorporated, but, to calculate precise quantities, a better
knowledge of the magmatic temperature and whether other sources of gas, such as
magmatic gas and hydrothermal fluids, were significant, is needed. This project
will include 1) field investigations to better characterize the CI stratigraphy
and link distal and proximal deposits and define the relative timing of volcanic
events; 2) complete volatile analysis (H2O, CO2, S, F and Cl) of melt inclusions
and apatite microphenocrysts via Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy,
ion probe, and electron microprobe. Back-calculating volatile concentrations
during open-system degassing is a new technique that should reveal much about
the Campanian Ignimbrite magma history; and 3) a study of the glass transition
temperature at varying strain rates and residual water contents to better define
the emplacement temperature. Current models and interpretations of datasets may
need to be modified to include the potential role of hydrothermal fluids in
"supercharging" an eruption, as hydrothermal water does not appear in many
petrologic measurements of gases. A model for explosive eruptions that includes
the potential contribution of erupted hydrothermal systems will help define
volcanic hazards more accurately and may elucidate a possible cause for
paroxysmal pyroclastic density current-producing
eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.