* 1761418
* Effect of Surface Stiffness on the Friction of Confined Microgel Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Yingxi (Elaine) Zhu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2023
* USD 380,714.00

This grant will impact progress of science and advance the national health and
prosperity by researching the properties of liquids tightly confined between
'soft' walls often found in biological systems and in nanostructures impacted
nanotechnology. A liquid tightly confined between two solid surfaces at a gap
spacing comparable to its molecular dimension can behave very different from its
bulk state. Increased friction is commonly observed with confined liquids, often
due to the solidification of the liquid when confined. Prior research of
confined liquids has mostly focused on hard and well-structured confining walls.
Yet many biological and engineering processes involve highly soft and deformable
surfaces, such as lubrication between synovial and cartilaginous joints, motions
of red blood cells in capillaries, and even the aquaplaning of rubbery tires.
The impact of surface stiffness on fluid lubrication remains poorly understood.
This grant supports fundamental research to understand the effect of surface
stiffness on the structure and friction of strongly confined liquids, whose
confining wall stiffness can be varied to be relevant of many real world
systems. The knowledge gained from this investigation can be transformed to
control fluid transport by optimizing surface mechanical elasticity and design
low-friction interfaces for energy saving in various industrial applications.
Broader impacts of this project will also include the recruitment and training
of underrepresented students, including women students, as the next generation
of American engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the long-
debated questions of surface-induced glass transition and friction augment of
spatially confined liquids. A quantitative understanding of the effect of
surface stiffness on the dynamics of confined liquids between deformable
surfaces will be developed by in-situ microscopic characterization at a single-
particle level. The surface-to-liquid stiffness ratios will be tuned in a single
microgel system by using microgel particles of varied crosslinking degrees as
both surface coatings and confined liquids. A micron-gap tribometer integrated
with confocal laser scanning microscopy enables the measurement of the
heterogeneous dynamics and friction of confined microgel liquids between two
deformable surfaces against varied gap spacings and shear conditions. The
relationship among surface stiffness, confinement length scales, dynamic
heterogeneity, and shear-induced fluidity of confined liquids will be
quantified. The results obtained from this research will give molecular insight
to confinement-induced glassy dynamics and biolubrication involving highly
deformable surfaces. The success of this project can lead to a new avenue by
judicious design and control of the mechanical compliance of surfaces and
coatings to modify friction, facilitate interfacial mass transport, and
manipulate surface sensing and actuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.