* 1761696
* Influence of Mesh Size, Type of Crosslinking, Polymer Stiffness and Interfacial Rheology on the Frictional Characteristics of Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,062.00

This grant will support research that will advance the knowledge related to a
structure-property relation for hydrogels, promoting both the progress of
science and advancing national health. Hydrogels are a class of soft materials,
composed of crosslinked polymeric networks that remarkably swell in water, which
closely simulate many natural biological tissues, like mucous gel layers.
Biological lubrication taking place in respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts,
in the oral cavity and in the eyes, relies on the low friction coefficients
provided by these mucous gel layers. Despite significant research effort, there
is still disagreement about the origin of such low friction, which hinders the
design of biomaterials capable of achieving efficient biolubrication to date.
This project will thus deliver the needed knowledge of the relation between
hydrogel's properties and frictional response. Thereby, it will enable to
establish design principles of hydrogels for targeted biomedical applications
capable of achieving low friction coefficients, and augmented wear resistance,
and therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. society. This
research involves several disciplines including materials chemistry and science,
and tribology. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fill the outlined knowledge gap, two
major lines of research will be followed: one comparing physically and
chemically crosslinked hydrogels with a wide range of crosslinking degrees, and
a second one that will study the influence of polymer chain semi-flexibility. To
evaluate lubrication mechanisms, friction force measurements will be carried out
on well-characterized hydrogels (with a wide range of compositions) by colloidal
probe Atomic Force Microscopy and with a Surface Forces Apparatus as a function
of load and sliding velocity (spanning over five orders of magnitude) to probe
microscopic phenomena with different relaxation times. The experimental effort
will provide insight into the effects of mesh size, type of crosslinking,
polymer stiffness, as well as aging of the interface, on the frictional
characteristics. The research team will also conduct dynamic shear-force
measurements to scrutinize the relation between friction force and interfacial
rheology of hydrogels. The knowledge generated by this research will afford to
modulate the frictional response of hydrogels through the precise control of
their microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.