* 1761912
* Observations of Fault Growth Under Elevated Fluid Pressure Using Dynamic Microtomography
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Wen-Lu Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 358,589.00

Sudden motions of a tectonic fault such as the San Andreas fault cause
earthquakes. Better seismic risk assessment requires quantitative knowledge of
fault distribution and propagation. The discovery of slow slip events, those
that occur over hours to months instead of seconds, at convergent plate
boundaries, like in the Pacific Northwest, provides new opportunities to study
the mechanics of earthquakes and other fault instabilities. Seismic observations
link slow slip events to high fluid pressure within the fault zones but how this
works mechanically is still unclear. Recent studies in the lab that emulate
these conditions show that increasing pore pressure slow down fault growth. This
project looks to advance these experiments to improve our understanding of the
mechanics of slow faulting under high pore pressure. The work has broader
impacts on our understanding of seismic hazards at coastal plate boundaries as
well as other areas that see this type of complex faulting. The researcher will
also provide a research experience for an undergraduate, and conduct outreach to
a nearby high school to bring students into a scientific lab. The project
supports a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers hypothesize that dilatant hardening at crack tip can cause
deformation to migrate, which results in delocalized fracturing and slow fault
propagation. To test this hypothesis, the work enables deformation experiments
using an X-ray transparent deformation apparatus to record the real-time fault
growth. The state-of-the-art dynamic microtomography imaging will elucidate the
fault nucleation process and growth pattern in a deforming rock at in-situ
conditions. They will also incorporate dilatancy hardening into the damage model
to simulate the effect of pore pressure on fault propagation. Comparison of the
3-D microstructure generated by numerical simulations and the time-lapse
tomography images will provide new insights into deformation mechanisms. The
goal is to build a better understanding of the mechanics of slow fault growth,
and thus provide the critical link between the geophysical observations and the
stress states of a megathrust fault during the interseismic period of an
earthquake cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.