* 1761251
* An Investigation of Science and Engineering Apprenticeship Programs and their Workforce Outcomes
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Daniel Kuehn, Urban Institute
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 03/31/2019
* USD 169,057.00

The Urban Institute will conduct an exploratory mixed method study of STEM
apprenticeship programs to provide a foundational understanding of the
characteristics and performance of STEM apprentices, including the experiences
of underrepresented minorities in STEM apprenticeship programs. The proposed
research also will investigate the program-level determinants of success,
including program design elements that lead to higher completion rates and wage
growth for apprentices. Elements of project-based learning and action learning
theories will frame the research, although much of the extant research on
registered apprenticeships is either descriptive or atheoretical, or it is
grounded in economic theories that are principally concerned with explaining an
employer's incentive to provide apprenticeship training. The results of the
project will support the implementation and expansion of STEM apprenticeship
programs and guide the design of new comparable STEM training programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will use data from the Registered
Apprenticeship Partners Information Data System (RAPIDS) and state data from
Virginia and Washington to answer research questions investigating the
characteristics of STEM apprentices and apprenticeship programs and whether they
vary over time and across different fields, completion rates for STEM
apprentices and determinants of program completion for these workers, and level
of wage growth apprentices achieve upon completion of their apprenticeship. The
analysis will be conducted in two overlapping stages. First, multivariate
modeling using administrative data on registered apprenticeship will examine the
prevalence of the apprenticeship training model in STEM occupations and the
characteristics of apprentices in these fields. The administrative data also
track apprentice outcomes, including progress through and completion of the
program and wage rates for completers. These data will be used for multivariate
modeling of the determinants of apprentice outcomes. The findings from the
multivariate models of apprentice outcomes will inform the development of
protocols for the second stage of the analysis - content analysis of
apprenticeship work process schedules and interviews with representatives of
STEM apprenticeship programs. The interviews will explore how apprenticeship
training supports workforce development, promising strategies for STEM
apprenticeships, and the strengths and weaknesses of the training model. The
research is expected to make important contributions to future implementation of
registered apprenticeships in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.