* 1761918
* Transient Network Theory: Bridging Molecular Mechanisms to the  Viscoelasticity of Soft Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Franck Vernerey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 398,937.00

The ability to organize large populations of molecules into materials can open
the door to making dynamic materials or soft machines, thus advancing the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; and even securing the national defense
by facilitating the emerging area of soft robotics. Such materials are often
found in nature in the form of transient polymeric networks which are at the
source of muscle contraction as well as self-healing and adaptation in
biological tissues. Although similar molecular networks can be synthesized in
the laboratory, their performance still lags far behind their biological
counterparts; raising the need for a better theoretical understanding and
experimental control. This project will provide a route to fundamentally
understand how the organization and dynamics of such polymer networks can lead
to a well-targeted emerging response. It will promote the progress of soft
matter science by bridging the gap between our understanding of the behavior of
a single molecule and that of an entire network, not only enabling a fundamental
understanding of bio-polymers, but also in improving our ability to control
synthetic materials. The project will also develop an educational program around
the concept of "materials of the future and bio-inspiration" in high-schools,
the enhancement of undergraduate curriculum, and dissemination of scientific
knowledge through social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a fundamental
viewpoint, this project will support the development of a transient network
theory that will describe, in a statistical sense, the time evolution of a
transient polymer network based on molecular processes such as chain detachment,
reputation, or diffusion. Going beyond phenomenological viscoelastic models, key
concepts in statistical mechanics will be used to obtain a clearer connection
between transient molecular interactions between many polymer chains and the
time-dependent response of the network. The project brings three key
contributions: (a) a new fundamental understanding of the relation between
molecular processes and rheology, elasticity and energy dissipation; (b) the
ability to generate new hypotheses regarding dynamic polymers and explore their
macroscopic outcome in terms of growth, fracture resistance, and self-healing,
and (c) a new continuum framework to describe the extreme deformation of soft
materials whose behavior lies between that of solids and fluids. A computational
methodology based on finite elements will be introduced to solve the research
theory and used to study and characterize the viscoelastic response of synthetic
and biopolymers in terms of their inner structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.