* 1761610
* Nonlinear Viscoelastic Behavior of Glassy Polymers: Unification of the Mechanical and Enthalpic Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2020
* James Caruthers, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2020
* USD 402,815.00

Glassy polymers are some of the most important engineering materials in use
today. They are used in a wide variety of products ranging from the matrix resin
in aerospace composites to high impact transparent materials used in aerospace,
automotive and home applications to numerous consumer goods. Notwithstanding the
commercial importance of these materials, a fundamental understanding of the
glassy state remains one of the outstanding questions in science and
engineering. The design of products made from glassy polymers requires a
fundamental understanding of how these materials respond when deformed. This
award supports research to uncover the mechanisms that control the deformation
behavior of glassy polymers and then incorporate this understanding in
quantitative models that describe the relationship between the deformation and
the forces required to cause that deformation. This research is a major step
towards developing the constitutive models that describe the material response
to complex deformation ? models that are at the heart of the computer codes that
are used to design products made from glassy polymers. Because of the economic
importance of products made using these materials, this research will eventually
benefit the U.S. economy, and thus, advance national health, prosperity, and
welfare. The award will also support undergraduate research through supervision
of honors thesis, and motorsports-based STEM outreach to middle and high schools
in partnership with the IndyCar racing community.

The current state-of-the-art in modeling the deformation behavior of glassy
polymers does not incorporate one of the key molecular concepts of polymer
physics. Specifically, although glassy polymers may appear to be spatially
uniform, on the nanometer size scale glassy material exhibits significant
dynamic heterogeneity, where neighboring spatial regions can have order-of-
magnitude differences in local mobility. This award supports research that will
continue development of a new class of models that explicitly incorporates
dynamic heterogeneity. In addition, when materials are deformed they exhibit
both deformation behavior and a thermal response; however, existing models
ignore the thermal response which can contain up to half of the overall
deformation energy. A major objective of this research grant will be to unify
the deformation and thermal response to provide a more physical description of
the deformation process in glassy polymers. Finally, researchers supported by
this award will participate in a major STEM program, where high school students
design, build and test electric go-karts that they then race as part of the
Indy500 festivities. Material properties are a key component of the classroom
aspects of this STEM program, where mechanical properties of polymers are
explicitly analyzed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.