* 1761501
* 2017 Stone Child College Targeted STEM Infusion Project
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Cory Sangrey-Billy, Stone Child College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,970.00

Increasing the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
instructional and research capacities of specific institutions of higher
education that serve the nation's Indigenous students is a major goal of the
Tribal Colleges and Universities program. The "2017 Stone Child College Targeted
STEM Infusion Project" directly addresses these goals through the development of
an instructional model that incorporates new ethnobotany curriculum materials
and research experiences across the STEM disciplines at Stone Child College
(SCC). This work will expand STEM offerings, improve the academic environment
for Native students, and encourage them to pursue challenging and rewarding STEM
degrees and careers, thus leading to a more diverse national workforce and
strengthening our country's prosperity and security. The lessons learned about
the efficacy of the project in supporting Native students' STEM outcomes will
contribute to our understanding of best practices for attracting and preparing
underrepresented students in STEM as the next generation of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "2017 Stone Child College Targeted STEM
Infusion Project" at Stone Child College will develop an ethnobotany course and
student research experiences that address core botany concepts and traditional
plant knowledge of the Chippewa-Cree as a means to engage Native students in
STEM studies. The project will update and enhance a forty-year-old book on
Chippewa-Cree ethnobotany and develop a video to complement the book for use in
the course, which will be offered across the STEM disciplinary degrees at SCC.
The project will also develop and test a student cohort model that employs near-
peer mentoring of high school students by college undergraduates as they
complete the course and engage in culturally relevant ethnobotany research.
Cultural experts from the tribal community will collaborate with college STEM
faculty members in the design and delivery of the course and research
experiences. The project's evaluation will collect evidence of the efficacy of
the project in supporting improved STEM outcomes for Native students. Knowledge
generated will be disseminated in publications and presentations and will
contribute to the knowledge base on means for increasing the representation of
Native people in STEM degrees and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.