* 1761249
* The Influence of Gender and Race in Fostering Innovation in Engineering Teams
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Nadya Fouad, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 492,531.00

The study examines how the interaction of diversity and engineering team
dynamics impact innovation in the workplace. The investigators apply the
Categorization Elaboration Model (CEM) to investigate why simply including women
or racial/ethnic minorities on engineering teams does not lead automatically to
greater innovation. The model reconciles the inconsistent literature on team
diversity and team performance and addresses the fundamental question of when
and how team diversity can have a positive relationship with various indicators
of performance such as creativity, innovation, team effectiveness, and
performance. The study adds to the research literature by explicitly linking
types of team diversity with innovation; simultaneously examining team dynamics,
team microclimate, and team cognition to highlight factors that facilitate or
impede innovation in diverse teams; adding temporal elements by collecting data
over a two-year period; and examining the diversity-innovation process among
teams of working engineers in the field. Investigators will use variables such
as the value, radicalness, and number of a development team?s patents in
emergent technologies. The research findings will influence organizational
practices within engineering firms by identifying specific team dynamics and
microclimates that facilitate innovation goal achievement by diverse
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a large scale quantitative survey
linking team diversity and team dynamics to team performance and metrics of
innovation, primarily patents. The study will collect data from 5,234
engineering alumni who participated in a prior NSF funded longitudinal study
about contextual barriers that impact persistence in engineering careers. It
will investigate four research questions: (1) What conditions must be in place
to facilitate/hinder demographically and informationally diverse teams to
produce innovative solutions? (2) What are the underlying mechanisms by which
demographically and informationally diverse teams produce innovative solutions?
(3) What are the underlying mechanisms that explain the relationship between
demographically and informationally diverse teams, information, discussion
process, and innovation? and (4) How do these processes vary over the study
period of two years? The CEM hypothesizes that it is not direct relationships
between gender and racially diverse teams and innovation but factors within the
team and team dynamics that influence the relationship between diversity and
innovation. The investigators will use hierarchical linear regression, mediation
analysis, and ANOVA to test the six hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is supported by the ECR program that emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. ECR supports the accumulation of robust evidence
to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.