* 1761950
* Collaborative Research: Personalized Systems for Wayfinding for First Responders
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Yingzi Lin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2021
* USD 197,138.00

First responders face serious risks when responding to emergencies, and
disorientation induced by complex building features is a major cause of
injuries. In order to successfully navigate complex, dangerous buildings during
a crisis, first responders need to build accurate spatial memories of unfamiliar
spaces in a timely manner. This requires retention and processing of a large
amount of information such as maps and verbal instructions. An apparent gap
between the enormous information processing needs during a mission and the
limited processing capacity of people creates a potentially fatal situation in
emergency wayfinding. This project will contribute to the NSF's Big Idea
"Harnessing Data for 21st Century Science and Engineering" by conducting
fundamental research in information processing and engineering in the field of
disaster management. This project will test the theoretical foundation of
personalized wayfinding information systems that can effectively minimize the
cognitive load of first responders on the individual level. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be
insights to improve emergency response wayfinding, which will save lives and
potentially reduce economic losses during disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three interdependent scientific objectives. First, the research
quantifies the structured relationship between spatial information and different
forms of cognitive load in wayfinding tasks. Spatial information for wayfinding
will be categorized and measured using semantic metrics; then a quantitative
model of the relationship between spatial information and cognitive load will be
examined. Second, the research explores cognitive resilience that helps identify
and prevent an abrupt drop in wayfinding performance. Virtual Reality (VR) based
multi-mission experiments are performed to examine the hypothetical nonlinearity
of the relationship between cognitive load and wayfinding performance. Third,
the research evaluates the effectiveness of personalized wayfinding information
system in simulated mission tasks. A holistic VR experiment is performed to
compare the new personalized system against the current universal spatial
information systems. The outcome of the scientific investigation includes an
adaptive wayfinding information system that dynamically tailors the way spatial
information is presented based on the real-time cognitive load of individual
first responders, measured by a set of neurobiological and physiological
metrics. The project will immediately impact first responders primarily
firefighters for their missions. A number of collaborative outreach activities
are planned between two project sites: Texas A&amp;M University and Northeastern
University. These include advancing VR technologies for STEM education,
integrating the research outcomes to curriculum development at both
institutions, and developing a free online course and open-source project for
general public access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.