* 1761880
* Spokes: MEDIUM: MIDWEST: Collaborative: Community-Driven Data Engineering for Substance Abuse Prevention in the Rural Midwest
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Simon Lin, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

The opioid crisis ravaging Ohio and the Midwest disproportionally affects small
and rural communities. Harnessing and deploying data holds promise for
developing a response to this crisis by policymakers, healthcare providers, and
citizens of the communities. Currently, there are many barriers to getting data
into the hands of individuals on the frontlines. Crucial data are siloed across
law enforcement, public health departments, hospitals and clinics, and county
administrations; data often are inaccurate or collected in non-standard ways
across different agencies and departments; the stigma of drug abuse limits
accurate reporting of drug-related deaths; and information is not shared with
the community and other stakeholders because of the lack of a privacy and
security framework. Such barriers, for example, prevent individuals with
addictions or their families and friends from locating available treatment
centers or obtaining other important information in a timely way. Similarly, it
is difficult for first responders and healthcare providers to obtain critical
up-to-date information. In predominantly rural counties, these challenges are
especially daunting because there is often poor connectivity and communication
infrastructure. This Big Data Spoke project involves developing scalable,
flexible, and connectivity-rich data-driven approaches to address the opioid
epidemic. The cyberinfrastructure framework, OpenOD, will be initially designed
and deployed in small and rural communities in Appalachia Ohio and the Midwest,
where the need for data and connection are greatest. Based upon significant
community input, OpenOD will also create end-user applications or enterprise
solutions to support stakeholders and communities to mount a response they feel
will be most efficient and beneficial at the local level. As a Spoke to NSF?s
Midwest Big Data Hub, our efforts can be efficiently scaled, disseminated, and
applied to the opioid and other societal problems such as infant mortality,
crime, and natural disasters. This project fits within NSF's mission to promote
the progress of science (contribute to the science and engineering of large
socially relevant cyberinfrastructures) to advance the health and welfare of US
citizens (by linking data sources in new and useful ways to empower communities
to address societal problems; establishing sustainable partnerships between
academia, industry, government and communities; increasing data literacy and
community engagement with data science; and enhancing research and education via
development/adaptation of training modules and courses in data
analytics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to help small
and rural communities in the Midwest address the opioid epidemic via BIGDATA
(BD) technology. While no communities have been spared, small and rural
communities face unique challenges in confronting the opioid epidemic: knowledge
and data exist in siloes across multiple organizations with varying
jurisdictional boundaries; efforts to collect, link, and analyze data are
hampered by a lack of infrastructure and tools; rural areas are plagued by "dead
zones" in cellular connectivity; communities lack capacity for data collection,
and analytics; needs and resources across effected communities are not uniform
and require BD approaches that are flexible, open, leverage significant
community input, and can be dutifully validated. Our proposed solution is
OpenOD, a framework that provides uniform, relevant and timely access to data.
Working integrally with the Midwest Big Data Hub (MBDH) and our partners, our
three main objectives are to: (1) Work with local communities to understand
strengths and gaps in cyberinfrastructure, data availability, and need for data
analytics workforce skills. (2) Assemble flexible cyberinfrastructure that
includes a data commons, stakeholder-usable and cloud-amenable data analytics
and visualization tools, and internet connectivity with both mobile and non-
mobile capabilities. (3) Validate, evaluate, and disseminate cyberinfrastructure
and data analytics tools to stakeholder groups throughout the region while
fostering new partnerships. OpenOD will create approaches that will allow
governing units to deploy openly available tools rather than rely on proprietary
tools. In this way, existing disparities in data access and ensuing responses
are effectively addressed. The potential contributions of the project are to:
(1) Increase BD and STEM literacy and community engagement in underrepresented
groups given the operating milieu of OpenOD in rural areas where the population
is indigent and lacks adequate skills to join the modern workforce. (2) Improve
well-being of individuals in society by linking data sources in new and useful
ways to empower communities to address the opioid crisis; improved connectivity
and timely delivery of critical information will accelerate community
responsiveness and improve preventive strategies. (3) Provide infrastructure for
research and education will be improved given that project activities will
deliver linked, curated data sets to community stakeholders, researchers and
educators. Training modules and courses adapted and developed and shared with
local/regional educators and will remain with the communities after the funding
period has ended. In addition, new and established partnerships will allow
sustainability of the project in the communities for the long-
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.