* 1761300
* Using Distributed Control to Achieve One-Way Wave Propagation in Acoustic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Karl Grosh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 364,698.00

Acoustic waveguides - structures that guide sound waves - are ubiquitous and
found in nature (for example, the ear canal) as well as in engineered consumer,
industrial, and military products (for example, mufflers in automobiles). In
this research, investigators will explore how a network of sensors, actuators
and amplifiers can be used to improve control over transmission of sound,
leading to highly directional acoustic waveguides. The target applications are
in electronics, such as in cell phones. The process will involve a rigorous
design-model-build-test process combining state-of-the-art theoretical and
numerical modeling with new experimental techniques. Outreach to
underrepresented students in engineering from the Atlanta University Center-
Consortium of Historically Black Colleges and Universities will be realized
through a two-summer internship in the Michigan Summer Training in Acoustics
Researcher (M-STAR) program. Interns will team with PhD students to develop Cool
Acoustics demonstration projects and take part in the project
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new approach to waveguide design will
require new analysis tools for a variety of purposes. This is due to the
generation of a spatial delay differential equation (DDE) resulting from
feedforward of the field and gradient information (unlike the time domain DDE,
these equations are seldom studied). In order to fix the design space, Floquet-
Bloch of these spatial systems will be modified. The analysis of stability,
robustness, and effectiveness of the designs will be identified allowing for the
most promising designs to be realized in hardware. The outcome of work is a new
approach that has the potential to radically change how one-way wave propagation
is achieved enabling new classes of acoustic systems and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.