* 1761541
* Molecular mechanisms regulating Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation pathway in living cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/07/2017,07/31/2020
* Alexei Tulin, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2020
* USD 496,208.00

This project will investigate how the DNA genome is packaged in the cellular
nucleus to create alternate gene configurations that either permit or prevent
retrieval and use of the genetic information. Understanding the dynamic nature
of such DNA packaging may help explain how organisms successfully coordinate
normal growth and development in response to ever-changing environmental
signals. The project will have broad educational impacts by providing research
and training opportunities for high school and undergraduate students, many of
whom will be from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Histone proteins in nucleosome-associated DNA can be
reversibly modified by addition of poly(ADP-ribose), so-called PAR, molecules,
leading to alterations in chromatin conformation and changes in gene expression.
Whereas much as been learned about the action and regulation of the enzyme that
adds this modification, PAR polymerase (PARP), not much is yet known about the
enzyme, PAR glycohydrolase (PARG), that degrades it. Changes in poly(ADP-
ribosyl)ation levels have been attributed to up- and downregulation of PARP
activity, with PARG acting constitutively to cleaving PAR at a constant rate.
This project challenges that idea and poses the hypothesis that regulation of
PARG activity is crucial for tissue- specific and cell cycle-specific
differences in poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation rates. Preliminary results suggest that
transient phosphorylation of PARG domains may lead to conformational changes in
the protein, in turn affecting its activity. Using Drosophila as a model, a
combination of in vivo and in vitro studies will be used to detect
phosphorylation of the PARG protein and to analyze its nuclear localization and
activity. The results are expected to provide new understanding of the role of
PARG in regulating steady-state levels of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and how this
poorly studied histone modification controlls cell-cycle-regulated and tissue-
specific gene expression.