* 1761774
* Collaborative Research: Proofing A Basic Systems Engineering Model Through Empirically-Based Cognitive Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Kurt Becker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2022
* USD 236,593.00

America's global leadership depends in part on its engineering and design
capabilities in an increasingly competitive and complex environment. Trends have
long been toward larger and more complicated systems. Systems engineering
methodology is intended to address the complexity of today's engineering
challenges. Currently, there are only narrative theoretical models that cover
the entirety of systems engineering. These models have proven difficult to test
due to their discursive nature. This project addresses how such theoretical
models can be tested against quantitative experimental results derived from
studying engineers performing systems design. This will result in improved
systems engineering models and used to contribute to America's global
leadership. The results of this project form the basis of an increased
scientific understanding of engineering systems design with direct implications
for systems engineering practice and education. It will demonstrate a novel
research technique that can be used to test other discursive theoretical models
and will lay the foundation for the future testing of the education of systems
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Descriptive theoretical models that aim to
capture and enhance engineering systems design have been suggested but not
tested. The goal of this project is to apply the approach of converting a
narrative theoretical model into a cognitively-based ontology with the aim of
producing a representation that allows for quantitative representations and
testing. This approach treats the discursive model as the articulation of a
think-aloud protocol. This project is based on a newly developed technique of
representing such descriptive theoretical models by translating them into the
Function-Behavior-Structure (FBS) ontology, which serves as a common ontology,
and then segmenting and coding the result as if it were a think-aloud protocol.
The FBS ontology is a highly-grounded ontology that has been shown to be
effective in representing the engineering design process. This then allows the
theoretical model to be compared with results obtained by studying the design
cognition of engineers designing using a think-aloud protocol segmented and
coded using the FBS ontology. Since both the theoretical model and the
experimental results are in the same form the theoretical model can now be
tested for coherence with the experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.