* 1761151
* Mechanistic Studies of Organic Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jeehiun Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Jeehiun Katherine Lee of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers
University is utilizing funding provided by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic
&amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division to explore mechanisms of
catalysis. The specific focus will be reactions catalyzed by N-heterocyclic
carbenes (NHCs). NHCs are novel organic substances which have been shown to act
as catalysts for a broad collection of important chemical reactions. Mechanisms
for these reactions are poorly understood. Reactions are studied both
computationally and experimentally, in the absence of solvent, using a mass
spectrometer. The absence of solvent allows for intrinsic reactivity to be
revealed. These fundamental mechanistic studies provide educational
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate scientists. The project also
provides mentoring and training for groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometric and theoretical computations
are used to examine the properties and reactivities of N-heterocyclic carbenes
(NHCs) NHCs are a versatile species that provide ligands for transition metal
catalysts as well as being catalysts in their own right. NHCs catalyze
"Umpolung" reactions, triggering polarity reversal; the focus of this proposal
is on polarity reversal at a carbonyl carbon. Such reactions are of great
synthetic utility, but the mechanism is poorly understood. Both computations and
experiments are being used to probe the mechanisms by which the polarity
reversal is incurred, with the plan of designing a strategy that would greatly
enhance the overall utility of this reaction. The gas phase is uniquely suited
to this study because the role of solvent can be ascertained. Mechanistic
understanding of these NHC-catalyzed transformations leads to the development of
improved catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.