* 1761179
* Math Classrooms, Student Mindsets and STEM Pathways in High School
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Chandra Muller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,297,624.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This study will add to
foundational knowledge by building theory about broadening participation of
underrepresented minority groups (students of color, young women, students from
low SES families, students with disabilities, English language learners), and
intersections among them, in STEM education. The study will use data from the
National Study of Learning Mindsets (NSLM), the largest (to date) national
randomized-controlled trial of a psychological intervention conducted with a
national probability sample of public high schools and an over-sample of urban
district schools, including over 18,000 students from 83 schools. The goal of
the NSLM was to gain insights about ways to retain underrepresented students in
the STEM pipeline. Through the intervention students were taught the concept of
a growth mindset (the idea that the struggles in school are opportunities to
learn, and do not mean you lack intelligence), and how to apply this concept in
their schoolwork. Surveys assessed the growth mindset climates in math
classrooms. The present study will analyze NSLM data to investigate if 9th grade
math classroom climates and students? use of a growth mindsets worked together
to help students successfully complete advanced math and science courses in the
early high school years. The four main objectives of the study include: (1)
Coding 8th to 10th grade STEM course-taking patterns among students who
participated in the NSLM and describing the extent to which minority groups are
under-represented in advanced STEM coursework; (2) Testing whether a 9th grade
math class with a strong growth mindset climate predicts higher rates of
persistence in 10th grade STEM courses among students from under-represented
groups; (3) Identifying the growth-oriented teacher practices that best create a
growth mindset climate and increase STEM course persistence; and (4) Testing
whether the effect on 10th grade STEM course persistence of a growth mindset
intervention given directly to students in 9th grade depends on the 9th grade
math classroom climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of NSLM data will present
a unique opportunity to study why 9th grade math continues to be a gatekeeper
course for many underrepresented students. The study will move beyond research
that focused on letter grades (i.e. A, B, etc.) and instead focus on course
taking patterns (i.e. taking Algebra II in 10th grade or not). Thus, it will
advance knowledge about reducing attrition of underrepresented groups in
rigorous math pathways. The combined use of quantitative techniques and an
integrative theory will help address the ongoing national goal for diversifying
the future STEM workforce. Intersectional analyses?which look at groups that
have multiple disadvantages, such as students who are both in a racial minority
group and who are learning English?are essential to uncovering a deeper
understanding of inequities faced by these groups. To do so, the study will
build a database that links student and teacher records to validate novel,
efficient, and scalable assessments of math classroom climates and math teacher
practices useful for improving instructional climates that narrow achievement
gaps in high school trajectories. Last, this study will advance knowledge about
scalable, low-cost interventions, and identify classrooms where such
interventions are most or least effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.