* 1761699
* Point Processes in Healthcare and Security Analytics: Nonparametric Estimation and Efficient Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Xin Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 324,883.00

The advancement of point process models in healthcare and security analytics,
such as in predicting disease occurrences, crime and cyber security attacks, has
the potential to significantly improve public health and safety. Point processes
are an important but underappreciated class of models in engineering that
incorporate temporal dynamics, information diffusion, and recurrent behavior.
This project will establish theoretical foundations and computational methods
that enable efficient modeling and estimation of point processes from real-time
and large-scale transactional data. To address emerging data-rich challenges in
healthcare and security analytics, this project aims to break the modeling and
computational limitations of current theory and practice in point processes,
providing a powerful new set of tools for these significant engineering
challenges. The PIs are committed to devoting their efforts to facilitate the
education and training for next-generation engineers and data scientists,
especially women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of efficient inferential analysis and decision-making for point
process models is far from reaching the same level of maturity as that of
Gaussian models. In this project, the PIs will leverage elements from many
fields - optimization, machine learning, nonparametric statistics, and
information theory, to address several fundamental modeling and computational
hurdles in the context of multivariate Hawkes processes. The project has four
main research thrusts: (i) investigation of nonparametric models to
significantly advance the capability of point processes in capturing large-scale
and complex event data; (ii) development of novel theoretically grounded and
practically efficient learning and optimization algorithms for statistical
inference in point processes; (iii) exploration of domain-specific structure to
achieve the optimal trade-off between likelihoods and regularizations; (iv)
development of online optimization schemes and tools to facilitate real-time
prediction and inference for streaming event data. The techniques developed in
this project will be used to advance the modeling and prediction of specific
healthcare and security related applications, such as discovery of disease
relationships, tracking of adverse drug reactions, and detection of criminal and
terrorist activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.