* 1761287
* Xavier ADVANCE Adaptation - Supporting Transformation: Intersectional Directions to Engender Success (STrIDES)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mehnaaz Ali, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,013,337.00

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA)
Adaptation project will implement activities to address systemic inequities
contributing to XULA's lack of female STEM faculty, particularly female faculty
of color. XULA will implement the Supporting Transformation: Intersectional
Directions to Engender Success (XULA STrIDES) project which includes two goals:
1) Create an equitable, inclusive, and energizing climate for STEM faculty
members, especially those belonging to multiple marginalized groups; and 2)
Identifying and eliminating organizational barriers that impede faculty
inclusion. To accomplish these goals, a Faculty Administrative Fellow for
Diversity will be appointed in the office of the Provost who will monitor and
coordinate diversity efforts including potential policy changes. The project
will also strengthen mentoring networks on campus and bring in national experts
to provide evidence-based training for search committees, administrative
leaders, and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XULA is a primarily undergraduate
STEM-focused Historically Black College/University (HBCU). The XULA STrIDES
project will implement strategies adapted from the University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley, Washington State University, Oakland University, University of
California Davis, Rochester Institute of Technology, and University of Colorado
Boulder. XULA STrIDES will contribute to the knowledge of equity in STEM by
adapting these strategies to their setting and evaluating the impacts at the
HBCU. XULA STrIDES will have a national impact, through dissemination and
communication of project results throughout the HBCU and STEM education
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.