* 1761551
* Investigating language contact and shift through experimentally-oriented documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 439,932.00

It is well-known that when speakers of different languages are in contact with
one another, the structures of these languages can and do change. Words and even
grammatical structures can be borrowed from one language into another, and the
structures of the languages can also converge into something new. One potential
outcome of contact is language shift: when speakers cease to speak their
ancestral language in favor of a new (generally more economically or politically
advantageous) one. Language shift is known to be a major driver behind language
endangerment and loss, but the transition from language contact (sustained bi-
or multilingualism) to language loss (the abandonment of one of the languages)
is not well-understood. The current project aims to document language contact in
progress by combining traditional documentation methods with new questions and
approaches borrowed from laboratory psycholinguistics, in order to better
understand the social and cognitive factors that drive shift. Qualitative
methodology, including interviews and elicitation, are combined with
quantitative and experimental methods for a systematic investigation of the
factors that influence language contact and shift. This project helps understand
the linguistic and psycholinguistic processes at work in language loss and can
aid in developing strategies to promote healthy language contact. This is of
enormous value especially to marginalized communities experiencing and
attempting to forestall linguistic and, in turn, cultural
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the changes that are currently
taking place in urban versus village settings for a set of endangered languages
spoken in the northeastern part of Russia. The region provides an excellent
testing ground because of the variety of languages and different contact
ecologies found in the Sakha Republic and the Chukotka Autonomous Region.
Urbanization, a known factor in language shift, is occurring rapidly here, and
the capital Yakutsk is the fastest growing northern city. The region provides
excellent conditions to study the varying roles of cognitive and social factors
because it has two majority languages, one national (Russian) and one regional
(Sakha, a Turkic language) used in education, government and all local domains.
The study focuses on language contact between Russian, Sakha and three minority
endangered languages: Even and Evenki (both Tungusic), Chukchi (Chukotko-
Kamchatkan) and Yukaghir (possibly Uralic), which are structurally different and
can illustrate how linguistic patterns affect change. Although these languages
are endangered and in need of urgent documentation, their speaker populations
are still robust enough to provide a sufficient sample for rigorous statistical
analysis, and to document different stages of shift. Well-controlled production
and comprehension experiments will be conducted, focusing on three linguistic
parameters: word order (and its interaction with case marking), case marking and
alignment, and subordination strategies, with particular attention to the
linguistic encoding of spatial relations. To complement data collected from
controlled experiments, data will be collected from spontaneous conversation in
order to document the dynamic multilingual practices in these contact ecologies.
All data will be subject to rigorous statistical modeling. The project includes
yearly training workshops and in-field experience to prepare local students and
linguists in language documentation and
psycholinguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.