* 1761432
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical Regulation of Cell Death
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Qi Wen, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2023
* USD 512,931.00

For a person to be healthy, cells must be created and, at the right time,
sometimes die. There are many diseases that are caused by cells that don't die
at the correct time. The death of cells is changed by physical forces applied to
and generated within tissues. However, relatively little is known about how the
forces change the timing or speed of cell death. The interior molecules of a
cell create and carry loads between cells. The goal of this research is to
determine the specific role of the molecule actin, and the pathways that control
actin, in the mechanical regulation of cell death. The work will identify small
and large size molecules that can be manipulated by drugs to change how loads
regulate cell death in many diseases, including tumors, heart disease, arthritis
and osteoporosis. The project will support training of a doctoral student and
six undergraduate researchers (REU) mentored between our campuses. As part of
the program, these student researchers mentor girls from underserved middle-
schools in a one-week program focused on gaining confidence through independent
mini-research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
fundamental understanding of how forces are generated by single cells and within
the context of multicellular tissues. It will elucidate how mechanical forces
regulate cell death. The role of cell forces and actin dynamics in apoptosis
will be studied at multiple scales; in clusters of cells, in individual cells,
and at the molecular signaling scale. The overall approach is mechanics-based
and combines experimental and computational models that inform each other to
obtain accurate maps of the force distribution within cells and tissues. The
work will identify how mechanical forces, the actin cytoskeleton, and relevant
signaling pathways collectively regulate apoptosis. Quantitative knowledge of
the mechanical signals that induce apoptosis and the mechanisms transmitting
these signals is fundamental for understanding the underlying pathophysiology of
various disease states that involve improper control of cell
death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.