* 1761638
* New Particle Formation Experiments: Nucleation and Growth
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* David Hanson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 384,080.00

This project focuses on the formation and growth of new particles in the
atmosphere. Laboratory experiments will be conducted to measure changes in the
rate of new particle formation and growth with changes in composition,
temperature, and relative humidity. The results are expected to lead to improved
accuracy in predicting the impacts of new particle formation on climate, health
and visibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory research includes experiments
to: (1) conduct measurements of nucleation rates in the ammonia - H2SO4 system
as a function of reagent concentrations and temperature; (2) conduct
measurements of the synergistic effect of ammonia on nucleation rates for the
amine - H2SO4 system at low H2SO4 concentrations; (3) characterize growth rates
using a Photolytic Flow Reactor with growth via H2SO4 and using a second flow
reactor with growth agents injected in the vapor phase; (4) measure the
nanoparticle size-dependency of the growth capabilities of select organic
compounds; (5) estimate absolute growth rates (i.e., uptake efficiency) by
incorporating measured gas-phase concentrations into model simulations; and (6)
explore the capability of the Photolytic Flow Reactor as a tool for
understanding growth via uptake of complex secondary oxidation products such as
are produced in photo-oxidation of alpha-pinene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator (PI) plans to use computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
simulations of the flow reactor to bolster the interpretation of the
experimental results. The CFD simulations allow for estimates of the free
energies of small molecular clusters and extrapolations of the results to
conditions in other experiments so that nucleation rates can be compared. The PI
intends to compare the results from this project with global atmospheric
particle formation measurements from the CERN CLOUD
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help develop undergraduate
research capabilities by exposing undergraduates to high-level experimental and
computational work that will prepare them for careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.