* 1761471
* Collaborative Research: CRISP Type 2: Revolution through Evolution: A Controls Approach to Improve how Society Interacts with Electricity.
* CSE,CNS
* 08/07/2017,08/31/2019
* Mia Naeini, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 123,674.00

This CRISP project addresses the challenges associated with the rapid evolution
of the electricity grid to a highly distributed infrastructure. The keystone of
this research is the transformation of power distribution feeders, from
relatively passive channels for delivering electricity to customers, to
distribution microgrids, entities that actively manage local production, storage
and use of electricity, with participation from individual customers.
Distribution microgrids combine the advantages of the traditional electricity
grid with the advantages of emerging distributed technologies, including the
ability to produce and use power locally in the event of grid outages. The
project will result in a unified model that incorporates key aspects of power
generation and delivery, information flow, market design and human behavior. The
model predictions can be used by policymakers to guide a transition to clean
energy via distribution microgrids. The expectation is to enable at least 50% of
electric power to come from renewable resources. This cannot be done with either
the traditional grid, due to its limited capacity to accommodate intermittent
renewable power sources, or with fully decentralized approaches, which would not
be affordable for most utility customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses many socio-technological gaps necessary to translate from research
discovery to commercial applications. To date, there is no theoretical framework
to ensure system stability as renewable energy routed through power electronics
replaces traditional rotating machinery. To achieve an optimal mix of storage
performance and information bandwidth and to design nonlinear controllers, we
will use Hamiltonian Surface Shaping Power Flow Control theory. We will study
methods to detect malicious tampering with information flows. The complex
interaction of intermittent resources, human behavior and market structures will
be modeled in an agent-based simulation. System inputs will be provided by
utility and meteorological data, and by behavioral models that incorporate
information obtained by surveys, interviews and metering data. Emergent system
dynamics will be abstracted and studied using dynamical complex network theory,
to explore stability limits as a function of human behavior and market design.
Finally, the effect of enhanced controllability of distribution systems on the
robustness of large energy-information-social networks will be analyzed using
interdependent Markov-chain models. Graduate students involved in this program
will be exposed to a unique combination of skills from engineering, data
analysis and social sciences; such cross-disciplinary training will prepare them
for leadership roles in the emerging energy economy of tomorrow.