* 1761512
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscopic Defect Field Interactions in Materials with High Number Density of Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Youping Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,578.00

Deformation behavior of crystalline materials is highly complex, owing to a
hierarchy of length scales that describes their structural makeup. Interfaces
link distinct crystal structures or material phases at these various length
scales. The interactions of crystalline defects with interfaces are chiefly
responsible for the emergent material behavior at the application scale. The
collective interactions of defects and interfaces through multiple scales up to
the higher scale of everyday applications have been extremely challenging to
resolve experimentally and have also not been captured using computer
simulations to the desired sophistication. This is a significant obstacle to the
understanding of the behavior of complex materials, where high density of
specific interfaces is instrumental in achieving superior functional and/or
mechanical properties. This research aims to address this challenge through the
study of superlattices and metamaterials by exploiting and further advancing an
atomistic-to-continuum scale method. It is expected that this research will
significantly promote the fields of mechanics of materials and computational
materials science, with commensurate impact on the rapidly developing field of
computational materials design, which will advance national health, prosperity,
and welfare. This work is also expected to have substantial broader impact
through training of undergraduate students in high-performance computing,
graduate curriculum enhancements, and dissemination of codes to the wider
community. The project will also reach out to engage students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superlattices and metamaterials
represent two emerging material systems that derive their exceptional properties
from structure rather than composition. With their well-ordered periodic
interfaces and structure, superlattices and metamaterials provide model systems
amenable to systematic study of the collective role of interfaces on evolving
defect structures. The goal of this collaborative effort is to demonstrate the
collective role of interfaces and defects on mechanical properties by studying
this special class of material systems by using an advanced Concurrent
Atomistic-Continuum (CAC) approach. It is expected that this research will
identify the dominant deformation mechanisms as well as the key structural
variables that control the materials behavior and the underlying mechanisms,
explore the critical length scale or structural parameters at which the
materials exhibit a transition from ductile to brittle behavior, and investigate
the fundamental phenomena that control the plastic flow and fracture behaviors
in these material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.