* 1761658
* Investigation of Tonogenesis and Consonant Inventories through Language Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Sadaf Munshi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 284,728.00

One important cornerstone of advancing scientific knowledge about the world's
estimated 7,000 languages is the tremendous variation between even the language
families represented in that number. This scientific endeavor is threatened by
estimates that perhaps as many as half of those languages will not be spoken at
the end of this century. This project will document one such language,
Mankiyali, a severely endangered Indo-Aryan language, which exhibits a number of
features that are of interest to phonologists, typologists, sociolinguists, and
historical linguists. For instance, some of the sound correspondences observed
in the preliminary comparative analyses of the available data suggest new
analyses in several areas: the transitions into Middle from Old Indo-Aryan
voiced, voiceless and aspirated stops, and the development of tone, consonant
length (gemination), and complex consonants (affricates). The sound changes are
expected to provide a better insight into the development and evolution of Indo-
Aryan languages of the northwestern group, and better insight into areas of
interest to linguistic theory, such as tonogenesis. The proposed project
complements these goals in terms of economic and educational growth. Through an
international and cross-cultural collaboration, the project will enhance student
and faculty development both in the US and in Pakistan, a key country in a
region vital to the US in terms of national security and strategic interests. By
fostering ties between Pakistan through a local university, a non-governmental
organization (NGO), and the Mankiyali community, and the University of North
Texas (UNT), the project will foster binational relationships that can function
as a type of "soft" diplomacy. The project also offers research opportunities
and participation in training workshops for UNT students, who will benefit from
the international exchange, acquire skills in organization building and
leadership, and be better prepared as they enter a global STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of Mankiyali in different domains is rapidly
decreasing, and the total number of fluent first language speakers is fewer than
500 individuals, with rapid language shift ongoing. The language represents a
contact area where researchers have only scratched the surface in scientific
documentation and analyses. Mankiyali is very poorly documented, but the
preliminary data suggests it has the potential to significantly advance
scientific understanding in several areas, especially in the burgeoning research
areas of the connection between voice quality and tone. This collaborative
project to document Mankiyali will generate a rich repository of video and audio
recordings, essential to providing a record of the language's phonological and
other features. Workshops for native speaker consultants, students and personnel
will help create infrastructure to develop a research, training and capacity
building effort that supports initiatives to document other endangered languages
in a region that is characterized by both high linguistic diversity and severe
endangerment. Part of the intellectual merit of this project lies in its
investigation of specific linguistic, typologically underrepresented features
characteristic of Mankiyali itself, especially in the areas of tone and
segmental phonology. By recording a variety of genres, a diversity of individual
voices will provide information on the social, cultural, and, historical aspects
of the community, making this work of value to anthropologists, historians and
other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.