* 1761576
* Low Versus High Latitude Continental Climatic Effects of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province on the End Triassic Extinction Event
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Lisa Park Boush, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 382,386.00

This project aims to understand the end Triassic extinction (ETE about 201
Million years ago), one of five mass extinctions in Earth's history. The causes
of the ETE are still under investigation, but massive volcanic eruptions during
the breakup of Pangea emitted large amounts of greenhouse gases, which in turn
caused habitat-change. As a result, many animal and plant species went extinct,
allowing for new animals to thrive, notably dinosaurs. The project focuses on
two field locations: the Moenave Formation of Utah, near the sub-tropics during
the time of extinction, and the Elliot Formation of South Africa and Lesotho,
near the South Pole. By combining the timescale with the occurrence of fossils,
a prediction of how major climatic changes may cause extinction will be
developed, thus providing us with clues about how to mitigate the current
increased levels of species extinctions. The proposed study has important
societal implications. It addresses some of the grand challenges for research on
Earth-surface processes, published by the National Academy of Sciences
(Landscapes on the Edge: New Horizons for Research on Earth's Surface). For
example, the research will help identify how knowledge of our planet's past
helps us prepare for a sustainable future. Students supported by this project
will be recruited from two major organizations that encourage scientific
education for minorities: the Society for Chicanos and Native Americans in
Science and the National Association of Black Geoscientists. The project will
involve federal agencies through partnerships with the St. George Dinosaur
Discovery Museum and Zion National Park, specifically via museum and visitor
center displays of our study outcomes. Student exchange experience will be
coordinated with Senior Personnel at the University of Cape Town (UCT) and
University of the Witwatersrand (UW). Students from the University of Arkansas
(UA) will spend a field season in southern Africa learning field skills and
gaining cultural experiences, and students from UCT and UW will visit the UA to
learn geochemical and spectrometry skills and visit field sites. Finally, we
will develop datasets for and work with high school teachers that are training
for the Next Generation Science Standards adopted by the state of
Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: 1) identify the ETE in the
Moenave Formation, USA (low-latitude) and the Elliot Formation of southern
Africa (high-latitude) using bio- and chemostratigraphy and high resolution
geochronology; 2) generate paleoclimate proxy data; 3) determine
biostratigraphic trends in ichnological and microfaunal record; and 4) compare
ecosystem and climatic shifts in high versus low-latitudes in the southern
hemisphere. The methods employed include: 1) collection of C-isotope (bulk and
compound-specific) chemostratigraphic and detrital zircon geochronologic data
from both formations; and 2) biostratigraphic data (body and trace fossils of
vertebrates and invertebrates). CO2 concentration, temperature, and mean annual
precipitation will be calculated using stable and clumped isotopes from paleosol
and lacustrine sediments, major and minor element concentrations from paleosols,
and O-isotopes from ostracods and vertebrate fossils. These data will then be
correlated to the paleontological occurrences of vertebrate and invertebrate
remains from both continents to determine effects of climate change caused by
the CAMP on the two ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.