* 1761675
* GOALI: Prediction and Mitigation of Undesirable Acoustic Phenomena in Combustors and Power Generation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Joseph Majdalani, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 386,553.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
at creating methods to improve the safety, performance, and stability of large
combustors and power generation systems. A unifying approach will be pursued
that can have a significant impact on both the aerospace and power generation
industries. For example, understanding and suppressing instabilities that arise
in combustors will aid in advancing hybrid combustion technology and its use as
a safe and clean propulsion alternative in both space and land applications.
This methodology will therefore help in the advancement of large combustors and
chemical rockets and thereby advance the country's defense capabilities. The
advancement of more stable propulsion concepts will transform our nation's
launch infrastructure with drastically reduced costs in space exploration, space
tourism, satellite deployment, and weaponry development. The broader impacts
include training of several graduate students, offering of specialized courses,
broad dissemination of research outcomes, as well as the sharing of first-hand
knowledge and experience with industrial partners. Furthermore, the project will
enhance STEM education efforts by exposing high school students to modern
research concepts in acoustic noise control and rocket propulsion through
strategically planned short courses, summer training, technical exchanges, and
competitive design challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a
unified, physics-based, acoustic stability framework for rocket motors will
provide a diagnostic tool to quantify the behavior of acoustic oscillations in
large combustors. This methodology can also be extended from solid and hybrid
motors to liquid rockets, ramjets, preburners, augmenters, and gas turbine
engines. With the physics-based framework in hand, it will be possible for
future combustors seeking higher performance to be operated more efficiently and
closer to their stability limits. The program will seek to obtain more realistic
mean and unsteady flow models for solid and hybrid rockets with arbitrary
geometric configurations, spatially sensitive grain regression rate equations
for hybrids, and a triglobal stability formulation to capture the amplified
acoustic oscillations and pressure jumps. It will also lead to the training of
several graduate and undergraduate students, a technical guide for building
safer and more stable rockets, and two modern courses on aeroacoustics and
hybrid rocketry. Finally, partnership with the industrial sponsor, the Space
Propulsion Group, will benefit the development of the Mars Ascent Vehicle, which
is presently under development by NASA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.