* 1761223
* Conference on Minority Language Documentation for Community Language Practitioners
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 28,361.00

The major centers of training for linguists are universities in the United
States, Europe, Australia and Latin America. This creates a challenge for
countries like Indonesia, which produce significantly fewer trained linguists,
yet at least 700 of the estimated 7,000 languages of the world are spoken with
its borders. One innovative, collaborative approach to addressing the training
bottleneck in documenting endangered languages is the use of relatively short
training workshops that bring together teams with different expertise. This
workshop will use conduct a one-week language documentation conference that has
the additional benefit of producing documentation on the languages. The focus
will be on the endangered languages of Nusa Tenggara Timur, since speakers of
these languages have little or no documentary expertise. The scientific interest
of East Indonesian languages includes their relevance to the linguistic history
of the region and further documentation and analysis of these languages will
have broad implications for the study of two entirely different language
families in this biogeographical transition zone between the Asian and
Australian continents. U.S. graduate students will gain international field
research and training experience, and minority language speakers will be trained
in best practices in language documentation and archiving. There will be
increased international collaboration opportunities. Project products include
materials supporting language efforts in the communities and the deposit of
documentation in the highly regarded PARADISEC archive will increase accessible
data on the targeted languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
focuses on training native speaker documenters, because they are often in a
better position to conduct the tasks of documentation, from securing appropriate
permissions to arranging recording sessions to transcribing and annotating
texts. Languages from two entirely different language families, the Austronesian
Central Malayo-Polynesian family, and the non-Austronesian Timor-Alor-Pantar,
long assumed to be Trans-New Guinea languages of mainland New Guinea, will be
documented during the workshop. Both families share a number of typological
features which appear to have diffused across the families, most notably in the
system of grammatical possession, both in constituent order and in overtly
distinguishing between alienable and inalienable possession, features which are
rare in the Austronesian family. On the other hand, the languages often
distinguish inclusive vs. exclusive pronouns, a feature common among
Austronesian language but rare in the non-Austronesian languages of New Guinea.
The training of endangered language speakers to produce, linguistically
annotate, and archive quality data will lay the groundwork for further
scientific investigation of these and other topics. The resulting documentation
will increase scientific knowledge of Eastern Indonesian languages, while also
laying the groundwork for future projects in this region, including possible
collaborations between the two groups of participants, graduate students and
native speaker documenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.