* 1761712
* Pile Foundations Under Inertia and Liquefaction-Induced Lateral Spreading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Arash Khosravifar, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 115,732.00

Past earthquakes indicate that liquefaction-induced lateral spreading is a major
cause of collapse of pile foundations. Pile foundations in liquefiable soils
should be designed to sustain both lateral spreading loads (kinematics) and
structure loads during shaking (inertia). The past research on the consequences
of liquefaction-induced lateral spreading are fairly new and in some cases
contradict each other; specifically, on the combination of inertia and kinematic
demands. This knowledge gap has both potentially un-conservative and over-
conservative consequences. On one hand, it poses considerable public safety
concerns in regions affected by long-durations subduction earthquakes, such as
the U.S. Pacific Northwest, Japan, and the western coast of South America. On
the other hand, we don't know if, and how, inertia and kinematics combine at
large depths. The latter has resulted, in some cases, in excessively
conservative, and costly, ground improvement solutions. This research project
will use data from five centrifuge tests on pile-supported wharves in
liquefiable soils combined with advanced numerical modeling to contribute in-
depth understanding of the inelastic behavior of piles in multi-layer soil
profiles with liquefiable soils for buildings, ports and wharfs, lifelines and
bridges. The broader impacts of this project are diverse and include providing
design recommendations for practitioners, developing advanced 3D numerical tools
that will provide vertical steps for future research, and growing a diverse
geotechnical graduate research program at Portland State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
understand the factors that affect how inertia and liquefaction-induced lateral
spreading (kinematics) combine during earthquakes. The central hypothesis in
this research is that this combination reduces with depth and increases with
strong-motion duration and pile inelasticity. The objectives of this research
will be pursued through three specific aims. First, the combination of inertia
and liquefaction-induced kinematics will be evaluated with respect to depth by
analyzing data from five centrifuge tests on pile-supported wharves that were
conducted by Dickenson and coworkers at UC Davis large centrifuge between 1999
and 2000. Second, the effects of strong-motion duration on the combination of
inertia and kinematics will be evaluated using 3D numerical models. The 3D
models will be validated against centrifuge tests data and will be subjected to
a suite of spectrally-compatible ground motions. The results of numerical
analysis will be used to test the hypothesis that the combination of inertia and
kinematics increases with earthquake duration. Third, the effects of combined
inertia and kinematics on inelastic demands of piles will be evaluated using 3D
numerical models updated with inelastic piles. This will allow assessing the
hypothesis that inelastic demands of piles in laterally spreading grounds are
amplified during long-duration motions. This research thereby integrates
experiment-based data from physical models and advanced numerical analysis. The
potential findings of this research will reduce uncertainties in evaluating pile
behavior in laterally spreading grounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.