* 1761987
* NSF/EAR-BSF:Aftershock Productivity in Context of Rupture Kinematics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 312,599.00

Aftershock studies have blossomed in the current data-rich era. Substantial
progress has been made in empirically predicting how many aftershocks are
produced in the aftermath of an earthquake. Although predicting the timing and
size of aftershocks have received more attention historically, the expected
total number of aftershocks is just as robust an observation. In general, a
magnitude 7 earthquake produces 10 times as many aftershocks as a magnitude 6
and the pattern continues for all magnitudes, i.e., the number of aftershocks
increases by a factor of 10 for each magnitude unit. The project asks why does
aftershock production follow this pattern? What information does it contain
about earthquake mechanics? Why do some earthquakes, like the 2017 Chiapas
earthquake produce many aftershocks, while others, like the 2017 Mexico City
earthquake produce only a few? And most importantly, can this information be
used to anticipate the aftershock production in the critical days following a
disaster? This project has broader implications for our understanding of
earthquake hazards, and adds to the US-Israel scientific partnership. The work
will also support graduate students and an undergraduate researcher to conduct
research as part of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant effort has
been spent on these questions utilizing tools from statistical seismology. Many
studies have focused on regional earthquakes, where statistics are most robust.
Separating out the causes of aftershock production can benefit from information
of the slip patterns of individual mainshocks that can be derived using global
seismic data. Previous studies have strived to attack this problem by combining
aftershock data with information about the timing and distribution of slip. The
studies have been insightful, but have generally lacked the number of mainshocks
required for statistical analysis. This lack has been, in part, because until
recently slip maps were sufficiently difficult that they were only available for
a small number of cases. Therefore, it was difficult to ask questions about the
relation between aftershocks and mainshock rupture since different models are
biased in different ways. This situation has changed dramatically with recently
published large compilations of rupture sequences done uniformly with a single
method. This work exploits a new era of combining information from kinematic
ruptures and their ensuing aftershocks. The researchers will capitalize on this
capability and attack aftershock productivity by: (1) using the spatial
distribution of aftershocks relative to well-resolved coseismic slip maps to
clarify physical origins of the magnitude dependence, (2) investigating regional
variations in productivity, and (3) examining the interrelationship between
aftershock productivity, regional strength, and arrest criteria for mainshock
ruptures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.