* 1761657
* Linguistic and Documentation Training for Long Island Algonquian to Support Native American Community Language Researchers
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Jose Elias-Ulloa, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2022
* USD 39,301.00

The 1990 Native American Languages Act enacted into national policy the
recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American languages.
Currently, the documentary sources for the indigenous Algonquian languages of
Long Island (ALI) and the nearby Southern New England mainland are fragmented
and highly challenging, demanding still quite scarce in-depth linguistic
expertise to make them of real practical use to scholars and teachers.
Collaboratively designed by an indigenous community-member (Unkechaug) Ph.D.
researcher, established community language activists, and an experienced
Algonquianist linguist, this project will use workshops to make the core tools
of Algonquian language analysis and documentation genuinely accessible.
Algonquian linguistic structure is notoriously complex, for example, verbs that
agree with both subjects and objects (as compared to English, which only
displays subject-verb agreement), and further depends on a hierarchy of animacy
in subjects and objects in that agreement system. Using a less technical
approach, and integrating linguistic research and language revitalization,
project activities will develop a richly analyzed and annotated database of ALI
materials. Broader impacts include increased participation in the language
sciences by Native Americans and support for community language revitalization.
Moreover, this research product will be entirely public, supporting work by
related Algonquian groups and an existing collaboration with the local K-12
system, even as it sets up the ALI community participants to carry this (and
related) research forward as a long-term community
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This database developed in this award
will generate long-term, sustainable linguistic research infrastructure for the
participating Unkechaug, Shinnecock, Montaukett, and Mohegan communities. It
will also contribute substantially to the infrastructure of general (and
Algonquian-specific) linguistic digital documentation and data analysis, and
other fields still unable to use current-form ALI materials. Twelve monthly
workshops will offer detechnicalized but rigorous training in the relevant
essentials of archival and linguistic data-management, phonetics/phonology,
morphosyntax/morphosemantics, historical reconstruction, and other relevant
linguistic skills for annotating archival documents, all applied as hands-on
work developing the preliminary ALI database. Analysis of entry, mid-project,
and exit interviews with participants, and of the training presentation and
content itself, provides a final set of reports and recommendations regarding
the outcomes and overall effectiveness of this researcher training
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.