* 1761158
* Collaborative Research: Who are Interdisciplinary STEM Doctoral Graduates? Exploring and Assessing Antecedents and Economic Consequences
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Andrew Hanks, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 04/30/2023
* USD 237,396.00

Researchers at Cornell and Ohio State Universities will apply an economic
framework to examine the risks, rewards, and benefits of the choice to pursue
interdisciplinary dissertation research among early, mid- and later career Ph.D.
students and degree holders. Using data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates,
Survey of Doctorate Recipients, and the Institute for Research on Innovation
&amp; Science, they will compare competing definitions of interdisciplinary
research and analyze and map trends regarding career outcomes. The research will
generate new insights for Ph.D. students and their advisors on career-level
effects faced by those who complete interdisciplinary dissertations in STEM
fields. The project supports the NSF prioritization of the Convergence Research
Big Idea and the need to develop a workforce that can conduct cross-disciplinary
solution-oriented work on complex problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the proposed project are to utilize rich data sources to improve
understanding of what constitutes interdisciplinary research in STEM and how it
is measured, to track changes longitudinally in the characteristics of
individuals who conduct interdisciplinary dissertations in STEM, to quantify
economic outcomes, and to study the career paths of those who conduct
interdisciplinary dissertations in STEM. The specific research questions are (1)
to what degree do differing definitions of interdisciplinarity yield variation
in the measurement of interdisciplinary research frequency, and how do these
measures vary over time? (2) Which demographic and socio-economic factors help
explain the decision to complete interdisciplinary dissertation research in
STEM, and how do these change over time? (3) Do individuals who complete
interdisciplinary dissertations in STEM seek and earn tenure with greater or
lesser probability? and (4) Over time, will the salary of people who complete an
interdisciplinary dissertation in STEM grow at the same rate, slower, or faster
than their non-disciplinary peers? The researchers will address the questions
using primarily quantitative analytical techniques and equation modeling. The
project will help improve future career preparation for individual students and
the institutions where they study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.