* 1761057
* Collaborative Research: Next Generation Science Standards and Designing School System Educational Infrastructure to support Elementary School Science Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* James Spillane, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,614,322.00

To generate foundational knowledge, this project will examine the development of
school-level and system-level STEM learning environments that support the
implementation of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) through high-
quality science instruction at the classroom level. This study is significant
since the NGSS depend on local discretion in operationalizing foundational
ideals in classroom instruction, yet few systems and schools are organized to
support teachers in doing so. As such, this project will address the need for
additional knowledge and experiences for teachers to effectively implement the
NGSS. In addition, it will develop and test a practical theory of organization
and management detailing key domains of work that are essential to bridging
academic standards to classroom instruction. It will construct models of
effective, system-level and school-level science learning environments to enact
this theoretical framework. The project serves the national interest by
characterizing what makes school systems and schools effective in supporting
fundamental change in teaching and learning such as NGSS, which will allow
others to build on these insights, thus supporting the development of more
effective school experiences with STEM for all students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. Using a descriptive, theory-building longitudinal research
approach, the project will investigate how systems and schools are responding to
NGSS through a series of five studies. The program of research will target 12
school districts and 24 elementary schools in 3 states that are currently
implementing NGSS. A comparative case study design across the five studies will
feature cross-disciplinary collaboration among researchers with complementary
expertise in studying systems, schools, and state level instructional
improvement. This approach will advance knowledge of educational policy, system
and school improvement, and instructional improvement by addressing a
fundamental challenge of contemporary education reform: the coordination of
national and state academic standards with teaching and learning in classrooms.
Outcomes from this research will make contributions to broader social progress
through support for schools and systems in ensuring excellence and equity in
educational opportunities offered to students. These outcomes will also develop
a practical theory of organization and management which, in turn, will increase
the potential for directly guiding improvements in science learning, teaching,
and outcomes at scale in larger numbers of schools. These supports will be
beneficial to schools and systems that are experiencing standards as punitive
policy instruments, rather than as resources for motivating and supporting
instructional transformation. Massive open online courses, policy briefs,
university and school-oriented publications, and major social media outlets will
be used to disseminate results broadly to educators and education policymakers
and other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.