* 1761711
* I-Corps: Polymeric Antibiotics for Drug-Resistant Infections
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Young Jik Kwon, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is providing a
possible paradigm shift in antimicrobial therapy and in treating antibiotic
resistant bacteria in a multitude of fields including healthcare, agriculture,
water treatment, and veterinary. The ability to directly target drug resistant
strains of various microbes can provide a vital impact on the state of global
medicine. The CDC estimates more than 2 million people become infected with
antibiotics resistant bacteria yearly, with at least 23,000 deaths due to
antibiotic resistant infections. The use and availability of a natural
nanomaterial that can innately affect the growth of various strains of microbes
will enable wider access to antimicrobial applications. Aside from this
potential for direct use, nano-antibiotics can also possibly be used to treat
water systems, enabling a broad new market
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project stems from the core
technology which enables selective targeting of infections inside human patients
while denying the bacteria access to the traditional mechanisms through which
drug resistance develops. The aim is to address the need for modern solutions to
drug-resistant infections with engineered nano-antibiotics that are capable of
reversing drug resistance in bacteria. These nano-antibiotics combine the
genetic specificity of nucleic acids with a physically-active vector with
therapeutic capability. A stimuli-responsive function is added to allow the
nanoparticle to be tunable to specific infections as needed, while maintaining a
wide-spectrum usability. This therapeutic strategy is unique not just because
gene silencing is used to remove drug resistant properties from multi-drug
resistant bacteria, a delivery vector that has the capability to kill the
microbe is also used. This approach is generalizable, and can potentially be
implemented to treat any bacterial infection that has become resistant to
conventional antibiotics.