* 1761344
* Concurrent Enhancement of Fatigue Life and Corrosion Resistance via Laser Shock Peening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 422,279.00

This research project addresses the fundamental science associated with surface
deformations induced by laser shock peening (LSP), and their use to improve the
stress corrosion cracking (SCC) resistance of metallic components in addition to
LSP's well-known effect on fatigue life. SCC is a phenomenon where the
combination of a tensile load in a corrosive environment causes premature
failure. This failure is often sudden, catastrophic and occurs at loading levels
far below a material's yield strength, making it difficult to predict. Depending
on the material and environment, SCC can occur through different mechanisms,
thus there is a need to identify mitigation approaches. Shockwaves generated on
the surface using LSP impart compressive residual stresses, without thermal
effects, and have traditionally been used to improve the material's fatigue
life. They also induce other changes at the microstructural level, which may
help mitigate SCC concurrently. Improving material performance will enhance the
capability of existing technologies, potentially by allowing them to operate at
higher tensile loads for longer times. In addition, the surface treatment
methodology can be applied to different materials and geometric configurations,
thus providing effective solutions for many industries ranging from nuclear
reactors to oil production to medical devices. As such, the research has
significant breadth and directly and positively impacts economic welfare and
national security. By networking with minority groups such as National Society
of Black Engineers, underrepresented students will be recruited. High school
students and STEM teachers from neighborhood schools in northern Manhattan and
the Bronx will be engaged in an innovative combination of "reach out" and "let
in" activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will set forth the mechanisms
that allow deformation processes to have stress corrosion cracking (SCC)
mitigation benefits. Fundamental understanding of the interaction between the
shockwave-induced microstructural changes and the SCC pathways will be
developed. Hydrogen has been identified as a major component driving SCC, and
thus entry of hydrogen into the surface and propagation of absorbed hydrogen
within the lattice will be better understood. Movement of mobile dislocations
can contribute to crack propagation. Both of these components will be influenced
by dislocation cell structures formed during shockwave processing. In addition,
the electrochemical effects of the deformation process on SCC and their
mitigation will be studies in a fundamental approach. Finally the project will
perform scientific investigation into the balance between LSP's effect on
fatigue life and SCC resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.