* 1761597
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Isolation of Embedded Foundations Using Periodic Meta-material Barriers to Create Resilient Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Stokoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 127,885.00

The severity of damage caused by earthquakes over the past decades underscores
the need for improvements to reduce the associated threat to America's economy
and the safety of its citizens. Evidence in more recent earthquakes shows that
conventional seismic isolation systems are effective in reducing the damage from
horizontal components of earthquake shaking. However, conventional isolation
systems are not well suited for protection against the vertical components of
earthquake shaking, nor can they be readily used for embedded or underground
structures. To overcome the disadvantages in the conventional seismic isolation
systems, we have developed innovative periodic material-based seismic isolators.
Periodic material-based seismic isolators possess distinct frequency band gaps
which block, filter, and reflect incoming ground vibrations with frequencies
falling between these gaps. These frequency band gaps can be designed to block
ground motions that are harmful to structures. Previous studies have shown
periodic foundations, made of periodic material-based seismic isolators, to be
effective in isolating ground motions for structures built on the ground
surface. This project will investigate periodic material-based seismic isolation
systems of embedded or underground structures. The knowledge gained from this
research will have broad and far-reaching significance that goes beyond
conventional commercial and residential buildings and extends to all types of
structures located in seismic zones. Results from this research can impact the
development of seismic design codes on a universal
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the investigation of periodic
meta-material barriers-based seismic isolation systems for development of
resilient structures. The periodic meta-material barriers-based seismic
isolation system is a complementary system to be applied together with periodic
foundations. Both periodic barriers and periodic foundations are inspired by
phononic crystal, which can isolate the seismic waves using the frequency band
gap mechanism. With this mechanism, the incoming seismic waves falling within
the frequency band gaps of the properly designed periodic foundations or
barriers will be filtered out regardless of the direction of wave propagation.
The periodic foundations, which also act as the foundation of the
superstructure, can isolate seismic waves coming from the soil beneath the
embedded foundations. Periodic barriers, on the other hand, will isolate the
embedded structures from the incoming lateral seismic waves. The combination of
periodic barriers and periodic foundation will form an isolation envelope for
the embedded foundations. This project will study the effectiveness of the
combined periodic barriers and the periodic foundation systems through numerical
simulation and field studies. The field studies will examine how seismic waves
propagate in soil with and without periodic barriers. The main objective of this
project is to develop periodic barriers that can effectively attenuate incoming
seismic waves. This project will also generate a set of simplified design
guidelines for practicing engineers to design periodic barriers that will
attenuate seismic shaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.