* 1761618
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Control of Long Range Micro Air Vehicles Inspired by Monarch Butterflies
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Chang-kwon Kang, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2021
* USD 276,876.00

This Collaborative research project will study the biomechanics of Monarch
butterfly flight, with the goal of creating engineered flight vehicles with
unprecedented capabilities. The seemingly fragile Monarch exhibits the longest
flight range among insects. Individual Monarch butterflies may travel up to four
thousand kilometers during the annual migration between North America and
Central America. This project will examine the distinguishing characteristics of
Monarch butterfly flight, including the slow tempo of the flapping wings, the
effects of wing flexibility, and the mechanical coupling of wing and body
movements. Furthermore, the Monarch flies at relatively high altitudes. Glider
pilots have observed Monarch butterflies soaring on thermal currents at
altitudes up to 1,250 km, and their overwintering grounds are at altitudes of up
to 3,300 km. This project will examine whether the unmatched range of the
Monarch among similarly sized animals lies in the combination of large, flexible
wings, slow flapping speeds, and high-altitude flight. A multidisciplinary team
will integrate expertise in computational mechanics, biological experiments,
fluid dynamics, and nonlinear controls to uncover the physical mechanism
underlying the highly efficient Monarch flight. This knowledge will be applied
to the creation of transformative, bio-inspired micro-air vehicles with enhanced
flight efficiency and superior flight range. Micro-air vehicles with extended
flight range will improve the national quality of life by enabling long-term
monitoring of environmental hazards. These vehicles will enhance national
security by allowing long-term surveillance of large areas, and by providing
long-range reconnoitering capacity for search and rescue. Engineering models of
Monarch flight will also contribute to the understanding of their migration
patterns, and thereby support the conservation of this endangered
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific objective of this project
is to test the hypothesis that high-altitude flight is a critical component to
the long-range flight characteristics of the Monarch butterfly. This will be
achieved with a series of experimental, computational, and theoretical research
efforts. The flight maneuvers of live Monarch will be measured by a motion
capture system in a low-pressure chamber simulating the ambient environment at
various altitudes. The measurements will be validated with computational fluid
dynamics simulations for the unsteady viscous flows around flexible flapping
wings integrated with a multibody dynamics model representing the thorax and the
abdomen deformation. The resulting aerodynamic model will be approximated by an
artificial neural network for real-time dynamic simulation, from which a
nonlinear feedback control system will be constructed via Floquet-Lypuanov
theory. The fidelity of the computational dynamic model and the feedback control
system will be verified against experiments with Monarch butterfly inspired
micro-air vehicle and live butterfly flight measurements. These will provide a
comprehensive analysis of the low-frequency flapping dynamics of an articulated,
flexible multibody system representing the remarkable flight characteristics of
Monarch butterflies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.