* 1761505
* Creating and Using Social Impact Models for Engineered Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Christopher Mattson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,643.00

Every product has economic, environmental, and social impacts on those who
produce and use it. While environmental and economic impacts are relatively well
known and appropriate measures have been identified and implemented, very little
work has been done to help guide engineers, understanding of social impacts.
Therefore, this project focuses on creating ways to measure and evaluate the
social impacts of engineered products. Accordingly, the research questions
pursued in this project are: (i) How are social impacts of products influenced
by engineering decisions, (ii) What studies can be carried out to evaluate the
social impact of existing products? (iii) What are social impacts as they relate
to engineering decisions that can be observed in existing products? (iv) What is
an appropriate framework to guide engineers "understanding of anticipated social
impacts of products they're designing" This research promises to improve
industrial competitiveness by enabling engineers to account for social factors
that oftentimes dictate the success of engineered products, but currently are
difficult for engineers to consider formally. It also will promote a vision of
sustainable design and engineering in which needs of the present are met without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Thus,
this research intends to have a broad impact on industry and society by
transforming how the social impact of engineered products can be understood,
predicted and considered in the design and optimization of engineered products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out by, first, defining the
boundaries of social impact. This part of the research tames the unwieldy
concept of social impact and frames it in a way that links it to engineering
decisions, making it tangible to engineers and laying the foundation for future
research in sustainable design and engineering. Second, this research will
execute empirical studies to model the social impact of existing products. This
area of focus involves examining a variety of products/projects with industrial
collaborators all over the world who have agreed to provide us with access to
existing product and project data. These collaborators bring insight ranging
from medical products to consumer products to humanitarian projects and they
will provide data and insight from North America, South America, Europe, Africa,
and Asia. Third, this research will extract principles from the empirical
studies that act as a foundation for developing a framework for engineers to
improve social impacts of their products. Key principles will be extracted and
articulated after observing the social impact modeling patterns in the empirical
studies. These principles will be at the foundation of the modeling framework
created. Fourth, the research will create a principles-based framework to guide
engineers in developing social impact models--deterministic and non-
deterministic. This portion of the research seeks to develop a generic framework
for identifying a product?s social impacts, converging on one or more social
sustainability measures for the product, and linking those measures to the
engineer-controlled parameters of the design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.