* 1761697
* Collaborative Research: In-situ Production of Calcium Carbonate Nanoparticles in Fresh Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Hongyan Ma, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,422.00

Portland cement concrete remains the most widely used construction material in
the world, and improvements in its properties have the potential for significant
benefit in the design and longevity of civil infrastructure. Incorporating
nanoparticles to concrete can significantly enhance specific properties, for
example strength and durability. However, real applications of nanoparticles in
concrete are very limited because of low benefit-cost ratio of using
nanoparticles induced by the high manufacturing cost, and difficulty of
dispersing nanoparticles. This research studies the in-situ production of
nanoparticles in fresh concrete to enhance the engineering performance. A two-
step mixing process will be used to produce calcium carbonate nanoparticles in
fresh concrete at low cost, as well as to provide well dispersion. Concrete made
by this process will have significantly higher strength and better durability
due to mechanisms triggered by the nanoparticles. The potential benefit to civil
infrastructure, national economy and environmental benefits can be substantial.
An aggressive educational plan is designed to complement the research
activities, with an emphasis on involving a group of traditionally
underrepresented (woman, minority and/or socio-economically disadvantaged)
students and high school teachers in the research activities. A series of course
modules and special topics lectures will be developed to integrate the research
endeavors into classroom teaching at both institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-
situ production of calcium carbonate nanoparticles overcomes the major barriers
preventing practical applications of nanoparticles in concrete. Three hypotheses
have been identified for revealing the working mechanisms of this method: 1) the
in-situ produced calcium carbonate nanoparticles promotes cement hydration and
tunes the local packing and growth of hydration products, 2) the phase change of
nanoparticles from amorphous or metastable to a stable one creates a binding
mechanism in concrete, and 3) concrete with calcium carbonate nanoparticles
exhibit lower porosity and higher strength due to changing in mineralogy of
hydrated cement. A comprehensive experimental and numerical approach will be
applied to test these hypotheses. Especially, molecular dynamics simulations
will be used to explain the effects of the method on the early hydration of
cement; thermodynamic modeling will be employed to quantify the effects on the
mineral phase assemblage; advanced material characterization techniques (x-ray
diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, backscattered electron imaging, etc.)
will enable validation of the simulations and quantification of the
microstructure. The engineering performance will be determined by the evaluation
of mechanical properties and durability testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.