* 1761273
* Collaborative Research: Liquid Phase Atomic Layer Deposition of Thin Films on Nanoparticles Using Three-Dimensionally Printed Microfluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Roseanne Warren, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2022
* USD 171,237.00

Nanoparticles are particles between 1 and 100 nanometer in size that possess
unique, size-dependent properties due to their high surface area-to-volume
ratios. Functional nanoparticles have the potential to benefit society through
applications such as drug delivery, magnetic resonance imaging, renewable
energy, optoelectronics, and catalysis. These applications rely on an ability to
precisely customize the surface chemistry of nanoparticles using thin-film
coatings. Nanoparticle thin-film coatings are typically on the order of a few
monolayers in thickness, yet must be uniformly applied to individual
nanoparticles. This award supports fundamental research into a new, high-
precision thin-film nanoparticle coating strategy that overcomes current
manufacturing challenges, including coating non-uniformity, by combining
principles of atomic layer deposition, three-dimensional printing, and
microfluidics. Improving the uniformity of nanoparticle coatings enables new
applications of functional nanoparticles across health, energy, and technology
sectors. This research award supports public engagement with nanotechnology
through hands-on educational demonstrations of nanoparticle applications, with a
focus on promoting inclusion for groups historically underrepresented in
manufacturing research such as women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Current challenges in thin-film coating of nanoparticles include
particle aggregation, non-uniform coating, limited thickness control, and
undesired sensitivity to particle size and morphology. This research award meets
these challenges by combining the monolayer-by-monolayer deposition principle of
conventional atomic layer deposition with the hydrodynamic nanoparticle
manipulation approach known as deterministic lateral displacement to achieve a
new nanomanufacturing technology termed 'Liquid Phase Atomic Layer Deposition'.
This approach represents a shift from conventional atomic layer deposition based
on deposition at the solid-vapor interface to a new deposition physics based on
successive adsorption and deposition reactions at the solid-liquid interface.
The research studies center on utilizing specially positioned nanoposts within a
microfluidic channel to passively transport suspended nanoparticles into
discrete, adjacent flow streams of successive reactant and wash solutions. It is
hypothesized that the controlled solid-liquid interface phenomena of Liquid
Phase Atomic Layer Deposition yields a high degree of precision and uniformity
for nanoparticle thin-film coating. The engineering of parallel three-
dimensional microfluidic reactors, constructed by means of two-photon direct
laser writing-based additive manufacturing, ensures that this method is also
high throughput. The research team investigates the phenomenon of Liquid Phase
Atomic Layer Deposition through fundamental experimental studies, computational
fluid dynamics simulations, and multiphysics finite element
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.