* 1761416
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Autonomous Systems for Experimental and Computational Data Generation and Data-Driven Modeling of Combustion Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Richard West, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,995.00

To meet pressing societal needs for more cost-effective and sustainable energy,
future combustion engines need to be more fuel-efficient, produce less
emissions, and operate on a variety of fuels, including alternative fuels.
Engineers often use computer models of fuel combustion chemistry to design
engines with improved performance and determine the suitability of a certain
fuel in an engine. In producing combustion models for engineers to use,
scientists usually start by creating a trial model, then generate computational
and experimental data to test the model, and improve and validate the model
against the data. The latter two tasks are often repeated until the resulting
model is sufficiently accurate for reliable use. Present techniques for
developing reliable, validated models for transportation-relevant fuels
typically involve combining the efforts of multiple research groups, taking
multiple years or even decades to obtain enough data. The present approach for
developing fuel combustion chemistry models is insufficient to address pressing
energy needs in a timely and effective manner, particularly as many potential
modern fuels have not been well characterized. This project will create and test
the performance of a new autonomous system that creates trial models, generates
data, and makes model improvements to rapidly converge on a reliable, validated,
fuel chemistry model. Successful implementation of the novel autonomous system
will provide an advanced model development tool for combustion kinetics and an
accelerated means of understanding the oxidation behavior of the many
alternative fuels, which governs their viability. Finally, this project will
engage undergraduate and graduate students in research and create novel teaching
modules for data science applied to combustion kinetics. The modules will
enhance proficiency of younger generations of students in the scripting and data
science tools necessary to ensuring a competitive STEM program in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this project is to create
an autonomous system for studying fuel oxidation chemistry and evaluate its
performance relative to current time-intensive approaches. This autonomous
system will use a multi-physics uncertainty quantification framework, MultiScale
Informatics, to integrate an automated kinetic model construction platform,
Reaction Mechanism Generator, an adaptable automated High-Throughput Jet Stirred
Reactor experiment, and an algorithm for performing automated quantum chemistry,
statistical thermodynamics, and transition state theory calculations (AutoTST).
By linking the uncertainties both in experimental observables in the Jet Stirred
Reactor and in Quantities of Interest, such as onset of ignition in an engine,
to physically meaningful parameters in the kinetic model, such as barrier
heights of a reaction, calculations and experiments can be optimally designed to
improve the model?s accuracy for predicting Quantities of Interest. This project
seeks to (1) create the autonomous platform, (2) use it to generate a model for
n-heptane, for which previous data and models are relatively mature, to assess
its performance, and (3) apply it to diisobutylene, a promising biofuel recently
identified in the DOE?s Co-Optima program. This project will create a new data-
driven approach for combustion research at an accelerated pace, contribute to
scientific understanding for n-heptane and diisobutylene, and, more broadly,
contribute to understanding of autonomous science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.