* 1761603
* Collaborative Research: Urban Vector-Borne Disease Transmission Demands Advances in Spatiotemporal Statistical Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Edward Ionides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 692,276.00

Statistical analysis of partially-observed, nonlinear, stochastic spatiotemporal
systems is a methodological challenge. Many existing inference algorithms suffer
from a "curse of dimensionality" that prohibits their applicability to models
describing interacting dynamic processes occurring within and between many
spatial locations. New algorithms will be developed, and shown in theory and in
practice to advance capabilities for spatiotemporal data analysis. This
methodological research will be carried out in the context of addressing a
public health concern, transmission of dengue virus. Global incidence of dengue
has risen 30-fold over the past fifty years, with notable geographical expansion
in South and Central America. The municipality of Rio de Janeiro is a focal
point for dengue transmission in this region. Spatiotemporal data on dengue
cases in Rio de Janeiro will be analyzed, together with data on human movement,
temperature, and rainfall. Policy decisions for the detection, control, and
potential eradication of infectious diseases are informed by model-based
understanding of disease transmission. Improved understanding of the
spatiotemporal dynamics of disease transmission will have implications for
improvements in disease control. Mathematical models will be developed to
describe spatiotemporal dynamics of dengue transmission, and the novel
statistical methodology will be used to link these models to the data from Rio
de Janeiro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatiotemporal partially-observed Markov
process models provide a framework for formulating and answering questions
relating spatiotemporal data to an underlying stochastic dynamic process.
Statistically efficient inference involves integrating out over possible values
of the latent process, a task known as filtering. Except when the system is
approximately linear and Gaussian, filtering spatiotemporal models is
challenging. One algorithm developed in this project will address the curse of
dimensionality by guiding Monte Carlo particles toward important regions in the
latent variable space. Another algorithm will combine many weak, independent
filters to give a global filtering solution. Disease transmission systems, which
are highly nonlinear and stochastic and are imperfectly observable, will be used
to motivate and demonstrate the capabilities of the new algorithms.
Specifically, models will be developed for the dynamics of dengue transmission
in the major metropolis of Rio de Janeiro. Spatiotemporal stochastic
epidemiological models will be used to examine the role of human mobility, host
immunity, and climate variability in the context of a heterogeneous
socioeconomic landscape. A particular goal is to identify locations that
function as sources of infection critical to disease invasion and persistence as
well as those that act as sinks incapable of sustained local
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.