* 1761441
* Improved process understanding of snow density and SWE across forested mountain landscapes from coordinated field observations and model analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Eric Small, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 02/28/2023
* USD 617,293.00

Seasonal snow in mountains is a critical water resource for billions of people
worldwide. The amount of water stored in snow, or snow water equivalent (SWE),
depends on its depth and density, both of which vary in space and time. New
technologies permit mapping of snow depth across large watersheds, but there is
no similar advance for measuring snow density. Instead, snow density models are
used, but different models can yield divergent results across mountain
landscapes. Therefore, understanding why snow density models differ is essential
for reducing uncertainty in SWE. This project will improve knowledge of the
physical processes that affect snowpack density, focusing on how forests yield
predictable variations in snowpack density across watersheds. The project will
advance snow density modeling and thus predictions of SWE, snowmelt, and runoff.
Snow density models will be used to transform snow depth datasets into SWE
datasets, benefiting hydrologic research. The project will train one graduate
student, develop two field classes, and support multiple undergraduate interns
at the university and through programs that strives to increase diversity in
geoscience students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial variations in snowpack density
are driven primarily by differential compaction due to the mass of overlying
snow - density tends to increase with greater snow depth. In contrast, secondary
processes lead to increased density as depth decreases (e.g., wind compaction)
or decreased density as depth increases (e.g., new snowfall). The guiding
hypothesis is that landscape properties and climate govern the relative
importance of primary and secondary densification processes. Snow in open areas
is typically deeper than in forests, so snowpack density is predicted to be
greater in open areas. However, secondary processes can enhance or counteract
this effect, depending on environmental factors. Hypotheses that assess the
roles of primary and secondary densification effects will be tested using
coordinated field investigations and modeling experiments. Field investigations
in distinct snow climates with landscape controls (e.g., forest vs. open) will
measure differences in snow density, depth, water content, and layer
characteristics. Snowpack will be simulated with process-based modular snow
models and reference models. Field data will be used to quantify model errors,
evaluate model representation of primary and secondary effects, and test model
sensitivity to meteorological uncertainty. Models will be further evaluated
using data from the NASA SnowEx campaign and the second Snow Model
Intercomparison Project. Robust models identified will be applied to produce
datasets of density, SWE, and uncertainty for community
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.