* 1761136
* Collaborative Research:  Efficient Learning of Process-Structure-Property Models in Value-Driven Materials Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Christiaan Paredis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2023
* USD 304,153.00

This award supports research that will contribute knowledge towards the
efficient discovery of new material systems. New materials are expected to have
a significant impact in a broad range of application domains, ranging from
biomedical systems to infrastructure and energy systems, improving the
efficiencies of these systems and creating new capabilities that have so far
been technologically out of reach. In current practice, however, the development
of new materials is very costly and time-consuming because it relies mostly on
physical testing and experimentation. Rather than focusing on the development of
a specific new material, this award aims to develop modeling approaches and
learning algorithms that allow for more efficient and effective exploration and
discovery of new materials in general. The results of the investigation will
help material scientists and engineers understand when to rely on mathematical
analysis models or when to use physical experiments so that new information
about so far unexplored materials can be gathered efficiently, and so that the
materials design effort can be efficiently guided towards materials with desired
and valuable properties. The research is expected to lead to a dramatic
acceleration of the materials design process with significant competitive
advantages to US industry. Through a university-industry consortium these
innovations will be transferred into industrial practice. All new models and
algorithms will be shared open-source, and the research findings, methods and
tools will be incorporated in on-campus and on-line courses, with the potential
to reach a large number of students, researchers and practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this project is to
critically evaluate the relative merits of different modeling formalisms and
approaches for capturing and utilizing materials domain knowledge in a way that
is most valuable to the designer. In the design process, multiple information
sources will be combined, including bulk material tests, low-cost experimental
assays, and physics-based multiscale Process-Structure-Property models. The
hypothesis is that combining information from a portfolio of information sources
with synergistic cost-accuracy trade-offs leads to a more efficient and
effective design process. A second focus is on combining the information from
these sources into integrative reduced-order Process-Structure-Property
linkages. These linkages support learning through Bayesian updating as new
information is acquired, and they are computationally inexpensive and therefore
well-suited for searching the design space. The overall design framework will be
applied and validated in the context of dual phase
steels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.