* 1761677
* RAPID: Measuring the response of stream communities to Hurricane Harvey across a semi-arid to sub-humid gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Christopher Patrick, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2021
* USD 215,952.00

Understanding how natural systems change and recover from a catastrophic
disturbance, such as a major hurricane, is important to help society respond
effectively to these events. Natural systems, like streams, can provide a buffer
to lessen storm impacts and quicken recovery of natural processes that benefit
humans. This research aims to understand how streams along the Gulf Coast of
Texas responded to flooding and strong winds after Hurricane Harvey made
landfall in August 2017. The enormous amount of rainfall and associated storm
surges are likely to change the number and kinds of organisms that live in
nearby streams. Although the 'community' of microbes, plants and animals in
streams is expected to change, it is also expected to recover over time to pre-
storm conditions. The time to recovery is thought to differ in predictable ways
between streams and between kinds of organisms. To test this idea, it is
necessary to have data on stream flows, physical stream characteristics, and
community composition before and after the storm. Researchers supported by this
award developed and implemented a stream monitoring program prior to Harvey's
landfall in south Texas. This award will allow the researchers to collect data
immediately after the storm and over the expected recovery period. They will
explore if the recovery period depends on whether a stream occurs in a typically
wet or typically dry area. Results of this project will help urban planners and
natural resource managers understand responses of streams to hurricanes. In
addition, the research will directly support faculty to train a diverse group of
local scientists and managers who can help their communities respond effectively
to future hurricanes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how climate
regime mediates community response to disturbance. Specifically, it tests
predictions about which biotic communities and associated ecosystem processes
are most or least resilient to climate-related disturbances. These predictions
provide an important test of disturbance theory and are of great relevance to
forecasting the ecological impacts of climate variation. A major disturbance
event, Hurricane Harvey, affected a region with a sharp climate gradient from
semi-arid to sub-humid. The research team, including faculty and students at a
Hispanic-serving institution, will use a series of stream ecosystems along the
climate gradient, with pre-storm community and ecosystem data, as a model
system. In each stream, the research team will conduct high frequency repeated
surveys of communities (e.g., microbial, invertebrates), ecosystem components
(nutrients, benthic algae, organic matter, habitat), and collect continuous
high-frequency data using automated loggers (DO, light, temperature, discharge,
depth). These data will track temporal changes in community composition, basal
resources, and ecosystem processes that collectively provide measurement of the
immediate response and longer-term impacts of the disturbance. It is expected
that community resistance to the disturbance will be higher in drier systems
with greater stochasticity in abiotic conditions. Likewise, it is expected that
communities with higher annual precipitation and more riparian vegetation will
experience a positive response driven by organic matter inputs and increased
light and primary production. These general functional responses will vary in
rate among trophic groups as a function of generation time.