* 1761071
* The Role of Single and Repeated Traumatic Injury on the Blood-brain Endothelial Barrier Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jeffrey Wolchok, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2023
* USD 375,461.00

Recent studies have shown that moderate, severe, and more crucially, repetitive
traumatic brain injury can cause the breakdown of the blood-brain barrier.
Failure of this critical protective barrier between the contents of the
bloodstream and rest of the brain can cause both short- and long-term problems
because of increased invasion of the brain by disease causing agents. The causes
of breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, as well as the potential of repetitive
injury to more severely degrade the blood-brain barrier is poorly understood.
There are very few non-animal laboratory models that copy the mechanical,
structural and functional complexities of the blood-brain barrier that can be
used to study traumatic brain injury. This project will use a new non-animal
(benchtop) model of the blood-brain barrier to study its breakdown after
repetitive traumatic injury. The project will advance health by determining the
biological and structural causes for reduced barrier function in the brain
following traumatic injury. The educational and outreach work in the project is
centered on engaging high-school students who will use the latest technologies
of Biomedical Manufacturing and Innovation in a week-long summer camp.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance fundamental insights within the
field of blood-brain barrier mechanobiology, specifically the understanding of
the role of strain, deceleration and repeated injury, in causing altered
structure and dysfunction of the blood brain barrier and the overall
neurovascular unit. Three-dimensional in vitro models of the blood-brain barrier
neurovascular unit (organ-chips) incorporating neural and microvascular cell
types, and capillary fluid flow will be designed and engineered. These organ-
chip constructs will be subject to single or multiple traumatic injuries in
custom-designed bioreactors to quantify and model the temporal evolution of
blood-brain barrier breakdown as a function of injury magnitude, number of
impacts and time between impacts. This project will thus provide important
insights into the mechanoregulation of blood-brain barrier cellular phenotype,
metabolism and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.