* 1761421
* Documentation of discourse and cultural activities to advance scientific knowledge of an endangered tonal language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Jonathan Amith, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 190,865.00

The world's estimated 7,000 languages are disappearing at an increasingly rapid
rate. Parallel to language loss is the disappearance of cultural and economic
activities. The present project, part of a long-term multidisciplinary effort,
will emphasize video documentation to enhance a language documentation project
that focuses on highly endangered cultural activities particularly prone to
loss. This has the potential to increase scientific understanding of the spatial
and motion components of grammar and to generate a valuable corpus of the
distribution of complex tonal properties in narrative and other grammatical
contexts. With up to 21 tonal contrasts on a single disyllabic sequence,
Yoloxochitl Mixtec (YM), the language documented in this project, has one of the
most extensive tonal inventories in any reported language. This inventory that
carries great functional weight both lexically (distinguishing words) and
morphologically (marking both derivational and inflectional processes),
providing opportunities to deepen scientific advances both in terms of YM tone
and cross-linguistic studies of complex tone systems. Broader impacts include
the training of a US undergraduate in video documentation of endangered
indigenous cultures. Additionally, annotated videos will be disseminated through
Internet venues (e.g., Vimeo and YouTube). The entire subtitled corpus will
serve as an educational resource for US high school and college students,
especially those from diasporic Mexican Indigenous communities here in the US.
In addition, video documentation will enhance intercultural understanding and
has significant educational value for the community and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The language and cultural and economic activities that
will be documented are from Yoloxochitl, state of Guerrero, Mexico. The project
continues the documentation of YM, a highly complex tonal language in which
little comparative work has been done on this prosodic feature. The present
project on YM will create the first extensive audio corpus of Mixtec lemmas
(headwords). Video documentation will enable a focus on activities that are best
documented and understood through audiovisual recordings. Visual imagery most
effectively captures varied processes (e.g., preparation of plant material) and
movements (e.g., the relationship between language and gesture; the
documentation of manual skills) that would remain opaque in textual or simple
audio descriptions. Moreover, the lexicon of a given language is connected to
activities that must be conceptualized if the words themselves are to be
understood. The expert team will record with two cameras (one stationary and one
mobile) to allow the complete recording of each process while yielding footage
for the creative editing of short vignettes on each activity. All footage as
well as the final videos will be transcribed in YM, translated into English and
Spanish, disseminated, and archived. It will serve as a primary source in an
under-documented group of language for future comparative work on over three
dozen recognized Mixtec languages while allowing acoustic analysis of the high
number of tonal contrasts. Additionally, the focus on semantic domains involving
ritual performance and material culture production will provide highly nuanced
data of often archaic material in the linguistic and anthropological realm. The
results of this project will be of value to linguists in a range of specialties
(typologists, Oto-Mangueanists, historical linguists, tonologists, and
semanticists) as well as to anthropologists studying Mesoamerican language and
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.