* 1761887
* Spokes: MEDIUM: MIDWEST: Collaborative: An Integrated Big Data Framework for Water Quality Issues in the Upper Mississippi River Basin
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Larry Weber, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,999.00

This project will develop a cyberinfrastructure framework to facilitate research
on the efficient management of agricultural practices and their impact on water
resources in the Upper Mississippi River Basin (UMRB). Large-scale data
acquisition, integration, analysis, and visualization using data-enabled
information technologies will accelerate the dissemination of knowledge,
experience, and shared resources (e.g., technology, equipment, and people) among
communities and partners. The key element of the project is a new cyber
platform, the Upper Mississippi Information System (UMIS), which will provide
water quality data within a rich spatio-temporal hydrologic context. The UMIS
directly addresses three of the Grand Challenges for Engineering identified by
the National Academy of Engineering: i) provide access to clean drinking water;
ii) manage the nitrogen cycle; and iii) engineer the tools of scientific
discovery. The UMIS will immediately begin facilitating data access,
integration, and scientific discovery for water quality challenges in the UMRB.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMIS will offer internet-based open access to water
quality information in its meteorological, hydrological, and geographical
context, providing almost endless potential benefits for stakeholders. For
example, the experimental design of the UMIS will enable researchers to study
spatial scaling, efficiency of various land use and agricultural practices to
improve water quality, and the impact of climate change on land management and
water quality. Decision-makers, producers, and extension staff will be able to
assess the relative efficacy of local (e.g., best management practices) versus
system-level (e.g., state programs) solutions designed to reduce pollution,
optimize the use of resources, and evaluate tradeoffs among competing
objectives. For all stakeholders, the UMIS will support partnerships and
collaborations, increase dissemination of information about a critical natural
resource to empower stakeholders at all levels, and set new standards in the
communication of scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.