* 1761613
* Building Capacity in Documentation of Language and Traditional Ecological Knowledge for Hualapai, a Native American Language, and Other Pai Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Carrie Cannon, Hualapai Indian Tribe
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 101,279.00

The state of Arizona is home to 15 Native American languages belonging to 5
distinct language families, thus representing tremendous diversity. The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. The Pai subgroup of the Yuman language family is spoken on both sides
of the U.S.-Mexico border, in Arizona, and in the Baja California state of
Mexico. The Pai language communities have maintained strong connections and
exchanges of knowledge, especially in the ecological and environmental domains.
Whether academic (linguists, anthropologists) or indigenous (elders, traditional
culture bearers), these experts know language encodes a tremendous amount of
specialized traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). Unfortunately, as languages
become endangered, that traditional knowledge is often the first to be lost.
This project will investigate how this traditional indigenous scientific
knowledge, here encoded in Pai languages, should best be documented and will
develop protocols for accessibility of the appropriate knowledge. The Pai
languages are spoken in a region of significant biological diversity, where
harvests, the lifespan of plants, and the temporal boundaries of seasons are
undergoing rapid transition. This, together with the severely endangered status
of all Pai languages, makes this work highly urgent. The team is led by and
composed of indigenous scientists and language scholars, meaning activities will
be conducted with community benefits foremost. Other broader impacts include
broadening participation of Native Americans in the language and ecological
sciences, the development of intellectual property (IP) protocols regarding
sensitive material like TEK, and the expansion of a binational collaboration
between its Pai-speaking tribal nations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by the
Hualapai Indian Tribe, the project brings together six Pai nations, five from
Arizona -- the Hualapai, Havasupai, Yavapai-Apache, Yavapai-Prescott, Ft.
McDowell Yavapai -- and the Paipai tribal people of Baja California, Mexico.
This project will situate training and collaborative decision-making as a
methodology for this kind of comparative language and TEK documentation. The
interdisciplinary team includes biologists, linguists, ethnobotanists, and
elders and experts from each of the 6 Pai communities. Project activities focus
on collaboratively training in skills essential to documentation of TEK through
language: transcription and annotation, vouchering and specimen collection;
comparative analysis of phonology and variation; databasing; and data management
and archiving. Botanical species and the indigenous ethnoscience associated with
them represent a sensitive and proprietary area. Stakeholder communities possess
significant knowledge of the local ecology and its traditional calendar cycle,
weather patterns, and uses of botanical species, with such knowledge deeply
embedded in ceremonial or religious activities. That sensitivity is compounded
by the potential for commercial benefit through pharmaceutical and other uses,
which adds potentially contentious issues when documenting TEK. The project will
advance an indigenous-based approach toward documentation of botanical and
linguistic knowledge. The team will disseminate how they develop IP protocols
for this specialized documentation and disseminate the protocols themselves. The
project will establish a foundation for future documentation of the rich
linguistic and cultural heritage of the Pai communities, both individually and
from a comparative analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.