* 1761810
* Spokes: MEDIUM: NORTHEAST: Collaborative Research: Data Science Foundry: A Collaborative Platform for Computational Social Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Augustin Chaintreau, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

This research project will develop a collaborative data science platform for
computational social science called the Data Science Foundry. The collection and
management of large-scale data currently is a relatively unstructured process,
with data-processing decisions being made in an ad hoc fashion. Society has
started to rely on data-driven science to address policy-related questions,
however. The development of a collaborative platform that provides structure
will allow social scientists to collaborate and validate each other's studies.
This project has the potential to transform how studies are designed and how
data will be processed. The collaborative platform will result in a higher level
of trust in the studies conducted via the collaborative curation of study
design, procedures, and validation. The collaborative platform also will
increase the number of studies that can be done in a short span of time. The
platform will be developed as open-source, thereby facilitating interactions
with the community and enabling different institutions to install the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a collaborative platform
that social scientists can use to collaborate and validate each other's studies.
The investigative team will attempt to identify the best possible collaborative
model for data-driven social science, determine how automation can most enhance
the studies, and develop explicit and implicit mechanisms to establish trust in
end-to-end data processing pipelines and the results they generate. To aid in
the platform's development, the research team will focus on the prediction of
outcomes from surveys, a specific yet widely applicable type of problem within
computational social science. This class of problems involves much subjective
assessment during the feature engineering state as well as copious
interpretation during the data transformation stage. These unique challenges
will benefit both from a collaborative workflow and from mechanisms that enable
trust in the eventual results. The project will bring together three distinct
teams to develop this platform: computer scientists to develop abstractions,
APIs and systems; statisticians to help with methods and study design; and
social scientists to help define the problems and workflow and to provide user
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.