* 1761189
* Towards Nanomanufacturing of Materials with Coherent Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 612,644.00

Rapid innovations in today's manufacturing technologies and the need for
superior performance are pushing the boundaries for advancing next generation
materials. Due to extreme operational demands, current service components
warrant a favorable combination of high strength, ductility and cracking
resistance. Nanostructured materials have the potential to meet these
technological demands if they can be designed to possess these properties and
manufactured at large enough scale. The design of new materials, however, has
traditionally been a highly iterative and costly process, and thus the
development of computational models can greatly reduce the cost of development
and deployment of advanced materials. This award supports research that will
advance knowledge of nanoscale processing routes while simultaneously developing
more predictive modeling methods.? The integrated processing and modeling
approach will expedite materials design while eliminating excessive processing
and characterization trials.? Moreover, this research will result in high
fidelity tools for material lifetime prediction for critical applications in
civil, aerospace, naval structures, nuclear plants and ground vehicles, with the
potential to improve safety and eliminate premature retirement of materials.
?This research draws upon collaborative approaches in Materials Science and
Mechanical Engineering, and integrates computational and experimental
approaches, ensuring that students involved in this research will be fluent in
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual challenge to be addressed by this
research involves harnessing processing methods to generate microstructures with
tightly controlled coherent interface populations, thus enabling a systematic
understanding of dislocation/interface reactions under complex cyclic loading
conditions. This research will enable control of physical vapor deposition
routes to deposit heavily twinned microstructures with narrow spatial
distributions at the nanoscale, which will allow expansion of the material
systems that can be induced to possess the promising nanotwin microstructure,
including materials with higher intrinsic stacking fault energies.? By probing
highly controlled nanotwinned microstructures, the research team will establish
the attributes for a nanotwinned material to achieve higher fatigue resistance
while also limiting variability in fatigue lives.? Integration of processing,
microstructural characterization and mechanical testing into a multiscale
modeling framework will ultimately allow for convergence to optimum
microstructures and compositions in a timely fashion, potentially eliminating
the need to perform exhaustive testing for each new processing parameter or
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.