* 1761680
* NNA: Collaborative Research: Integrating Language Documentation and Computational Tools for Yupik, an Alaska Native Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Lane Schwartz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 10/31/2022
* USD 304,441.00

One locus of crosslinguistic variation in how languages build words is whether
meaning is encoded in free morphemes ('units of meaning') that stand alone as
words, or whether those morphemes must combine with other morphemes to become
words. While English has many free morphemes, the Alaska Native language St.
Lawrence Island/Siberian Yupik uses the second strategy with very complex words,
often sentence-sized. These properties are known as agglutination and
polysynthesis. Researchers will document critical structures in the language,
digitize existing Yupik materials, and build computational tools to help the
community and other researchers. The data from Yupik are extremely important to
language science, since many of the phenomena displayed in the language are rare
and not well understood. Creating computational tools for languages with very
complex words, like Yupik, is of additional benefit to computer scientists and
language scientists in that it helps researchers improve computational tools for
languages like English. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of Native American languages. This project will build and improve
tools like a morphological analyzer, a spellchecker, and a searchable
dictionary, of value to the community in revitalizing their language. Graduate
students will be trained in these methods, and researchers will hold outreach
meetings with high school students in the language community to teach them
important computer and coding skills that will enable them to build further
tools. All data gathered will be permanently archived at the Alaska Native
Language Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators, a collaboration of
language and computer scientists from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign and George Mason University, will undertake this project. It involves
three interconnected parts: digitization of existing materials on and in Yupik
for use by community members and researchers; recording and analyzing the speech
of Yupik speakers; and working with the community to build computer tools for
Yupik and teaching students how to do so. A successful computational model of
Yupik linguistic phenomena has implications for unsupervised and semi-supervised
methods in morphology induction and grammar induction because the types of
morphophonological change are pervasive, much more so than models used in other
approaches to unsupervised morphology induction. This work is likely to have
important implications regarding appropriate computational modeling of
polysynthetic agglutinative morphosyntax. Accessing materials at several
archives, the team will scan them, and clean and process the scans so they are
accessible digitally and searchable. This will create a digital corpus of Yupik
materials for use by the community and for linguistic investigations into
grammatical mood, tense, and aspect to better understand these complex
morphosemantic constructions. The data will also improve the computational tools
being developed in this project, providing the Yupik community with access to
modern tools like spellcheckers, electronically searchable dictionaries, and
electronic books. Finally, in its tight integration of field work and the
development of computational tools for the analysis of the language, this
project will serve as a model for future collaborations of this
kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.