* 1761475
* Computational Tool and Corpora Development in a Language with Complex Clause-marking
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Roberto Zariquiey, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 344,690.00

One way ambiguity exists in language is through pronouns. Complex sentences can
introduce ambiguity when it is unclear whether pronouns have the same referent
or a different one. For example, in a sentence like, "She yelled when she threw
the ball," both instances of "she" could refer to the same referent (i.e.,
"Mary"), or they could refer to different females (i.e., "Mary" and "Susan"). To
better understand this and other phenomena associated with complex clauses, it
is necessary to investigate sources of crosslinguistic variation in the
grammatical strategies of constructions. In some languages, a set of markers
signal the relationship between two clauses in a system known as switch-
reference. These indicate the temporal/logical relationship between the events
conveyed by the clauses and whether these events share a prominent participant
or not. Switch reference systems are the main discourse organization device in
several indigenous languages of the Americas, Australia, New Guinea, and the
South Pacific. Arguably the most complex switch-reference system in the world is
found in Amawaka, a critically endangered language from Peruvian Amazonia from
the Panoan family. Investigators will document Amawaka to advance knowledge of
the complexities of switch-reference, the historical paths that give rise to
these systems, and their communicative advantages and potential ambiguities. It
will advance knowledge in regards grammar structures beyond the sentence level
and discourse organization strategies. The data will be permanently stored in
archives for endangered languages, available to researchers and the general
public. Additionally, undergraduate students and members of the indigenous
community will receive linguistic training and field research experience and
will produce a storybook and bilingual dictionary for use in schools. These
activities will educate and train the next generation of researchers and foster
respectful collaboration with the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will record primary data in the field through and then turn to
transcribing, translating, and annotating and analyzing that data using existing
linguistic software and by developing a a treebank tool for syntactic analysis.
Because treebanks contain linguistically annotated data sets, they serve as
critical tests of linguistic theories in syntax for sentence structure, given
the robustness of the number of naturally occurring examples. Alongside switch-
reference, other complex systems of theoretical and typological importance are
found in Amawaka, including tripartite case-marking that interacts with
information structure, a large number of singular vs. plural suppletive verbs,
and sophisticated prosody (tone and glottalization). Considering that the
language is rapidly becoming extinct, the present research will ensure a timely
account of these and other features, which have been scantly studied or not
studied at all. Project outputs include a large annotated Amawaka database, a
grammar description, dictionaries, focused research papers, and pedagogical
materials. In addition to increasing the scientific knowledge of Amawaka, switch
reference, and its other grammatical features, the resulting treebank data set
will contribute to more robust and reproducible language sciences. A Panoan-
internal comparison will allow the reconstruction of central aspects of the
protolanguage. Ultimately, the scientific findings will significantly contribute
to Amazonian linguistics and highly impact the linguistic field more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.