* 1761639
* Socio-Spatial Approaches to the Analysis of Multilingualism
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Jan Chomicki, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 10/31/2023
* USD 531,114.00

Language distributions represented on maps are typically quite simplified,
assigning only one language to a given area. The reality is more complex. On the
one hand, even in places where one language is dominant, there will often be
groups who primarily use a different language in their daily lives, such as at
home or in church. On the other hand, many people are able to speak more than
one language, and simplified maps are incapable of representing this
effectively. To achieve a more realistic sense of language distributions, it is
necessary to explore linguistic knowledge and use at the level of the
individual. In this multidisciplinary project, the investigators will use
advances in the available tools for mapping complex social patterns for the
spatial and linguistic dynamics of a rural region of Cameroon where the average
adult speaks five different languages, many of which are endangered. The level
of individual multilingualism found in this rural environment far exceeds what
is typically found in the United States. The project will support the training
of a graduate student and build future opportunities for international
collaborative research. The resulting research on socio-spatial patterns and
language use may be usable by the U.S. in the areas of public health, national
security, and connections on the ground in Cameroon. The future adaptation of
these methods will facilitate investigating the spatial patterns of other
dimensions of social behavior, such as trade and marriage, or to compare the
spread of linguistic features with the spread of diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will utilize new ways of representing
and analyzing language distributions using Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
and individual-level data to understand the extent to which people tend to learn
languages spoken by those that they live near and languages spoken by their
friends and family members. These individual-level factors will be examined with
regard to the dynamics and nature of the community in which these individuals
live. A particular focus of the work is understanding the relationship between
spatial, social, and cultural factors in accounting for an individual's
linguistic knowledge. High-resolution spatial data will be integrated with
detailed descriptions of individual patterns of language use and analyzed from
the perspective of spatial and social network analysis. Much of the data will be
collected using smartphones, allowing information to be gathered at a scale that
is unprecedented for linguistic research on endangered languages. The tools and
methods to be developed will be general in nature and applicable to any part of
the world and will be especially useful for the investigation of the language
dynamics of rural areas with limited infrastructure. A better understanding of
how and why people come to speak different languages will provide better
information to policymakers in the domain of language planning. Spatial analysis
of individual language use will augment psycholinguistic and other analyses of
multilingualism to advance knowledge of human cognition and behavior in this
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.