* 1761726
* Controlling Adhesion Between Stiff Surfaces by Tailoring Interface Geometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* John Bassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2022
* USD 456,386.00

Stiff and hard materials with flat and clean surfaces can spontaneously adhere
when contacted even under minimal pressure. This "direct bonding" process is
used to join ultra-flat glass optics and to bond large-diameter semiconductor
wafers. It is also essential in emerging technologies based on wafer-scale
semiconductor layer transfer processes and micro-transfer printing, including 3D
integrated circuits, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and flexible hybrid
electronics. This project focuses on understanding adhesion of interfaces formed
by bonding relatively stiff materials with surfaces containing engineered
features that give rise to imperfect adhesion. The hypothesis is that surface
patterning can be used to realize controlled and directionally-dependent
adhesion between stiff materials. Even though nearly all interfaces have
imperfect adhesion, there remains a fundamentally incomplete understanding of
the mechanics of imperfect adhesion, both from scientific and engineering points
of view. Consequently, at present the design of surfaces with desired adhesion
and toughness is mostly trial and error based. This project will advance the
science of adhesion and will enhance the fabrication of soft and hard
electronics as well as MEMS, impacting national health, prosperity, and welfare
and securing national defense. From an education and outreach standpoint, this
project will lead to new modules and hands-on demos on imperfect adhesion that
will be broadly used to educate at all levels: graduate and undergraduate
students, K-12 students, and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
combination of experiments and rigorous mechanics analyses incorporating
traction-separation laws that are physically motivated and experimentally
calibrated, research will be conducted to design methodologies to control
interfacial toughness. The adhesion of (1) micro- and nano-patterned silicon
surfaces with various geometries, and (2) surfaces with engineered waviness will
be investigated. Atomic force microscopy-based measurements will be used to
characterize the traction-separation adhesion law and determine parameters such
as the work of adhesion and interaction length scale. Micro- and nanopatterning
will be used to introduce adhesion anisotropy and asymmetry, yielding interfaces
that have dramatically different toughness depending on the direction of loading
and crack propagation. An accurate characterization of the traction-separation
law governing adhesion, which is required to predict toughness, will be obtained
from a combination of AFM measurements and experiments on wavy interfaces
coupled with detailed analyses. In addition, use simulation tools will be
developed and used to incorporate the experimentally-verified adhesion laws in
parametric studies to design surface patterns to meet specific objectives. The
work will lead to models that allow for the design of interfaces with
controlled, anisotropic, and asymmetric toughness. The understanding of
imperfect adhesion will enable advances in micro- and nano-patterning to be
exploited to realize innovative approaches to control interface toughness
through geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.