* 1761622
* Theory and Algorithms for Feedback Particle Filter
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Prashant Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2023
* USD 386,028.00

Finding accurate solutions for complex optimization problems and other related
challenging mathematical problems is very important in many engineering
applications. Some example applications include: target tracking and
surveillance where multiple sensor measurements are used to track targets, air
traffic management to track airplanes, weather surveillance to track hurricanes,
ground mapping, geophysical surveys, remote sensing, autonomous navigation, and
robotics. State-of-the-art solution approaches to these problems include the
Kalman filter algorithm and its many extensions. However, in practice, such
approaches can yield inaccurate and erroneous solutions because of technical
issues related to complexity in dynamics and uncertainty. In the past decade, a
new class of algorithmic solution approaches to these problems has emerged
referred to as the "Feedback Particle Filter". The Feedback Particle Filter can
better handle the technical issues related to such complex dynamics and
uncertainty. This research will advance the theoretical development and
verification of the Feedback Particle Filter algorithm, and lay the groundwork
for software tools that will be useful in tracking applications noted above. The
project also includes several educational initiatives that seek to engage
undergraduate students in entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major
objective of the research concerns the development of optimal control
formulations of the feedback particle filter based on optimal transportation
theory and mean-field games formalisms. The theoretical research is closely
integrated with the work on computational algorithms. The algorithmic objectives
pertain to numerical solution of the Poisson equation, convergence analysis of
the particle system with finitely many particles, and comparisons with
importance sampling-based algorithms. The deliverables include efficient
numerical schemes which will be implemented and demonstrated in
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.