* 1761990
* Spokes: MEDIUM: NORTHEAST: Collaborative: Advancing a Data-Driven Discovery and Rational Design Paradigm in Chemistry
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Aspuru-Guzik, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
and the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering
(CISE), this project aims to advance the use of modern data science in
chemistry. In particular, the project will advance the field of data-driven
chemical research by promoting the use of machine learning and other data mining
techniques in the molecular sciences and by fostering and coalescing a community
of stakeholders. The work of the project and the community it represents aims to
transform chemistry's ability to tackle challenging discovery and design
problems. This approach can dramatically accelerate and streamline the process
that leads to chemical innovation -- an important factor in economic and
technological advancement -- and thus result in an improved return on public and
private investments. The project also addresses corresponding questions of
training and workforce development needed in chemistry, thus insuring the US's
international competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of this project
is to assert the role of big data research in the chemical domain, i.e., to
promote, enable, and advance the ideas of data-driven discovery and rational
design. The project aims to create a community-driven roadmap as well as
facilitate concrete solutions that are beyond the scope of the disjointed
efforts of its individual stakeholders. The Big Data Hubs and Spokes ecosystem
is the ideal framework to realizing this vision and accelerating progress in
this high-priority area of research. The effort at hand sets out to implement
some of the key findings of the recent NSF Division of Chemistry workshop on
Framing the Role of Big Data and Modern Data Science in Chemistry. The four
signature initiatives of this Spoke project include (i) the planning,
coordination, integration, and consolidation of community-developed software
tools for big data research in chemistry as well as the formulation of
guidelines, best practices, and standards; (ii) the organization of workshops
for community building, to connect solution seekers with solution providers, and
to address questions ranging from strategic to technical; and (iii) the creation
and dissemination of community-developed teaching materials as well as the
formulation of course, program, and curricular recommendations for education and
workforce development that reflect the changing, data-centric approach in
chemical research; (iv) providing access to a shared hardware infrastructure for
community data sets, on-site data mining capacity, and the exploration of domain
specific method and hardware issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.