* 1761243
* Active Dynamic Granular Metamaterial through Controlled Jamming-Unjammming Transitions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,840.00

Granular media have a unique ability to transition from a free-flowing fluid-
like response in the so-called unjammed state to a rigid solid-like response in
the jammed state. Because of the importance of granular media in a variety of
natural phenomena and industrial processes, the quasi-static (slow rate of
deformation) response of granular media has been the focus of numerous studies,
with emphasis on characterizing the transition between unjammed and jammed
states. In this project, an integrated experimental and computational approach
will be used to conduct research on a novel dynamic granular metamaterial
(engineered materials system with hierarchy of structures) consisting of
metallic spherical grains encapsulated in a flexible membrane. Jammed-unjammed
switching in material response will be achieved with the help of a confining
external pressure, to create an active metamaterial for impact protection
applications that will combine the shape adaptivity of unjammed granular media
with the rigid-like response of the jammed metallic grains. The successful
development of the active dynamic metamaterial will lead to a range of
applications, especially in the field of transportation, robotics, and
manufacturing, that require both stiff and compliant behaviors, or shape
adaptivity and morphing. Thus, the project will promote the progress of science
related to granular mechanics and advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare through potential applications. Additionally, undergraduate researchers
will be recruited and outreach to K-12 students will be performed to achieve
broader impact. Underrepresented groups will be specifically targeted in these
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative experimental and
computational project will shed light on the fundamental understanding of the
unjammed-to-jammed transition of granular media under dynamic loading
conditions. In particular, it will focus on the two key energy dissipation
mechanisms involved: friction and plasticity. In the first phase of the project,
the effects of parameters such as packing fraction, particle constitutive
response, and particle size distribution on the dynamic transition between
unjammed and jammed states will be investigated. The second part of the project
will focus on the ?passive? tailoring of this transition through pre-
conditioning (i.e., pre-yielding) of the spheres or through the combination of
stiff (elastic) and compliant (elasto-plastic) particles encapsulated in the
deformable membrane, and on the ?active control? of the transition through the
confining pressure applied on the encapsulated granular medium. The project will
involve a combination of computational analysis based on a discrete element
modeling of the impact response of the granular medium, and experiments
involving a variety of 2D and 3D configurations of the confined and unconfined
granular medium subjected to dynamic loading created with a Split Hopkinson
pressure bar system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.