* 1761842
* GOALI: Pooled Screening Design for Disease Biomarkers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Ebru Bish, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2021
* USD 479,489.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
research to advance the national health through research on effective screening
strategies to detect asymptomatic infections and genetic diseases. The project
has the potential to substantially improve health outcomes, reduce healthcare
costs, and diminish the spread of disease by significantly reducing the time and
resources required to identify affected individuals. Partnering with the North
Carolina State Laboratory of Public Health (NCSLPH), the project investigates
pooling strategies for combining individual laboratory samples to measure the
concentration of a disease-related marker. Pools that test positive for the
disease marker then undergo follow-up testing to identify positive-testing
individuals. Pooling is a highly efficient strategy but must be performed
carefully so as to control for imperfect medical testing technologies,
heterogeneous populations, dilution effects, variable disease progression, and
other uncertainties in testing and disease parameters. This project will provide
public health agencies with effective strategies to mitigate existing and
emerging threats to communities and populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports fundamental research in operational methods to design effective
and efficient sample-based screening strategies by exploring novel, rigorous
approaches to pooled testing using an optimization framework. The framework will
incorporate disease (marker) progression models, imperfect tests with continuous
outcomes, pooling dilution effects, and demographic variables, including risk-
factors, in a realistic manner. The framework will be used to study the effects
of non-uniform screening policies, the impact of more accurate but costly test
procedures, policy robustness, and measures of equity among screened
subpopulations. By deriving structural properties of solutions to the resulting
non-convex optimization problems, this research will generate insight and
principles on the use of pooling. In collaboration with NCSLPH, pooling
strategies will developed, calibrated, and validated for two of the most
prevalent sexually-transmitted diseases in the United States. This research will
advance the knowledge-base in pooled testing and fill critical voids in the
literature, which spans operations research, bio-statistics, and medical
decision-making, and in practice. Project discoveries will be broadly
disseminated, new course material will be developed, and undergraduate and
graduate students will interact with the team through research experiences and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.