* 1761015
* Biomechanical Properties of Bioenergy Sorghum: Changes in Gene Expression Due to Mechanical Stimulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Scott Finlayson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2022
* USD 396,688.00

Bioenergy sorghum, a relatively new type of sorghum, has emerged as a potential
source for biofuel owing to its large amount of biomass. This sorghum grows
relatively tall (3-5 m) but commonly breaks and topples under wind, rain, hail
or other mechanical stresses. A promising approach to reduce breakage is to
develop new mechanically robust sorghum varieties. To do this will require a
fundamental understanding of the biomechanical properties of stalks and
identifying the genetic and environmental influences that produce stronger
plants. Experiments have shown that mechanically stimulating the plants during
growth can significantly change the physical and biomechanical characteristics
of sorghum stems. This occurs because the mechanical load changes the growth of
the cells in the plant stem. This mechanical stimulation causes adaptive growth
that improves the mechanical properties of the stalk. This research will
accelerate the development of new fuel-rich and mechanically robust varieties of
sorghum, thereby leading to significant increases in food, feed, and biomass
productivity. This project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with
interdisciplinary professional and technical training. The team will also
participate in a summer research experience for teacher (RET) program and summer
camps to disseminate the study of biomechanics and genetics/epigenetics of
sorghum to high school teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish
these goals, this study will integrate experimental and computational studies of
structural morphologies, biomechanical properties, physiology, and
genetics/epigenetics of bioenergy sorghum stalks, to provide a fundamental
explanation of stalk lodging (breaking) and to guide development of new lodging-
resistant sorghum. The intellectual significance of this work resides in
addressing the following fundamental topics: 1) uncovering the thigmomorphogenic
response (response to mechanical stimulation) in tuning the biomechanical
properties of bioenergy sorghum stalks, including investigating epigenetic
changes, gene expression, and hormonal responses associated with the mechanical
properties of stalks; 2) revealing the impact of the viscoelastic responses of
stalks and their constituents (sclerenchymatous tissue and parenchymatous tissue
with different cell wall structures) on stem lodging; and 3) providing
structure-property-genetic/epigenetic relationships for stalks with superior
biomechanical properties. Knowledge gained from this study will likely be
transferable to other grasses, thereby extending the impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.