* 1761388
* Phase Relations Between Silicate Melts and Crustal Brines
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Bjorn Mysen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2022
* USD 185,943.00

The ultimate objective of the proposed study is to understand the role of saline
crustal fluids on melting processes and material transport in Earth's deeper
crust and upper mantle. Experiments proposed will enhance the current
understanding of magmatic processes in subduction zones and gauge the
contribution of saline fluids on the stability of granitic-forming melts at
shallow crustal environments. The proposed study will promote understanding on
the mass and heat transfer associated with the deep Earth's hydrological cycle,
wherein water is carried into the mantle at subduction zones and released back
to the surface at volcanoes. Understanding the introduction, transport, and
storage of C-O-H volatiles in the interiors of terrestrial-like planets is
profoundly linked to the nature of habitability, the origin of life, and the
external evidence of conditions favorable for life. Structural characterization
of silicate melts and their glass-forming abilities are directly relevant to
materials and glass science. Experimental data will be made available to the
public through the Library of Experimental Phase Relations, and a data
repository hosted within the institution's web infrastructure. A series of
lectures and lab demonstrations/tours will be delivered to George Mason
University (GMU) undergraduate/graduate students, and some undergraduate
students from GMU will participate in the project during a 10-week summer
internship program, creating a strong partnership between a research-institution
(CIW) and a public state-funded University (GMU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
solubility and solution mechanisms of volatiles in silicate melts and aqueous
fluids governs mantle fluxes, and affects the properties of coexisting phases
such as diffusivity, electrical conductivity and viscosity. This has a profound
effect on the physical and chemical heterogeneities between the magmatic systems
developed along mid-ocean ridges, shallow continental crust and subduction
zones. Very little is known, however, about the silicate melt-fluid phase
relations, especially for saline fluids enriched in dissolved alkalis, alkaline
earths, and halogen ions. This proposal aims to explore the effect of dissolved
salts, fluid pH and melt peralkalinity on the phase relations between silicate
melts and crustal brines to better understand melt polymerization and C-O-H
solubility in the coexisting phases. This project will constrain the melt-fluid
relationships as function not only of pressure/temperature but also of relative
abundances and compositional variability of the coexisting phases. In a series
of hydrothermal diamond anvil cell experiments, Raman vibrational/Infrared
spectroscopy will be employed for the in-situ and real-time investigation of the
structure, volatile composition and properties of silicate melts coexisting with
electrolyte-enriched aqueous solutions. Experiments will reveal the interplay
between CO2 solubility, network-modifying cations and extent of melt
polymerization. The in-situ studies will be complimented by bulk CO2 solubility
measurements in glasses quenched from melt-fluid equilibria at high temperatures
and pressures. At the core of this effort is an innovative integration of ex-
situ and in-situ experimental protocols along with real-time chemical and
spectroscopic analysis. In this study, use of ultrapure synthetic diamond anvils
will increase tremendously the effectiveness of analytical methods that monitor
in-situ melt-fluid interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.