* 1761795
* Spokes: SMALL: SOUTH: Smart Privacy for Smart Cities: A Research Collaborative to Protect Privacy and Use Data Responsibly
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Jules Polonetsky, FPF Education and Innovation Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 02/28/2021
* USD 349,858.00

Today's cities and communities, and their residents, are increasingly connected,
and decisions are informed by actionable, real-time data. Data is making modern
cities and local communities faster and safer, as well as more sustainable,
livable, and equitable. At the same time, smart city technologies raise concerns
about individuals' privacy, autonomy, choice, and possible misuse. Government
officials are raising important questions about who should own data, how privacy
protections for public-facing technologies work, who and how to communicate with
the public about privacy, and more. The long-term vision of the project is to
help municipal leaders strengthen their ability to collect, use, and share data
in a responsible manner. This will help grow privacy-preserving innovations
across applications and geographic boundaries for the public good. In this way,
the Smart Privacy for Smart Cities Spoke will serve to increase public
knowledge, understanding and engagement with privacy-related concerns, and
ultimately promote the public's trust in smart city technologies and in their
local government.

The Smart Privacy for Smart Cities Spoke is a collaborative project led by the
FPF Education and Innovation Foundation (FPF EIF). It will undertake three
interrelated activities to help city/community innovators understand and
incorporate privacy considerations and protections into smart city projects.
First, the Spoke will produce a privacy risk assessment framework for smart city
projects, including guidance on what policies, practices and accountability
structures should be put in place and how to weigh benefits of new or expanded
data techniques against attendant privacy and security risks. The framework will
feature a de-identification component as de-identification is one of the primary
measures that organizations can take to protect and share data in a privacy-
preserving manner. Second, the Spoke will establish a network of privacy leaders
for smart cities and communities, helping municipal officials better understand,
communicate, and collaboratively address privacy issues and principles. Lastly,
the Spoke will hold two workshops in partnership with MetroLab Network, a
national network of 40+ city-university partnerships advancing technological
approaches to urban challenges. The workshops will serve to launch the privacy
leaders network; educate network members about the privacy risk assessment
framework; and identify areas for further collaboration and research,
particularly in applying the framework to specific technologies and data uses.
Expected project outcomes include wide dissemination of the privacy risk
assessment framework and its adoption in specific localities; development of new
collaborations and partnerships through the privacy leaders network and
associated workshops; and as an overall outcome, the advancement of civic
leaders' knowledge, understanding, and application of privacy protection(s)
toward standards of practice for smart cities and privacy. The project will
support and leverage the Hub Network, in particular the South Big Data Hub,
NSF's Smart and Connected Communities program, and the MetroLab Network of city-
university partners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.