* 1761423
* Acoustic Field Transport in Periodic and Disordered Metamaterials: a Fractional-order Continuum Approach.
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Fabio Semperlotti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,103.00

Acoustic metamaterials are engineered material-structures systems (or media)
that exhibit properties not readily achievable in natural materials. A
prototypical metamaterial consists of an assembly of structural elements in one
or more geometric shapes, sometimes characterized by a hierarchy of length
scales. One purpose for which metamaterials are frequently designed for is to
achieve a medium that is capable of transferring sound in remarkably unique ways
that are not found naturally. When sound propagates in a solid medium it gives
rise to noise and vibrations that, in the long term, are responsible for
structural deterioration and potentially catastrophic failure. The complexity
and multiscale nature of metamaterials poses many computational challenges that
have so far limited their use in real-world applications. This award supports
fundamental research to develop mathematical and computational methods that will
enable the design and simulation of metamaterials. The ability to design
materials capable of controlling the propagation of sound can have major
implications on the ability to achieve quieter, safer, and more durable
transportation systems and infrastructures in the fields of aerospace,
mechanical, civil, and biomedical engineering, thereby promoting the progress of
science; advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare; and securing the
national defense The educational part of this project involves developing new
tools and exercises to help students visualizing engineering concepts and
integrating them in the academic curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
takes full advantage of the potential and unique features of fractional calculus
to develop a computational continuum mechanics framework for the analysis of
acoustic field transport in metamaterials. Fractional order operators encompass
a variety of non-traditional properties ranging from memory effects to non-
locality, from multi-scale features to hybrid transport mechanisms that make
them uniquely suited to simulate the dynamics of elastic waves in inhomogeneous
media. The research will develop methodologies to synthesize fractional-order
wave propagation models from fundamental principles and it will apply them to
the design and performance prediction of periodic and random metamaterials. This
research will develop key capabilities at both physical and mathematical level.
At physical level, it will allow capturing and predicting anomalous acoustic
field transport mechanisms that otherwise would be undetected. At mathematical
level, it will develop methodologies to find exact or approximate analytical
solutions that would transform the way inverse material-design problems are
approached. The project has three main thrust areas: 1) development of the
necessary theoretical background to derive fractional continuum models of
inhomogeneous media from first principles, 2) application of the framework to
the analysis of periodic and disordered metamaterials with particular emphasis
on understanding anomalous propagation regimes, and 3) experimental validation
of the theoretical and computational framework on representative acoustic
metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.