* 1761060
* Collaborative Research: Controlled Investigation of Micro- and Nanoscale Contact Interactions Between Microbes and Biomaterials Using Artificial Bacteria
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2022
* USD 284,936.00

Moving bacteria and cells transport themselves though very dense environments of
long molecules during normal biological processes and disease. Examples are
sperm that travel through mucus in reproduction, bacteria of the nose, lung or
gut penetrating mucus during infection, and soil and oceanic bacteria migrating
through a bacterial mat of long-chain molecules. The molecules of mucus and
other molecules of the body are often about the same length as a microbe. This
means that individual and unpredictable interactions between microbes and
molecules change how the microbes move. Experimental evidence suggests that
microbial transport though such materials could be dominated by direct contact
interactions with the individual molecules. Contact interactions are difficult
to measure and their effect on locomotion is difficult to quantify. The overall
goal of this research is to quantify the effect of direct contact interactions
on the propulsion of bacteria. The research will use novel artificial bacteria,
'microrobots', and manufactured mucus to discover which contact interactions
dominate transport. The data will improve our ability to understand, perhaps to
control, the movement and spread of microorganisms in real-world environments.
The investigators will work with local K-12 students in an outreach program
named "Move Like a Microbe." The goal of the outreach is to intrigue the
students using new understanding of bacterial mobility and encourage them into a
science or technology (STEM) path in their later education. Understanding the
nanomechanics of microbe transport also will improve our abilities to control
disease and understand normal bacterial
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microstructural interactions with swimming
microorganisms have mostly been investigated using hydrodynamic and mechanical
models. There has been no in-depth examination of the role of contact
interactions mediated by electrostatic forces, van der Waals attraction, and
biochemical bonding. This research will advance understanding of bacterial
transport by combining new microrobotic artificial bacteria systems and a novel
semisynthetic mucus to allow well-controlled and well-characterized experiments.
The artificial models allow control of density, stiffness, surface charge,
surface chemistry, and micromechanical properties, to clarify the relative
importance of hydrodynamic, close-range, and nanoscale contact interactions for
microbial transport through biological media. Numerical modeling will be used to
integrate the interactions into quantitative models of transport. Finally,
natural bacteria will be observed moving through well-defined biomaterials and
their behavior will be correlated with that observed in the artificial systems,
in order to identify which contact interactions are most important for
biologically relevant scenarios, testing the hypothesis that contact
interactions dominate the effect of organism-scale microstructure on bacterial
swimming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.