* 1761132
* Non-Destructive Laser-Induced Transfer of Nanostructures to Flexible Substrates with Sub-5 Nanometer Resolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Chenglong Zhao, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2022
* USD 388,076.00

This grant supports the fundamental study of a new manufacturing process for
additive transfer of nanometer-sized structures that are a thousand times
smaller than the diameter of a human hair. The process uses a laser to lift the
nanostructure non-destructively and place it with sub-5 nanometer precision on a
flexible substrate. The process is affordable because it can be done under
ambient conditions. Such a capability is important for applications such as
wearables, sensors, and other flexible electronics, the economic manufacture of
which advances the prosperity and security of the nation. Additive manufacturing
or three-dimensional printing is widely used by engineers and designers for
rapid prototyping customizable products. Unfortunately, such a rapid prototyping
technique is yet to be developed for the nanoscale and for flexible substrates.
The importance of manufacturing at the nanoscale lies in the extraordinary
properties that materials exhibit at such small scales. Therefore, the ability
to manufacture three-dimensional nanometer-sized structures becomes critically
important to explore new properties and applications of nanomaterials. Reliable
and cost-effective manufacturing of nanostructures and devices on flexible
substrates has become increasingly important for the production of wearable
devices with a worldwide market expected to reach USD 50 Billion by 2022. This
award supports research on nanoscale three-dimensional printing that can enable
rapid prototyping of both two-dimensional and three-dimensional nanostructures
on flexible substrates. This award also enables broad participation of women and
underrepresented minority students in research and education and STEM training
of the next-generation workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The additive
nanomanufacturing method in this research overcomes many limitations that
commonly exist in conventional nanomanufacturing methods, which are high-cost,
time-consuming, incompatibility with flexible substrates, and lack of
customization. This research utilizes localized heating from a low-cost
continuous-wave laser to lift-off nanostructures of virtually any shape and
size. Through precise electrical manipulation, the lifted nanostructures are
transfered and additively placed on flexible, conformal or rigid substrates,
non-destructively, to form 3D and 3D nanoscale patterns with sub-5nm resolution.
The whole manufacturing process happens under ambient conditions without the
need of high-voltage or vacuum, which makes it cost-effective. The project
involves precise position and temperature measurements to study the fundamental
mechanisms for this manufacturing process. The initial speed and angular
distribution of the lifted nanostructures are measured quantitatively by using
optical forward scattered detection. The localized temperature in the
manufacturing process is measured with temperature sensitive luminescent probes.
Selective and compatible nanomanufacturing of complementary, 2D and 3D
nanostructures, with high precision nano-scale gaps on flexible substrates are
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.