* 1761019
* Collaborative Research: Scaffolding Explanations and Epistemic Development for Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2023
* USD 638,595.00

The goal of this project is to help students learn to use different kinds of
evidence in thinking about and creating models of complex systems. Thinking
about systems is increasingly important for students to understand complex
topics in science and engineering. Building models based on evidence is
important for helping students think critically in general, and about complex
systems ideas in particular. To support students in these efforts, the project
develops an easy-to-use software modeling tool that supports students in
creating models while concurrently indicating the sources of evidence (data,
simulations, etc.) that support their model-building choices. The products of
this project, which include software, curriculum, and assessments, increase the
capacity to engage young learners in ambitious science educational experiences
that are consistent with the Next Generation Science Standards. Outcomes of the
project include professional development materials, scaffolding tools, and
assessments which will be made freely available via the project website. This
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project transforms the way simulations are
used to help students develop scientific practices, epistemologies, and content
knowledge within elementary school science classrooms. It explores how 5th grade
students treat simulations as similar to and distinct from other sources of
evidence when engaged in scientific inquiry. By carefully selecting disparate
and sometimes contradictory forms of evidence, the project challenges students
to reflect upon their beliefs about how simulations of scientific concepts both
do, and do not reflect the phenomena under study. Building on past work, the
project is developing a scaffolded framework for teaching students about complex
systems concepts in the context of aquatic ecosystems. This software and
associated curriculum aims to help students engage deeply with the specific
biology content, the important cross-cutting systems concepts that it
represents, and the crucial scientific practices that are involved in
constructing scientific models based on multiple disparate forms of evidence.
This project will therefore focus on two of the key cross-cutting concepts from
the Next Generation Science Standards--systems thinking and scientific
practices. The project investigates the efficacy of posited scaffolds and
interventions through three complementary approaches: tutoring studies in more
controlled settings with smaller sample sizes, design experiments in five fifth-
grade classrooms, and a quasi-experimental study. The classroom design
experiments and experimental studies are carried out in diverse educational
settings in Indiana and New Jersey. Outcomes measured include both student
growth and discourse and interactions from video analysis. Measures of student
growth include interviews and written student artifacts. Measures of discourse
and interactions are coded as variables derived from video analysis. The
findings support designers, researchers, and educators who not only make use of
simulations in science curricula, but help situate them within robust scientific
practices and habits of mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.