* 1761742
* Merchant Operations of Energy and Commodity Conversion Assets Considering Market Incompleteness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Nicola Secomandi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 280,073.00

This award will promote the development of national prosperity and economic
welfare by investigating effective operations of critical energy and commodity
infrastructure systems. Merchant operations must manage the operational
flexibility embedded in physical energy conversion assets, such as power plants,
refineries, and storage and transport facilities. These systems form the
backbone of energy and commodity physical markets, which in turn form the basis
for the functioning of their associated financial markets. Incompleteness of
these financial markets reduces the productivity of existing energy and
commodity physical assets and hampers investment in new assets. This project
explicitly addresses market incompleteness and supports the development of
integrated operations and hedging practices to help asset managers achieve
improved valuation, operations, and risk management. A better understanding of
the impact of reduced energy and commodity market incompleteness on economic
efficiency can also inform related policy making. The associated educational
plan fosters interest in energy and commodity markets analytics based on
curriculum innovation and electronic archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a decision-making framework that directly accounts for
market incompleteness when managing on a merchant basis energy and commodity
conversion assets modeled as real options. It will have potential applicability
for the valuation, exercise, and hedging of both financial and real options that
arise in contexts that transcend the energy and commodity industries. This
approach contrasts common tactics that assume away market incompleteness when
devising operating policies, effectively decoupling their optimization from that
of financial hedging policies. It is also distinct from schemes that rely on the
calibration of risk propensity parameters. The methodology in this project will
extend the realm of applicability of quadratic hedging, integrating it with the
optimization of operating policies for energy and commodity infrastructure. It
will produce tractable algorithms for the computation of near optimal operating
and financial hedging policies relying on and extending state-of-the-art
approximate dynamic programming techniques. The performance of these methods
will be assessed using available market and operational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.