* 1761843
* RAPID: Emergence of ethnic social network and disaster resilience
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2019
* USD 90,372.00

Hurricane Harvey was catastrophic and extremely destructive and it presented
unprecedented challenges for disaster relief, recovery, and rebuild. Numerous
studies have examined the crisis management and disaster recovery support
paradigm. Most of these research efforts, however, have focused on time critical
information sharing among emergency service providers. In contrast, social
support groups that are formed organically through grassroots efforts take
advantage of the interactive nature of social media and allow their users to
actively engage in two-way or multi-way conversations, post comments and
reactions, which may serve to offer opportunities for correction of low-quality
information. This project advances understanding of risk communication by
incorporating social capital theories in the context of an ongoing risk event,
which allows the assessment of risk perceptions as they are being formed and
risk communication behaviors in motion.This research focuses on the Chinese
American community in Houston, who were united through the popular social media
platform WeChat. The project, inspired by stories from victims with first-hand
experience with Harvey, examines this burgeoning ethnic network and how it
contributes to disaster resilience, which is defined as the sustained ability of
a community to withstand and recover from adversity. Buttressed by existing
online and offline social networks, the entire community's disaster resilience
improved because ordinary citizens were able to receive useful information and
other social support directly and efficiently, when access to emergency service
providers and government agencies was disrupted.

Although focusing on one particular ethnic group may appear microscopic, this
case study will offer broader implications for other communities bounded by a
shared geographic location. RAPID Specifically, the goal of the proposed
research is to conduct a survey among Chinese American WeChat users to 1) assess
attributes of individuals, including their psychological attributes such as
hazard experience and risk perception, as well as demographic attributes such as
incomes, occupation, and education; 2) gather relational data, such as contacts,
ties and connections, and group attachments and embeddedness into the local
community; 3) identify key opinion leaders and map out effective pathways for
the dissemination of relief/recovery information. The research objectives are to
determine (1) the network structures of existing support groups, both online and
offline, and track their development and evolvement during the immediate
recovery periods post-Harvey; (2) the demographic and psychographic attributes
that denote key opinion leaders in these networks; and, (3) the most valuable
information sources and pathways of information sharing that improve disaster
resilience in the local community. The data collection entails a survey among
Chinese American residents of the metropolitan Houston area who use the social
media application WeChat. With an estimated margin of error at ±4%, 95%
confidence level, the sample size needed is 590 to provide good representation
of the Chinese American population in Houston, approximately 33,000.