* 1761561
* Reflected-Light Polarization Imaging to Quantify Tissue Microstructure and Damage
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Viktor Gruev, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 04/30/2022
* USD 388,541.00

Tendons and ligaments transfer forces from muscle to bone or between bones. They
are made of collagen that is susceptible to both mechanical and chemical damage.
Collagen damage can change the stiffness and strength of tendons or ligaments to
cause pain and disability. It is difficult to study this type of tissue injury
because we don't have good laboratory methods to see the damage as it occurs.
This research will use a new imaging technique that can see tissue changes
during mechanical loading. A novel video camera that sees properties of light
that are invisible to the human eye will record how the linear structures of the
tendons and ligaments are broken by loading that causes damage. Visually
following the degradation of the collagen during the process of mechanical
degeneration will make it possible to test new methods to prevent damage or to
treat the injuries. The research will train graduate students in advanced
biomechanics methods. The project includes writing a multimedia iBook on
ligament and tendon function to improve interactive workshops for K-12 students
and to make it easier to give biomechanics educational materials to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to use
polarization imaging to advance the microstructural analysis of connective
tissues and link the dynamic organization of soft tissues to altered mechanical
function in damage and degeneration. This project will establish a novel
reflected-light quantitative polarization light imaging (rQPLI) technique using
a tissue analog experimental system and computational simulations. This
technique will then be used to track local, mechanically-induced damage in
fatigue-loaded ligament and to quantify time-dependent biologically-induced
degeneration in tendon. rQPLI will overcome limitations of previous approaches
and greatly advance polarization imaging for use in musculoskeletal mechanics.
This study will examine intact, large-scale, full-thickness tissues that were
impossible to evaluate previously, enabling detection and quantification of
region-specific, microscopic, structural changes that occur during loading in
real-time. This novel imaging technique will enhance optical measurement of
tissue microstructure and advance polarization imaging techniques for
applications in musculoskeletal biomechanics. Results will lay the foundation
for future projects that further advance study of multiscale mechanics and
microstructural evaluation, and enhance fundamental understanding of structure-
function relationships in normal, damaged, degenerate, and healing connective
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.