* 1761414
* RAPID Collaborative Research: Do mangroves provide better coastal protection than salt marshes? A Hurricane Harvey case study from Port Aransas, Texas, USA
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Anna Armitage, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2019
* USD 122,935.00

Coastal marshes provide critical ecosystem services, including erosion
prevention and shoreline protection from storm surges that often result when
hurricanes make landfall. For several years, vegetation in coastal wetlands has
been shifting from grasses and forbs to taller, woody mangroves, raising
concerns about the impact these changes may have on these important ecosystem
services. Over the past several years, scientists have been conducting a large
mangrove removal experiment to study the ecological consequences of mangrove
expansion near Port Aransas, Texas. Hurricane Harvey made landfall near this
experiment, providing an unprecedented opportunity to study the immediate
impacts of mangrove expansion on shoreline protection and other vital ecosystem
services. This RAPID award will allow scientists to gain knowledge on the role
of coastal wetlands that will be extremely valuable to coastal managers
responsible for restoration and management projects along shorelines vulnerable
to future hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a critical
understanding of the impact of mangrove expansion on the role of coastal
wetlands in the provision of critical ecosystem services in response to intense
storms. Hurricane Harvey provides a unique opportunity to answer a critical
question - do mangroves provide fundamentally different shoreline protection
than the low stature grasses and forbs they replace? The researchers conducting
this study are using a pre-existing mangrove removal experiment that was in the
path of the hurricane to test the hypothesis that large woody plants like
mangroves are better able to resist these large storms, and therefore provide
improved shoreline protection. This work will also provide a better conceptual
understanding to the role of biotic factors in regulating the impact of large
storms. This information is of critical importance to land managers responsible
for restoring the ecosystem services coastal wetlands can provide.