* 1761185
* The Two- to Four-year Institutional Pathway to STEM Degrees: An Empirical Study of Broadening Participation in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Heather Thiry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,473,725.00

Given their accessibility and affordability, community colleges attract high
numbers of minority, low-income, and first-generation students. Despite their
potential to diversify the STEM workforce, few studies have sought to capture
how community colleges serve underrepresented students in STEM courses and
degree programs. Further, there is a limited understanding of what leads
underrepresented community college students to transfer to and attain STEM
degrees from four-year institutions. Taking a systems-level approach to
broadening participation, this project asks, "How do diverse students
successfully navigate two- to four-year institutional pathways in STEM and what
are the institutional practices and resources that support their progress
through to bachelor degree attainment?" It aims to answer this question by
developing descriptive case studies of three pairs of two- and four-year
institutions with transfer and degree completion rates that surpass their
comparable peers. In short, it uses models of success to understand what keeps
diverse students in the STEM educational pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded
in practice theory, which focuses on interactions between individuals and
institutions, the project uses mixed methods (e.g., interviews, surveys,
academic transcript records and artifacts such as course catalogs) to: (a)
Investigate the institutional practices that support transfer and persistence in
STEM; (b) Track community college STEM students' pathways to transfer and follow
through in a four-year institution; and (c) Compare the experiences, identity
development and persistence of transfer and non-transfer students pursuing
bachelor's degrees in STEM. Practically, by describing how students navigate
transfer pathways and institutional systems to succeed in STEM and identifying
the array of resources they draw on to succeed, the project can inform the
development of practices and interventions that are sensitive to the needs of
diverse students, both in and out of the classroom. Intellectually, the study
aims to develop actionable theories and explanations for diverse students'
transfer in STEM undergraduate education by identifying the explicit and
implicit institutional practices, resources, and policies that facilitate STEM
transfer. This project exemplifies the Education and Human Resources Core
Research program's commitment to fundamental research on learning in STEM that
combines theory, techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of disciplines
and contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.