* 1761743
* Bubble-printing of Colloidal Nanoparticles into Functional Materials and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Yuebing Zheng, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2023
* USD 446,633.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge in printing
technology, which is manufacturing with colloidal nanoparticles as building
blocks. Printing of colloidal nanoparticles into functional materials and
devices provides an economically viable way towards manufacturing nano-scale
structures and components for diverse applications such as sensing, energy
harvesting, solid-state lighting, and information displays. Such a technological
capability advances national prosperity and security. Printing techniques such
as gravure printing and inkjet printing have advantages in eliminating tedious
mask alignment and multi-step processes required in conventional lithography for
device fabrication. However, existing printing techniques have low resolution,
considerable post-processing time, and special requirements on the properties of
colloidal solutions. Bubble printing exploits optically controlled bubbles to
enable versatile patterning of colloidal particles on most substrates. This
award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of bubble printing into a viable technology for both prototyping and
scalable manufacturing of functional materials and devices. The research is at
the interfaces of photonics, fluidics, colloidal science, and manufacturing
sciences, provides interdisciplinary research opportunities for students and
helps broaden participation of women and underrepresented minority students in
manufacturing and engineering. The incorporation of the research results into
outreach programs helps promote public interest in nanotechnology and scientific
advancement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bubble printing employs a laser beam to
generate a microbubble at the interface of colloidal suspension and a substrate
via opto-thermal effects. The bubble captures and immobilizes the colloidal
nanoparticles on the substrate through coordinated actions of Marangoni
convection, surface tension, gas pressure, and substrate adhesion. Bubble
printing can overcome the limitations of existing printing techniques such as
poor resolution and feature fidelity. However, some scientific barriers need to
be overcome to realize the full potential of bubble printing for scalable
fabrication of functional materials and devices from colloidal particles. This
research is to fill the knowledge gap on the mechanisms of bubble generation and
printing. The research approach is to perform experiments supported by
simulations to advance the fundamental understanding of bubble dynamics and
nanoparticle assembly, and elucidate the novel physical mechanism for rapid
transport, capture and targeted immobilization of colloidal particles at the
generation of multiple microbubbles. The project develops a system for scalable
printing of functional materials and devices with high resolution, throughput,
stability and reproducibility, and demonstrate the capability of bubble printing
for site-specific fabrication and integration of multiple functional devices on
single platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.