* 1761190
* Collaborative Research: How Science Fieldwork Experiences Impact Undergraduate Students' STEM Academic and Career Decisions
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Julie Sexton, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 619,776.00

The representation of women in the earth, atmospheric, and ocean sciences
workforce is significantly lower than that of female undergraduate students
majoring in these disciplines. This underrepresentation limits the available
role models for female undergraduate and graduate students, and female
scientists working in industry. It is critical to understand the factors that
may influence why male or female undergraduate students pursue the STEM
workforce or not. Advancing a diverse and technically competent STEM workforce
is critical to the progress of science and the health, prosperity and welfare of
our nation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project team is investigating the
contextual components of social cognitive career theory to explore how male and
female undergraduate geology students successfully navigate scientific fieldwork
experiences as they pursue academic and career paths. More specifically,
knowledge will be advanced about how social, cultural, educational, and identity
variables interact with each other during and after fieldwork to affect
transitions from undergraduate education to graduate education or industry
employment. Mixed methods research will include the collection and analysis of
survey and interview data. Results will be examined to advance knowledge about
how and why STEM undergraduates who do field work pursue STEM careers, and to
inform future educational research on social cognitive career theory as it
applies to STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.