* 1761203
* Standard: RR - The Ethics of Archiving and Reusing Qualitative Data: Guidelines for Practice
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Shelley Feldman, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,058.00

This workshop that will advance scholarly research by developing guidelines for
the archiving, sharing, and reuse of qualitative data. By focusing on the
development of guidelines that are sensitive to the ethical and epistemological
concerns entailed in making qualitative data public, the workshop will move
beyond debates focused on the contrasts between qualitative and quantitative
research. These guidelines will offer a practical resource for use by
qualitative researchers (graduate students, senior scholars, policy analysts,
and project and program staff), IRBs, and other institutional bodies charged
with oversight regarding the ethical conduct of qualitative research. In
addition, they will be of interest to researchers and stakeholders beyond the
academy, including NGOs, not-for-profit agencies, and funding institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making qualitative data publically available has become
salient at a time when there are increasing calls for transparency in the
conduct of social research. Responding to this call may be most readily
accomplished by researchers whose large quantitative data sets can be anonymized
and when consent appears to be either straightforward, or these data are already
in the public domain. This workshop will focus on the ethical challenges of
archiving qualitative inquiry and the transferability of quantitative data
archiving, sharing, and reuse. A multidisciplinary group of workshop
participants who are sensitive to ethical concerns of informed consent and
preserving confidentiality, as well as on the epistemic assumptions that
underlie interpretive research methods will develop draft guidelines for making
qualitative data public. Once the guidelines are finalized they will be
disseminated to members of academic and research communities, organizations,
funders, and journal editors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.