* 1761735
* Spokes: MEDIUM: SOUTH: Collaborative: Integrating Biological Big Data Research into Student Training and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Guohao He, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,996.00

The project is a collaborative effort among the University of Tennessee
Chattanooga, Tuskegee University, Spelman College, and West Virginia University
to integrate and automate biological big data into student training and
education. Leveraging the team's expertise in computer science and ecology, the
project will offer training workshops on using network models to integrate
heterogeneous genomic big data and heterogeneous ecological big data to address
life sciences questions. The team will engage faculty and students in developing
a protocol to automate field data collection. The team also will prototype
automated methods to enhance plant digitization, leveraging the collection of
digitized plant images and meta-information at the Southeast Regional Network of
Expertise and Collections, as well as the ecological datasets in collaboration
with the Encyclopedia of Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are
to (1) enhance faculty expertise in big biological data through summer
workshops; (2) catalyze interdisciplinary collaboration on big biological data
research and education through hackathons, working groups, and community-
building via a Video Education Faculty Network; and (3) develop hands-on,
constructively peer-evaluated learning modules incorporating high-quality video
tutorials. The proposed activities will address challenges surrounding the
integration and automation of big biological data into education and training at
predominantly undergraduate institutions and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities. The project will help bridge the gaps between big biological data
and the fields of systems biology, ecology and evolution, and environmental
sciences. Overall, the project will catalyze collaborations among diverse
institutions and disciplines while increasing diversity in big data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education: Education and Human Resources (IUSE): EHR Program (NSF 17-590).
IUSE supports projects that are designed to improve student learning through
development of new curricular materials and methods of instruction and
development of new assessment tools to measure student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.