* 1761548
* Discovering and Demonstrating Linguistic Features for Language Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Graham Neubig, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 466,000.00

Documenting endangered languages is matter of great urgency, but is also a time-
consuming process. Annotation and curation of speech and text data, searching
for interesting, prototypical, or atypical entries, and marshalling examples for
pedagogy or publication are still mostly manual processes. This project aims to
speed these processes by (1) creating better tools for the automated analysis
of&lt;br/&gt;smaller and partially-annotated corpora, which have potential to
reduce the amount of time required by linguists to manually annotate these
corpora, and (2) creating better methods for linguists to browse their collected
data and answer questions about the characteristics of the language at hand. The
intellectual contribution of this proposal will lie in the development of new
computational methods for natural language processing (NLP) for endangered
languages, and their evaluation, both in controlled environments and as a tool
for linguists in the field. It will also have broader impact in the creation of
new tools and standards for linguistic documentation,increased collaboration
between linguists and computer scientists, and training of a graduate student in
the technologies and practices necessary to move this collaboration forward. The
training component will increase the STEM workforce capacity in computational
linguistics, important given the need for more advanced tools in working on
languages that are underdocumented and spoken in countries that are key to
national interests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a specific methodology to realize
this vision, this project focuses on recent development of massively
multilingual NLP models based on neural networks. These methods work by creating
NLP using data from a large number of languages, then using the information
gleaned from these languages to improve the accuracy of processing on a new
language with a paucity of training data. Within this framework, three major
research questions will be examined: (1) How can these techniques be efficiently
applied to very-low-resource languages,especially those in the early stages of
text collection? (2) What methods can be used to move beyond sentence-by-
sentence analyses, and synthesize information about the entirety of the language
to propose a simple grammatical specification? (3) Is it possible to provide
examples that support typological predictions for a linguist to read and learn
more about the nuances of the language they are analyzing? All three of these
research questions will be examined in a rigorous process of devising methods,
testing on existing data sets for well-resourced languages, and finally
deployment to field linguists to examine how they improve the efficiency or
accuracy of the language documentation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.