* 1761154
* CareerWise III: Intersectional Perspectives on Perceived Supports &amp; Persistence Among Diverse Women in STEM Doctoral Programs
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Kerrie Wilkins-Yel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 02/29/2020
* USD 246,526.00

This study will investigate the associations between perceived supports and
persistence for both majority (Caucasian) women and underrepresented minority
(URM) women in STEM doctoral programs. Women leave doctoral programs in STEM at
higher rates than their white male counterparts. Reducing the attrition of these
talented individuals from STEM is of particular importance given that diversity
at all levels of the STEM workforce has been shown to benefit the outcomes of
related scientific research. The proposed work will increase understanding of
the reasons for the underrepresentation of women in STEM academic and research
careers. Key research findings will be incorporated in the online CareerWISE
resilience training intervention and will provide the foundation for informing
and educating key support sources about how to strengthen support for women in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the overarching research
question of: How do experiences of perceived support play a role in the academic
persistence of diverse female doctoral students in STEM? The project proposes
three studies, each of which utilizes different research methods, and are guided
by the theoretical lens of Social Cognitive Career Theory. The "reflections
study" will produce qualitative data about the nature of support episodes, and
the sources, types, and timing of interpersonal support that were most effective
in mitigating discouragement and stresses from difficulties experienced in STEM
doctoral programs. The lab-based "communications of support" study will provide
real-time observations of how support is communicated between a faculty mentor
and an advanced stage doctoral student. Finally, the "first and second year
support experiences" study will assess support experiences that take place
during the critical early stages of doctoral study. Participants in the studies
will include current STEM doctoral students, early career professionals who have
recently graduated from doctoral programs, and women who left their STEM
doctoral programs prior to completing their degrees. Data across the studies
will be collected from interviews, surveys, daily journals, and lab-based
observation. The project is supported by the Education and Human Resources Core
Research Program (ECR), which funds fundamental research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.