* 1761546
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven Mechanism Design for Combinatorial Auctions and Exchanges
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Amy Greenwald, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 347,917.00

This award promises to contribute to the nation's economic prosperity by
improving the efficiency of market mechanisms. Market mechanisms increase the
welfare of market participants by enabling the transfer of goods and services
from those who ascribe a low value to their holdings to those who ascribe a
higher value to them. Combinatorial auctions and exchanges are market mechanisms
that allow agents to specify preferences (via bids and offers) over bundles of
assets (goods, services, rights). The value of an item may depend on whether an
agent owns a different item, so the value of a bundle of items may differ from
the sum of the values of individual items in the bundle. There are many
important domains where the need for such mechanisms arise, such as wireless
spectrum markets, which transfer radio spectrum rights from governments to
mobile phone carriers and between carriers, truckload transportation, and the
leasing market for cloud computing resources. Each of these markets involves the
transfer of billions of dollars, and in many cases, the assets are publicly
owned. The project will involve undergraduate and graduate student training, and
will also support the outreach activities of the PIs in organizing college
student volunteers to teach STEM subjects to inner-city K-12 public school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As there are multiple design objectives in the
construction of market mechanisms (efficiency, revenue, incentives, simplicity,
etc.), there is no single perfect market design involving combinatorial values.
Instead, there is a substantial literature in which a large variety of designs
have been suggested. What is missing from this literature, however, is a sound
methodology for comparing competing designs under realistic models of
participants' values. This project addresses this shortcoming by creating a
simulation platform that will support data-driven comparisons of combinatorial
market designs in the spectrum auction and cloud computing domains. This
platform will be open and accessible to the research community, practitioners,
and public agencies to rigorously evaluate existing market designs, variations
on those designs, and entirely new designs, and to definitively point to
features that render some designs better than others in their chosen application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.