* 1761110
* A Learning Environment to Support Comprehension Monitoring with Informational Science Text
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Rayne Sperling, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,469,395.00

The goal of this Education and Human Resources Core Research project is to
better understand how technology-based learning environments impact students'
scientific literacy. The project will address the need to equip students with
the skills to read and interpret scientific texts in a manner that facilitates
solving real-world scientific problems. The learning environment will deliver
"missions" related to three essential curricular units pertinent to 5th grade
built in a framework potentially scalable for the comprehensive grade
curriculum. Through a pedagogical agent, Monty, and a cast of interactive
characters, the program will impact scientific literacy with informational texts
to improve science conceptual knowledge, comprehension-monitoring skills, and
argumentation, encourage mastery and growth mindset approaches, and increase
self-efficacy and interest with science topics more broadly. The project will
also test the efficacy for students to transfer what they have learned outside
of the game on project-based classroom activities. A highly diverse sample of
students will participate that includes large numbers of minority,
international, ESL (English as a Second Language) status, and economically
disadvantaged students. The resulting system will be accessible and inclusive
for all learners as a pedagogical tool to enhance traditional classroom
instruction that includes a teacher dashboard for monitoring and assessment
purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two primary programmatic goals include: 1) to
design, develop, and iteratively refine the learning environment for 5th grade
students that improves comprehension monitoring and supports science learning
and 2) to increase current theoretical and practical understanding of how
elementary students engage with and monitor their comprehension of informational
science texts. The program will function within a self-regulated learning
framework and include three key curricular units (ecosystems, Earth and human
activity, from molecules to organisms) that align with Next Generation Science
Standards. A systematic program of studies will be conducted starting from
design-based studies in Years 1 &amp; 2 to test digital strategy tools and game-
based elements followed by experimental studies in Years 2 &amp; 3 to examine
the influence of both embedded comprehension monitoring tools and adaptive
scaffolding. A mixed method measurement approach will be adopted along with an
iterative program development model. Measures of content learning, metacognitive
monitoring, transfer, and motivational and affect variables (e.g. self-efficacy,
interest) will be targeted to inform the literature. Design studies will further
examine the impact of the environment with regard to ethnicity, gender,
socioeconomic status, ESL status, prior gaming experience, and achievement
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.