* 1761549
* RAPID: Evacuate or Not? Modeling the Decision Making of Individuals in Impending Disaster Areas
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Adam Goodie, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 107,717.00

A category 4 hurricane is approaching. Should a potentially affected individual
follow the official orders and evacuate, or stay in place? Millions of
individuals situated in vulnerable areas face this grave question as imminent
disaster threatens. Many choose to leave, whereas some do not. Numerous
interviews with such persons clearly convey their conviction in having made the
right choice. This RAPID project will identify the variables that significantly
influence the decision making of individuals in impending disaster areas, and it
will contribute to the understanding of how the variables are utilized
differently by different individuals. These insights will help to build new
computational models of the individual's decision making under uncertainty, in
extreme situations such as hurricanes and other natural disasters. The focus
disasters will be the impacts of Hurricane Harvey on the Texas coast and
Hurricane Irma on Florida and Georgia. Outcomes could augment evacuation efforts
with actions on the ground that target those most likely to ignore official
recommendations. Furthermore, such modeling will likely help relief-and-rescue
efforts to better coordinate and provide faster relief with increased precision.
Outcomes from this research will be integrated into the classroom instruction of
courses taught by the PIs, which will provide students with exposure to how
decision-making science can have real-world impact even under the most extreme
circumstances.

The technical approach begins with characterizing the affected classes of
individuals of interest. Next, various types of data about them will be
gathered. In particular, interviews of affected individuals before the impending
disaster and after, as reported by various news agencies, relevant social media
messages originating from disaster areas, government data on evacuees and their
demographics, and other survey instruments will be used to build a comprehensive
data set for analysis. These data will be sifted to infer the significant
variables and how they interact in individual decision making. The analysis and
data will be used to build empirically-informed decision making models, which
will combine principled agent-based modeling with parametric human judgment and
choice models. The exploratory nature of this research makes model evaluation
particularly important. Performance of the various models on the data will be
compared based on their fits and qualitative assessments. This research plan is
expected to yield validated models of the decision-making processes of several
affected individuals for government use and further study.