* 1761461
* RAPID: Coordinated Structural Engineering Reconnaissance for 2017 Hurricane Irma
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Tracy Kijewski-Correa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2019
* USD 80,110.00

Post-disaster, rapid response research reconnaissance is one of the most
powerful means to understand the effects of natural hazards on the nation's
built environment. The structural engineering community's ability to advance
windstorm design and construction methodologies is greatly informed by
systematically documenting the performance of residential homes, buildings, and
other civil infrastructure under actual hazard conditions. The 2017 hurricane
season has been an especially unprecedented venue for such investigations. The
season included Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic Hurricane on record,
sustaining 185-mph winds and Category 5 status longer than any prior storm. Irma
left a path of considerable destruction across the Caribbean. The U.S. Virgin
Islands and Puerto Rico were exposed to Irma's full Category 5 strength,
claiming three lives and compromising basic infrastructure in Puerto Rico, while
delivering staggering damage to the U.S. Virgin Islands. Irma eventually made
its first landfall in the continental U.S. on Cudjoe Key in southern Florida
early on Sunday, September 10, 2017, passing just 20 miles from Key West with
Category 4 winds that reached 130 miles per hour. Irma downgraded to a Category
3 storm as it made its second landfall later that afternoon on Marco Island,
just south of Naples on Florida's Gulf Coast, with sustained winds near 120
miles per hour. Irma continued to move northward along Florida's Gulf Coast,
weakening to a Category 2 storm and eventually to a Tropical Storm. Even in its
weakened state, Irma claimed 26 lives, crippled power infrastructure, destroyed
roofs, and instigated structural failures across the state of Florida, including
the widely publicized failures of multiple construction cranes in Miami. The
widespread infrastructure damage from Irma provides a valuable real-world
testbed for structural wind and coastal engineers, as well as the building
industry as a whole, to document infrastructure performance and damage data to
advance understanding of hurricane-resistant design and construction practices
in the United States. Under this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), a
central coordination node at the University of Notre Dame will link a network of
regional nodes at universities across Florida and Puerto Rico (Florida Institute
of Technology, Florida International University, University of Florida, and
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez), to orchestrate a wide-spread structural
wind and coastal engineering reconnaissance effort in the weeks following
Hurricane Irma to capture this valuable perishable damage data. Data obtained
from this field work will be organized and documented, through a data node at
Auburn University, and then shared with other researchers through the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org).

In this RAPID study, teams of researchers and students will form around each
regional node to survey and document structural damage and other storm impacts
from Hurricane Irma in four waves targeting Florida's Atlantic Coast, its Gulf
Coast, its Keys, and the U.S. territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin
Islands. The extensive domestic footprint of this investigation will allow
researchers to study a range of hurricane-driven hazards from Category 5 to
Tropical Storm intensities in order to respond to critical questions
surrounding: (1) the performance of distinctive construction practices in these
regions for a range of building and infrastructure classes, paying particular
attention to the performance of Floridian practices regarded as a leader in
resilient coastal construction, (2) the effectiveness of current mitigation
strategies and enhanced building design methods, (3) the impact of recurring
storm events on failure probabilities for homes exposed to both Hurricanes
Matthew (2016) and Irma (2017), and (4) the performance of new building envelope
technologies against water intrusion. This effort will further build the
capacity of the structural wind engineering research community to rapidly
organize and deploy post-disaster investigation teams by developing: (1)
policies and data standards for effective geographically-distributed
reconnaissance, (2) digital workflows that can enable the swift capture and
curation of perishable data, and (3) public engagement mechanisms to crowdsource
damage assessments.