* 1761068
* CDS&amp;E: Better by Design: Establishing Modeling and Optimization Techniques for Producing New Classes of Biomimetic Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Benjamin Peherstorfer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 02/28/2023
* USD 554,732.00

Novel nanomaterials with precisely tailored characteristics can enable
innovation in areas ranging from manufacturing to energy storage and drug
delivery but designing such materials can be a challenge. This project develops
modeling and optimization techniques that will enable researchers to use desired
properties to drive materials and process selection. The researcher harnesses
the power of mesoscale modeling techniques and computational methods based on
Bayesian machine learning and stochastic optimization to search the vast
universe of options to identify promising candidates. This approach gives the
community an enabling predictive tool for analysis and design of polymer-based
nanomaterials. The knowledge gained from this research will be broadly
disseminated through publications, conference presentations and by organizing
symposia. Educational and outreach programs will be developed to train a diverse
STEM workforce and to broaden participation of underrepresented students in the
fields of engineering and computational science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Integrating a mesoscale coarse-graining method with stochastic
optimization provides an enabling tool in soft materials and advances knowledge
about design exploration in high-dimensional search spaces and design
optimization under uncertainty. The goal of this project is to significantly
reduce the cost of simulating the molecular self-assembly process and the
characteristics of assembled materials. The researcher will develop a mesoscale
model that describes the dynamics of self-assembly and simulates and predicts
the structures and mechanical properties of assembled materials. A coarse-
grained approach balances the need for accuracy in material properties, which is
the basis for optimization, and the computational efficiency needed to make the
optimization feasible. The computational framework, which includes the mesoscale
modeling, classification, and optimization steps, will be validated by
comparison with experiments on peptoids. This research will enable inverse
design of peptoid-based biomimetic nanomaterials with precisely tailored
structures and properties for applications such as chemical/biological sensors,
biomimetic nanodevices and water/ion transport membranes. The computational
methodology will be shared through GitHub and as LAMMPS subroutines and the
computer codes will be released to the scientific community as open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.