* 1762477
* Characterizing the Dynamics of the Laser Metal Deposition Additive Manufacturing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Lianyi Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2020
* USD 379,290.00

Laser metal deposition (LMD), also called blown-powder direct laser deposition,
is an important additive manufacturing technique for producing customized and
functionally-graded parts for a variety of applications in the aerospace,
automobile, biomedical and defense industries. Even though investment in current
research in, and development of, LMD technology is growing quickly, significant
challenges remain in production of metal parts with repeatable and predictable
properties. This research project will explore in detail the processes of LMD;
identify the sources of defect formation and part quality uncertainties; and lay
the groundwork for creating repeatable and predictable properties in LMD
manufacturing. The research project includes rich educational and outreach
components, which will provide undergraduate and graduate students with exposure
to additive manufacturing. An e-Learning module will be developed to disseminate
the data and knowledge obtained by this project. The knowledge allow modelers to
improve and validate models and simulation tools. This research will therefore
advance competitiveness of U.S. industry, supporting domestic economic growth
and national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
research is to characterize the dynamics of the LMD process beneath the surface
of the melt pool at a high spatial and temporal resolution to understand the
fundamental mechanisms of the LMD process. The specific objectives of this
research project are to characterize: (1) the dynamics of melt pool formation
and evolution, and melt flow within the melt pool; (2) the dynamics of pore
formation and evolution; (3) the material mixing behavior during blowing powders
with different compositions; and (4) the dynamics of the solidification process
during LMD. The research approach uses in-situ high-speed high-energy and high-
resolution synchrotron x-ray imaging and high-speed high-energy x-ray
diffraction. This project will significantly advance the fundamental
understanding of the LMD additive manufacturing process. The dynamics of melt
pool, pore, material mixing, and solidification during the LMD process will be
revealed. The fundamental mechanisms of melting, mixing, defects formation, and
microstructure evolution during LMD process will be
unraveled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.