* 1762196
* 2017 Clinic on Dynamical Approaches to Infectious Diseases Data, December, 2017; University of Florida
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Steven Bellan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This award will provide support for the annual Clinic on Dynamic Approaches to
Infectious Disease Data (DAIDD) to be held in December, 2017. DAIDD will train
U.S. scientists in the mathematical modeling of infectious disease dynamics.
Mathematics and simulation are essential tools in infectious disease control,
enabling decision-makers to explore control policies before implementing them,
interpret trends, plan empirical studies, and predict emerging threats. Over the
past decade, integration of the fields of mathematical epidemiology and
biomedical epidemiology has increased in research practice; however, training
options provide few opportunities for integration in the classroom. This clinic
addresses this gap by offering participants exposure to a broad range of
concepts and techniques from both epidemiological traditions. The clinic will
provide a conceptual foundation for integrating dynamic modeling approaches with
empirical infectious diseases research. It is aimed at participants without
substantial experience in scientific computing or in mathematical modeling.
Training will focus on how the complex dynamics of pathogen transmission
influence study design and data collection for applied problems in infectious
disease research. Training will also prepare participants to pursue their
research goals after the clinic. Participants will develop the skills necessary
to identify which research questions can and cannot benefit from a dynamic
modeling approach. In addition, because the Clinic will also include scientists
from Africa, it will provide opportunities for U.S. scientists to build a
network of international collaborators. All pedagogic material will be made
publicly available online so that they can be used for self-instruction by those
unable to attend the Clinic or to be incorporated into teaching materials for
other courses.