* 1762137
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Unmanned Aerial System Datasets from Hurricanes Harvey and Irma
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 17,780.00

This 12-month RAPID project will organize unmanned aerial system (UAS) data from
119 flights at Hurricane Harvey and 247 at Hurricane Irma, in order to make the
data available to researchers. The project will (1) screen for personal privacy
identification and applicable state laws, and make available to researchers, (2)
host a virtual workshop to introduce the dataset and access procedures for
researchers, and (3) host a follow up workshop at the 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Safety Security and Rescue Robotics to discuss the results by
researchers using the datasets and how to acquire datasets in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The datasets were collected by the Texas A&amp;M
Engineering Experiment Station and Florida State University who co-deployed to
Fort Bend County, Texas, and Putnam and Collier Counties, Florida. They are
unique because they (1) reflect the largest number of flights for public
officials; (2) represent a diversity of UAS platforms (10 different models)
flying at different altitudes and for eight distinctly different missions; (3)
consist of video, still imagery, and photogrammetric data products based on
mission; and (4) include flights before the event, during the response phase,
and through the restoration phase. However, the datasets require some additional
work to screen content for privacy, to complete meta-data, to be consistent in
naming conventions in order to facilitate access by external researchers, and to
set up controlled access. The datasets are ephemeral because the missing meta-
data of pilots, platforms, and flight times for each mission will be lost in the
memory of the pilots and because the datasets are needed to enable other
researchers in computing and engineering use the data.