* 1762899
* Collaborative Research: Tessellated Structural-Architectural Systems for Rapid Construction, Repair, and Disassembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Brandon Ross, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 291,905.00

Recent natural disasters are reminders that the next generation of buildings
should minimize economic and social consequences of extreme loading with minimal
environmental impact. This research investigates a new integrated structural-
architectural wall system which utilizes tessellated patterns, an arrangement of
repetitive elements, to produce buildings that can be efficiently constructed,
repaired, reconfigured, and deconstructed. Tessellated Structural Architectural
(TeSA) systems can contribute to resilience through rapid repair and
reoccupation after an extreme event, as well as to sustainability through reuse
and adaptability of materials, structural elements, and buildings. Among the
benefits of TeSA systems is to facilitate building adaptation and
deconstruction, which are strategies for mitigating obsolescence, a primary
cause of building demolition, and limiting the environmental footprint of
demolition debris while increasing the lifecycle of buildings as they are
flexible to adapt to future uses. The need for these benefits will likely
increase as urbanization continues to increase. University coursework and
practitioner workshops will be used to disseminate research results and
encourage their application in the construction
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study and understand
fundamental differences of multiple classes of TeSA systems. The structural
behavior of diverse classes of tessellated wall systems, including 1D and 2D
topologically interlocking tessellations will be investigated through validated
models. Analytical models, physical experiments, and probabilistic assessments
will be used to focus on localization of damage in tessellated structures and
the effects of repair/replacement of damaged elements at the building scale.
Research will also create a decision framework whereby integrated teams of
architects and engineers can utilize fragility curves as a visual means of
communicating the effects of design decisions concerning materials and building
systems. It will provide architects and engineers with validated methods and a
demonstrated framework for designing TeSA systems of their own
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.