* 1762063
* Combined Modeling and Experimental Study of the Mechanisms of Growth Patterns in Stem Cell Homeostasis in Plants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Weitao Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,099,497.00

This project aims to understand how mechanical connections among cells and
chemical signals between them collaborate to control the growth, sell-
organization and differentiation of stem cells during plant growth. Mathematical
and computer models will allow researchers to perform virtual experiments that
are currently impossible in the lab. Coupled with live imaging experiments and
new image analysis methods, these experiments will yield insights into
biological mechanisms governing organ formation in plants and animals and
development of cancer in epithelial cell layers of the colon. UC Riverside is a
Hispanic-serving institution with very diverse student population and with many
students being first in their families to attend college. The team will be
actively working with undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups as well as with high school students on the interdisciplinary projects
related to proposed research program. Outreach activities will be coordinated
with the newly established UC Riverside Interdisciplinary Center for
Quantitative Modeling in Biology (ICQMB). Through ICQMB, regular meetings and
workshops will be organized on topics at the interphase of biology and
mathematical modeling, enriching other groups at UCR as well as other
universities and colleges in Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shoot
apical meristems (SAMs) in plants harbor a set of stem cells that differentiate
into cells for the development of all above-ground organs such as leaves, stem
and branches that constitute the entire biomass required for sustaining life on
earth. Like in animal systems, plant stem cell maintenance in SAMs involves
conserved molecular mechanism of repression of differentiation in the context of
a multilayered tissue.The main goal of this interdisciplinary research program
is to combine development and calibration of a multiscale mathematical and
computational modeling platform with specifically designed transient gene
manipulations and live imaging methods for the spatio-temporal study of cell
growth and division patterns that regulate stem cell maintenance and
differentiation of stem cell progeny in SAMs. To date, the most advanced
modeling efforts of cell division behavior in SAMs are restricted to the surface
cell layers which also do not account for cell signaling in coordinating growth
behaviors in this multi-layered structure. Modeling environment to be developed
by the team will combine descriptions of molecular and mechanical signaling at
several scales in all layers of the SAM to determine biological mechanisms
resulting in correct shape and form of the SAM. In particular. multiscale model
simulations will be used for testing hypothesis that WUSCHEL and cytokinin may
function together and/or independently to influence cell wall growth, cell
division rates and position of plane of cell division to organize the SAM
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.