* 1762341
* Binder Jet Additive Manufacturing with Granulated Ceramic Powders
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Chao Ma, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 686,403.00

Currently, ceramic parts made by binder jet additive manufacturing have low
density and poor mechanical properties; this award supports fundamental research
addressing the use of granulated ceramic nanopowder for binder jet additive
manufacturing to address these shortcomings. Nanoparticles are difficult to
incorporate into the most common additive manufacturing approaches, but the use
of granulations of ceramic nanoparticles with binders allows the use of
nanoparticles without the normal drawbacks of limited spreadability. A
granulated nanoparticle consists of nanoparticles combined with a polymer
binder, which is then machined or milled to produce a particle a few tens of
micrometers in diameter, which contains many nanoparticles. This allows the use
of granulations without complicating spreading of powder in an additive
manufacturing machine, and the use of nanoparticles to produce denser, stronger
parts in additive manufacturing. Research results from this project will help
enable additive manufacturing of high-density ceramic parts to produce wear-
resistant parts economically. The ultimate application in mind is next-
generation orthopedic implants, which is an economic area of great importance to
the US. In addition, there are spillover applications in the aerospace, defense
and automotive sectors, so that this proposal directly and positively impacts
economic welfare and national security. The research will involve undergraduate
and graduate students, including those from the underrepresented groups, who
will conduct experiments and analyze experimental results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to test three sets of
hypotheses: (1) granulated powder leads to a higher printed and sintered density
than both nanopowder and micropowder; (2) granulated powder has a similar
flowability to micropowder but a higher flowability than nanopowder; and (3)
granulated powder has a similar sinterability to nanopowder but a higher
sinterability than micropowder. The first set of hypotheses will be tested by
measuring the densities of printed and sintered samples from the three powders
(granulated powder, nanopowder, and micropowder) with Archimedes' method and
statistically comparing the results. The second set of hypotheses will be tested
by comparing the Hausner ratios (the ratio between tap and apparent densities of
each powder) of the three powders. The third set of hypotheses will be tested by
comparing the achieved densities of the three powders by a traditional pressing
and sintering means. Testing these three sets of hypotheses will result in new
knowledge about effects of granulation on binder jet additive manufacturing, and
flowing and sintering behaviors of granulated powder, nanopowder, and
micropowder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.