* 1762678
* Collaborative Research: Feasibility and Fundamentals of Femtosecond-Laser Shock Peening Without Protective Coating in Air Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Yalin Dong, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 188,804.00

Laser induced, localized shock waves can generate compressive stresses in a
metal's surface that improve the hardness and fatigue of the part without
altering its bulk material properties. This process, nanosecond laser shock
peening, requires a protective coating to combat the heat affect zone, and a
confining medium to promote the shock waves. The research will investigate the
ability of a femtosecond laser shock peening process, which has higher energy
density, to achieve the same result without the need for the protective coating
and confinement layer. Eliminating the coating and confinement layer will
significantly reduce setup complexity and manufacturing costs. Knowledge gained
on the fundamental physical mechanisms occurring during femtosecond laser
peening will be leveraged to realize a higher resolution process capable of
processing a broader range of materials than currently possible by nanosecond
laser peening. This advanced manufacturing capability will contribute to the
competitiveness of the US by finding application in the development of
progressive precision instrumentation, 3D-printing technologies, biomedical
implants, and micro-mechanical systems. In addition to providing graduate
students with advanced manufacturing expertise, the research results will be
integrated into both course modules and educational outreach activities aimed at
underrepresented minorities to further encourage more qualified people into the
manufacturing work force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to
understand the fundamental mechanisms and limitations of femtosecond laser shock
peening without a protective coating in an air environment. To achieve this both
process related non-equilibrium electron dynamics, and super-high strain-rate
deformation mechanisms will be investigated. A unique in-situ measurement method
will be used to capture the plasma dynamics occurring during femtosecond laser
shock peening of stainless steel 304 and aluminum 6061 samples. The
microstructure evolution will be characterized to study the deformation dynamics
under ultrahigh pressure and stain rate, while the surface morphology, residual
stress, surface hardness, and fatigue will be measured to test the effectiveness
of the process. Hybrid numerical models, validated by experiments, will be
utilized to further understand the underlying mechanisms. A Fokker-Planck model
will focus on revealing non-equilibrium electron dynamics. Outputs from this
model will be incorporated into a hydrodynamic model to predict the resultant
plasma formation and shock wave generation. The shock wave information will be
integrated into a finite element model to assist in predicting the deformation
process of metals subjected to super-high strain-rate
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.