* 1762360
* Free Probability and Cohomology in von Neumann Algebra Theory.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Dimitri Shlyakhtenko, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,000.00

A fundamental theme in mathematics is that, in many cases, certain aspects of
complicated finite-dimensional structures become simpler as the dimension of
such structures goes to infinity. This very paradoxical behavior underlies the
theory of thermodynamics in physics, in which complicated systems of particles
admit a simpler global description (involving just a few variables, such as
pressure and temperature) when the number of particles becomes large. A
mathematical theory of free probability, initiated by Voiculescu in the 1980s,
has shown that von Neumann algebras can be viewed as systems of 'thermodynamic
variables' for asymptotic behavior of random matrices. A distinctive feature of
the theory is that the variables no longer commute: the order of their
multiplication matters. This results in an extremely rich theory that leads to
free probability generalizations of classical objects such as partial
differential equations, Brownian motion, and so on. The present project concerns
questions of better understanding of asymptotic behavior of random matrices and
of the resulting asymptotic limit through construction of invariants, which are
both algebraic and analytic in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's aim
is to continue the study of cohomological invariants associated to subfactors
and more general inclusions of algebras, in particular L^2 invariants and their
analogs. The study of some of these invariants turns out to involve many
analytical tools supplied by free probability theory, such as free probability
analogs of Brownian motion and of the associated Laplace-like operators. The
study of these operators - arising in the asymptotic limit of random matrices -
is of significant interest in random matrix theory as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.