* 1762190
* Understanding the Mechanisms of the Pulsed Electric Current Process for Joining Oxide-Dispersion-Strengthened Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Bai Cui, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 307,825.00

Next-generation components for infrastructure and transportation, such as power
plants and aeronautical engines, must operate in increasingly high temperature
environments for maximum performance and output efficiency. To enable high-
temperature operations, new materials will be required with high strengths in a
variety of extreme environments. A promising class of novel materials known as
Oxide Dispersion Strengthened (ODS) Alloys have the potential to perform in
these environments. The industrial applications of these alloys, however, have
been limited by existing joining technology, because traditional joining
processes cause reactions at the micrometer scale in ODS alloys that lead to the
deterioration of the joint's mechanical strength. The pulsed electric current
joining process has emerged as a promising approach that can produce an
outstanding ODS alloy joint with minimal changes at the micrometer scale. This
award supports fundamental research to understand the relationships among the
pulsed electric current joining process, the ODS alloy microstructure, and the
resulting properties of the joints, giving insight into the mechanisms that
enable high performance joints. This new knowledge will enable the translation
of these high performance materials to applications in transportation, energy,
and infrastructure. The research will be integrated into a series of educational
activities for undergraduate students, as well as part of outreach to middle
school students from underrepresented groups to inspire excitement in Materials
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
fundamental processing-microstructure-property relationships active during
pulsed electric current (PEC) joining of Oxide Dispersion Strengthened alloys.
The hypothesis is that the PEC joining process is driven by electrical current
activation mechanisms, including enhanced mass transport by electromigration and
dielectric breakdown of the surface oxide film. To complete the research goal
and test the hypothesis, this project will pursue three research objectives: 1)
perform in-situ transmission electron microscopy investigation of the mechanisms
in the pulse electric current joining process; 2) conduct ex-situ investigation
of the mechanisms in this process; and 3) further improve ODS alloy joints using
pulsed electric current joining mechanisms. The new knowledge gained from this
work can be translated into strategies for using the pulsed electric current
process to join other materials requiring minimal microstructural changes during
the joining process, including high strength materials for extreme
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.