* 1762365
* Novel Exciplexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joseph Dinnocenzo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 629,905.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B program
supports the research of Professor Joseph P. Dinnocenzo at the University of
Rochester. Professor Dinnocenzo and his students investigate novel exciplexes
(excited state complexes), especially cationic (positively charged) exciplexes.
The research activities provide foundational knowledge about electron transfer
and new types of exciplexes. Substances which form exciplexes have potential
applications as sensors, as biological probes, and in organic light emitting
diodes (OLED). Due to their solubility in water, cationic exciplexes have
enhanced potential for development of biological imaging applications. The
research provides a rich educational experience for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students, in synthesis, electrochemistry and time-resolved
spectroscopy. This research specifically engages undergraduates from the
University of Guam (a minority institution in the US Territory) for summer
research opportunities. This group is underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates two types of novel, charge transfer exciplex intermediates that
were recently discovered in the Dinnocenzo laboratory. One type of exciplex is
formed by reaction of cationic, excited state acceptors with neutral donors.
Research objectives include determining the electronic nature of the exciplexes
(e.g. electronic coupling matrix elements) through theoretical fitting of
radiative lifetimes, which are determined by Time Correlated Single Photon
Counting (TCSPC) and fluorescence spectra. This project expands the generality
of cationic exciplexes by measuring some of their photophysical properties,
examining cationic exciplexes in a variety of media (including water), and
synthesizing intramolecular examples. A related project investigates examples
uncovered in the Professor Dinnocenzo's lab where two exciplex emissions are
observed from a single acceptor and donor. Preliminary results are consistent
with dramatically different solvent reorganization energies for the two types of
exciplexes, indicating major differences in their structures. In this research,
students learn how to synthesize, purify, and spectroscopically characterize
compounds. Students also receive training in a range of less traditional
techniques including transient absorption spectroscopy (TCSPC), fluorometry,
electrochemistry, and modern computational chemistry. The students trained
through the research are prepared to tackle a variety of multidisciplinary
problems in their professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.