* 1762161
* Syntheses, Characterizations, and Applications of Heli-viologens and Heli-twisted-acenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Edward Clennan, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2022
* USD 528,184.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Edward L. Clennan and Caleb Hill
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Wyoming are developing
hybrid polyaromatic hydrocarbons consisting of helical and linear domains of
aromatic rings. These compounds have non-superimposable mirror images and are
anticipated to emit circularly polarized light. The goal is to take advantage of
these and other novel optoelectronic features of these molecules to construct
circularly polarized light emitting diodes and other optoelectronic devices.
These devices have significant potential in liquid-crystal display, stereoscopic
three-dimensional displays, and information storage. This project also provides
training to scientists at all educational levels in organic synthesis,
photophysical characterization, computational chemistry, and optoelectronic
device construction. The results will be widely disseminated and will be a
critical feature of outreach efforts to all the community colleges in the State
of Wyoming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the helicene backbone of
these molecules provides a torque that simultaneously twists and locks the acene
into either a right- or left-handed twist. Synthetic modifications are being
made to extend the acene domain from one to five aromatic rings and phenyl- and
cyano-substituents are being appended to the acene domain to propagate the twist
down the full length of the acene. In addition, nitrogen atoms are being
embedded in both the acene and helical domains to generate diaza-acene and heli-
viologen analogues. Measurements of racemization barriers and photophysical and
electrochemical studies of the resolved enantiomers are being used to determine
how the structures and chiroptical properties change as a function of acene
length and the composition of the helical and acene domains. Circularly
polarized light emitting diode devices are being constructed with suitable heli-
twisted-acene substrates to determine their current density-voltage-luminescence
characteristics and their circularly polarized electroluminescence
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.