* 1762691
* Impact of Interactions between Metal Oxides to Redox Reactivity of Iron and Manganese Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/21/2017,08/31/2018
* Huichun Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 89,130.00

1236517&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fate of emerging
contaminants in the environment is critical for assessing their potential risks
to ecological systems. Yet, quantitative estimates of contaminant fate in
complex environmental systems cannot be accurately obtained through
experimentation and modeling with simple model systems. For this reason, this
project will investigate complex model systems containing binary oxide mixtures
to resemble soil-water environments: iron (Fe) or manganese (Mn) oxides as the
redox active oxides and aluminum, silicon or other iron oxides as the second
oxides. The main objective is to determine how the presence of a second metal
oxide affects the redox activity of Fe/Mn oxides. Specifically, two model
systems will be examined for their redox reactivity with respect to eight
organic contaminants: an oxidizing environment containing either manganese
dioxide or goethite as the dominant oxidant and a reducing environment
containing soluble ferrous ions in the presence of goethite as the dominant
reductant. Experimental and modeling work will be carried out to study the
reaction kinetics of the target contaminants in the above systems. Potential
particle interactions will be evaluated based on surface complexation, surface
precipitation, heteroaggregation, and competitive adsorption. This study is the
first to examine how the interactions between two different types of metal
oxides affect the redox activity of iron and manganese oxides. This research
will generate knowledge that is critical for predicting the fate of emerging
contaminants in redox active soil-water environments. The intellectual merit of
this project is based on: 1) a fundamental understanding of the nature of
interactions within binary oxide mixtures and how these interactions are
affected by solution chemistry including pH, oxide composition, and ionic
strength; 2) a mechanistic understanding of how a second metal oxide affects the
redox behavior of Fe/Mn oxides under oxic and anoxic conditions; and 3)
quantitative modeling of the relative contribution of each type of interaction
between metal oxides to the overall inhibitory effect of a second metal oxide on
the redox activity of Fe/Mn oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will create
a new body of knowledge available to aquatic chemists, environmental engineers,
geochemists and microbiologists working with metal oxides in terms of either the
activity of soil-water environments or contaminant removal. By developing
complex model systems, results of this project can enable a more accurate risk
analysis which could eventually be used by public health and environmental
agencies for contaminant regulation and environmental clean-up. This project
will also contribute to training, mentoring and overall development of graduate,
undergraduate and high school students. Other planned outreach activities
include participation of underrepresented minority and female students
(particularly from the Society of Women Engineers), one-week summer workshops
for female high school students, broad dissemination to over 30 industrial
partners at the annual industrial advisory board meetings for the NSF Water and
Environmental Technology (WET) Center, integration into the environmental
curriculum at the Temple University, and presentation at Temple seminars that
serve 1000+ Temple members and 3000+ working professionals from the great
Philadelphia area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.