* 1762468
* Collaborative Research: Mechanobiology of Fiber Geometry-RhoGTPase Crosstalk at the Leading Edge of Cells Crawling on Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Klaus Michael Hahn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2021
* USD 172,044.00

Cells move in a complex three-dimensional environment composed of fibrous
proteins. A first step for a cell in choosing a direction to move is to sense
its environment by tugging at the fibers. This starts what is called 'cell
contractility.' How contractility is achieved on fibers of varying diameters
distributed randomly or in specific patterns, in normal or diseased tissues, is
mostly unknown. Understanding the first sensory interactions between a cell and
a contacted fiber is important to how cells invade a fibrous tissue, such as
when cancer cells leave a tumor, or in directed migration of cells on fibers
towards a wound site. Most of what we know about cell migration stems from
classical studies conducted on 2D flat substrates or, more recently, using
complex gels. Neither approach allows the studying of cell-fiber interactions.
This research will address the need to quantify cell-fiber interactions to
understand cell migration during wound healing and disease. In this
collaborative research, by combining state-of-art technologies in nanofiber
manufacturing, cell signaling biosensors, and cell mechanics, we will be able to
see inside the cell and determine the decision mechanisms that help cells
migrate along fibers. The PI will work with faculty at a local community college
to train them in the laboratory so that they can develop educational materials.
This will create research opportunities for community college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will define the mechanobiological
state of a cell as it interacts with fibers. Specifically, we will reveal
RhoGTPase signaling (RhoA, Rac1, and CdC42) as cells form protrusions and
migrate on fibers. The interplay, localization, and summation of these molecules
at specific regions of the cell define the mode of migration, which has been
shown to be different in 2 and 3D. To determine the activity maps of these
proteins in cells on fibers, we will design fiber networks of varying diameters
(nanometers-microns) distributed in aligned and random configurations signifying
pro- and anti-invasive conditions. In doing so, we will be able to pinpoint
spatial and temporal activation maps of RhoGTPase's as cells tug and exert
forces on fibers. The mechanobiological force quantitation-biosensor activation
will develop new knowledge in the plasticity of cell migration to changing
fibrous environments, as would be encountered in vivo. Linking adhesion
receptor-based signaling spanning a wide range of spatial (nanometers-microns)
and temporal (seconds-hours) scales with migration and force modulation will
provide new knowledge in invasion-driven cell migration, thus opening new
directions in drug discovery and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.