* 1762633
* Automated Methods for Modeling and Designing Resilient Complex Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mario Ventresca, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 401,887.00

Networks arise in numerous engineering contexts, including manufacturing,
defense, energy, and transportation. Disturbances to part of a network can
result in significant performance degradation or complete disruptions of
functionality. This project will advance our ability to model and design
networks capable of maintaining sufficient performance and functionality within
a specified operational budget when subjected to various types of perturbations.
Results of this research will be demonstrated in the context of supply chain
networks, which are highly interconnected structures that arise as firms
exchange goods to create final products. Ensuring supply chain functionality is
critically important to industrial competitiveness and national defense, but
many existing networks are based on over-simplified models that are susceptible
to disruption and performance degradation. This research will improve the state
of the art by enabling better-informed network design decisions for complex
scenarios and demonstrate this through the design of improved supply chains.
Outcomes of this work will include general mathematical techniques and specific
design guidelines. The project will train students in this area of critical
importance and produce new educational material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishing the project goals requires the development
of efficient algorithms and advances in network science and game theory. In
order to represent complex networks, an action-based system model will be
utilized and specialized to the supply chain context. Model parameters will be
found using multi-layer complex network input obtained from publicly available
real-world supply networks and a multi-objective optimization algorithm that is
guided by objectives relevant to supply chain networks. The ability to
adequately and compactly represent a supply chain network will allow for tests
requiring a null-model or to examine what-if scenarios. The second project goal
is to devise efficient automated mechanism design algorithms for devising
incentives for firms to create connections that inherently ensure network
robustness to perturbations. These are termed complex network formation games,
and theory will be derived to formalize them. The third project goal utilizes
the modeling framework for centralized design, instead of modeling a specific
network, and will compare the results obtained from the decentralized game-
theory perspective in order to ascertain differences between the quality of
resultant networks and to extract best design
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.