* 1762792
* Energy Landscape and Stability of Origami-Inspired Deployable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Hanqing Jiang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 407,461.00

Scientists, mathematicians, and engineers are leading a vigorous interest to
transform origami from the art of paper folding to innovative engineering design
for harnessing its unique properties to create deployable structures with
tunable properties. To fully harness origami's exemplar capabilities in
deployment, there are two fundamental mechanics problems that need to be
thoroughly studied, namely, deformation and stability of deployed origami
structures. In this regard, this award supports fundamental research to
investigate the energy landscapes of origami structures and to study the
stability of the deformable origami structures. Successful investigations of the
above problems will bring origami to be used in much broader applications,
ranging from deployable structures for aerospace and civil applications,
implantable medical devices, daily essentials, and toys. As a result, this
research will promote the progress of the science and engineering of origami,
and advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. In addition to the
research activities, the education and outreach programs aim to benefit a broad
range of groups, from K-12 students through partnership with the local school
district and science center and undergraduates through a university research
initiative to graduate students through advanced teaching and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deployability has been one of the main
motivations to study origami structures. There are some efforts to understand
the mechanisms for the deploying process using paper folding as inspiration.
However, the stability of the deployed structure has not been studied yet and,
as reported in the literature, a deployed origami structure can potentially
collapse along the deploying path. This research attempts to fill this gap by
studying the stability of deformable origami structures. Specifically, it will
focus on the idea that deploying and collapsing processes should take two
different paths. A versatile and robust finite element platform will be
developed to study the energy landscape of deformable origami patterns and
investigate various stability phenomena of origami structures, including:
bistable, multi-stable, and tunable multi-stable states. The platform and
knowledge gained from the energy landscape/stability study will also be used to
create new origami-inspired metamaterials with tunable deployability and
collapsibility through heterogeneous integration of various origami structures,
ranging from 1D tubular structures, 2D plates, and 3D
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.