* 1762346
* RAPID: Post-Hurricane Irma Erosion and Deposition in Coastal Embayments of Eastern St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Derek Sawyer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 09/30/2018
* USD 52,835.00

St. John, Virgin Islands is a tropical island made up primarily of ash and
debris from volcanic eruptions. It is exposed to major geohazards such as
hurricanes and tsunamis. The bathymetry of the nearshore coast has a strong
influence on the severity of runup and surge from such events. St. John and
other similar volcanic islands are unlike carbonate/limestone islands that are
flat and lack significant topography. St. John has steep slopes and the type of
rocks immediately near the coast that are prone to weathering. This makes such
islands vulnerable to land-based sediment erosion. A multibeam bathymetric
survey was conducted in August 2017 in several offshore bays. Because Hurricane
Irma passed over the Virgin Islands after the hurricane, there is a valuable
opportunity to understand the impact of the hurricane in this offshore
environment. This project will complete a second multibeam bathymetric survey
and collect sediment cores to assess the extent of the erosion of the island,
the quantity of sediments that flowed into the bays, and how the shape of the
floor of the offshore bays changed. Understanding these impacts are important
for creating more resilient coastal communities. Two graduate students will be
involved in the field work and data analysis. The results will be provided to
local geoscience and environmental groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
scientific objective of this project is to quantify the volume, distribution,
and type of&lt;br/&gt;sediment influx that occurred as a result of Hurricane
Irma on St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands. Isolating the&lt;br/&gt;effects of this
hurricane event will yield a better scientific understanding of how to interpret
paleo-storm deposits observed in sediment cores A post-hurricane Irma multibeam
bathymetry and backscatter survey is planned to exactly overlap the regions of
St. John mapped pre-Irma (Coral Harbor, Johnson Bay, and Saunders Bay) and also,
to fill in data gaps from previous surveys. A transect of cores from the
interior of Coral Harbor moving seaward will be taken from the survey vessel
using a pocket vibra core system. Results of the project will constrain the
sediment flux delivered to the marine environment by storms versus non-storm
sedimentation. In addition to understanding the hurricane event, these new data
together will yield important insights into the relative contribution of a one-
off storm event versus that of annual-to-decadal non-storm sedimentation.