* 1762774
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Scale Biomechanics of Tissue Damage in the White Matter of the Human Central Nervous System
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* John Georgiadis, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2023
* USD 349,637.00

The debilitating long-term consequences of traumatic brain injury (TBI) caused
by head impacts in sports or blast effects in war are now generally recognized
as dangerous. Even milder head impacts require patient monitoring, though for
how long is not completely known. To care for people with less obvious injuries
and to measure whether a patient has healed, new approaches to brain imaging are
needed. This research is targeted at improving the prediction and monitoring of
brain injuries. A loss of white matter is one of the changes in brain tissue
after injury. How the head impact is distributed as stress in the brain is not
known, nor do we know the tolerance of brain cells to stress. This research
project will use fast confocal microscopy and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
techniques to develop and validate a multiscale mechanical model for brain white
matter that can predict cell injury. This validated model will be used to
estimate axonal injury in the brain using impact models of the whole brain. The
research will be used in the education of undergraduate and graduate students.
The PI instituted the GirlsConnect club in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
to increase the participation and retention of women in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on identifying the injury
thresholds for individual axons within white matter when the tissue is exposed
to dynamic, mechanical stretch. This interdisciplinary research builds on the
innovative experimental approaches to understand axon kinematics and novel
multi-scale computational models of the collaborative team to introduce: (i)
Analysis of axon-level displacements and sub-failure axonal damage following
clinically-relevant, dynamic loading of white matter; (ii) Computational
incorporation of the composite mechanics of axon and glial matrix interaction,
including damage, into the global (macro) response of the white matter following
tissue-scale loading; (iii) Quantitative prediction of stress concentrations at
the axon-level from the computational models; and (iv) Integration of clinical
imaging (MRI and Magnetic Resonance Elastography) and subsequent histopathology
and correlation of mechanical properties to axonal damage. The multi-scale model
will enable the prediction of changes in bulk mechanical properties from damage
to the axonal microstructure and from myelin degeneration. It is anticipated
that this model can be easily integrated into advanced imaging modalities to
predict and monitor brain injury and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.