* 1762128
* 2018 Gordon Research Conference - Industrial Ecology: The role of Industrial Ecology in reaching the Sustainable Development Goals
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Anu Ramaswami, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

1762128 (Hellweg). The Gordon Research Conference on Industrial Ecology (GRC-IE)
will be held May 20 - 25, 2018. A companion meeting for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, the Gordon Research Seminar on Industrial Ecology
(GRS-IE), will be held in conjunction with the GRC-IE (May 19 - 20). This is a
grant for participant support: conference fees and travel for U.S. researchers,
including PhD students, postdoctoral researchers, and junior faculty members.
The conference theme, "The Role of Industrial Ecology in Reaching Sustainable
Development Goals," addresses multiple emerging research, including sustainable
food provision (as related to the food-energy-water nexus), smart, sustainable
and connected communities, clean and renewable energy, infrastructure
innovations, and a focus on integrated assessments across multiple human and
environmental impacts (land, water, climate, biodiversity, economy &amp;
wellbeing). The GRS and the GRC play a critical role in advancing the
intellectual frontier in environmental science and engineering, in fostering
international collaborations, advancing research and networking opportunities,
and mentoring of young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing financial
support to young scholars who would not otherwise be able to participate, the
conference will help promote the development of a robust and diverse industrial
ecology research community. The GRS-IE held immediately prior to the GRC
provides a forum for graduate students and post-doctoral researchers to present
their work, discuss cutting edge aspects of their research, and build
collaborative relationships with their colleagues at a critical time in their
careers. Participants in the GRS-IE will be welcome at the associated GRC-IE and
encouraged to present posters at the GRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.