* 1762986
* Dynamics and Control of Tethered Multi-Rotor Unmanned Aerial Vehicles with Switchable Powered and Autorotation Modes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Tuhin Das, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 313,499.00

This research project will promote the progress of dynamic modeling and control
design, and advance the national prosperity, welfare and security by increasing
both the time aloft and the energy efficiency of tethered unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), which are used for surveillance, communication, and sensing.
The use of tethered UAVs deserves attention since they can provide a compact,
portable, temporary, and rapidly deployable alternative to helicopters or
satellites. The presented system, powered through an electrically conductive
tether, can increase the time UAVs can remain in the air and reduce the weight
of on-board batteries. The project will study the use of suitable blade
geometry, a flapping/teetering degree of freedom, and active feedback control
with the goal to enhance energy efficiency of a UAV by switching to autorotation
when prevailing wind speeds are high. Accordingly, the new design will have the
capability of reducing its energy requirement by harnessing wind energy while in
operation. The system will be portable, easily deployable, and actively
controlled. It will be agile, maneuverable, and its ability to switch between
two flight modes will allow robust hovering at desired altitudes and
orientations. The project will leverage University of Central Florida iSTEM
program to involve women and underrepresented minority students in research
activities and enable community outreach via the Orlando Science Center. The
project will foster ongoing collaborative research with the energy and power
industry and create new collaboration with local industry partners that have
business interest in tethered UAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make
fundamental advances in operation of tethered UAVs by undertaking extensive
efforts in dynamic modeling and control design. The two flight modes, their
unique set of actuations and inputs, and the distinct aerodynamic
characteristics of autorotation, distinguish the control of the system from
conventional multi-rotor systems. The system has a Multi-Input Multi-Output
structure, alternating causalities, many disturbance sources, a wide array of
parameters, and requires active control for delivering the functionalities. The
system admits a continuum of equilibria. This research will determine the
feasible and optimal subspaces within this equilibrium space where, (1) the
momentum theory holds and gives an accurate prediction of the aerodynamics, (2)
sufficient lift is generated, and (3) the tether tension is confined within
acceptable limits. Stabilization of the system will take fundamentally new
directions, involving switched control, uncertainty quantification, and feed-
forward actions. During autorotation, differential regenerative braking will be
employed for attitude stabilization. Robust autorotation will be achieved by
tether length actuation and intermittent mode switching. Thereby energy
efficiency and active attitude/altitude control will become integrally coupled.
The geometric symmetry of the structure will facilitate control design using
reduced-order models while incurring minimal loss of
generality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.