* 1762924
* Collaborative Research: Single-Input Control of Large Microrobot Swarms using Serial Addressing for Microassembly and Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Milos Zefran, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2024
* USD 545,894.00

This collaborative research project will create a practical control scheme for
large swarms of microrobots. These robots are typically no more than a few
millimeters in length, and rely on an external power source and control signal.
Currently, it is possible to steer the swarm as a whole to a single destination
(or perhaps, to a desired average location). However, realizing the full
potential benefits of microrobot swarms will require the ability to
simultaneously send independent commands, either to individual robots or to
small subgroups. Device designs have previously been explored that respond to
different command amplitudes, however this approach quickly becomes impractical
as the number of independently addressable robots grows. This scalability
problem can be overcome using serial addressing schemes. Here, there are only a
few distinct values for the control signal. Each independently addressable
subset of robots is associated with a unique sequence of signal values, and will
change its behavior only if the control signal contains that specific sequence.
This project considers two fundamental issues that arise in implementing such a
scheme. First is the need for on-board computation and memory allowing the
robots to recognize the unique sequence and to change the robots state based on
the detection of such sequence. Second is the need for a propulsive mechanism
that couples to the robot state to allow differential guidance towards a target
configuration. This project will advance two innovative engineering platforms
that meet both needs. The first is electrostatically actuated, operates on a
planar substrate, and is suitable for structured tasks such as microassembly.
The second is magnetically actuated, operates in a liquid volume, and is
suitable for biomedical applications such as drug delivery. The technical
aspects of the project are complimented by outreach activities, including an
annual microrobotics mobility competition to be held at the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation -- a premier robotics conference for
academia and industry. The results from this project will enhance the national
health, by enabling new diagnostic and therapeutic uses for microrobot swarms.
They will also promote the national prosperity, by enabling new classes of
microassembly robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a
practical control scheme to simultaneously control large numbers of microrobots.
This will be achieved by using microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) to
electromechanically and magnetically decode a sequence embedded in the single
global control signal, and couple the reconfiguration of such sequence to the
modification of the individual microrobot trajectories. This on-board sequence
decoding will be accomplished through sets of on-board physics-based finite
state machines (PFSM) that can accept a control sequence embedded in the control
signal and change the behavior of the microrobots accordingly. The project will
use both electrostatic and magnetic approaches to implement PFSMs, and to couple
their "accept" state to the propulsion mechanism to modulate individual
trajectories. Sets of stress-engineered electrostatic switches, which will latch
in response to a pre-programmed control voltage sequence, will be used to
implement PFSM on the electrostatic platform. Electro-permanent magnetic
circuits, which change their magnetic moment in response to a sequence of global
magnetic field, will be used to implement PFSM on the magnetic platform. The
project will develop the theory for PFSM-based multi-microrobot control,
construct both electrostatic and magnetic microrobotic PFSM platforms, and
validate the concept by implementing the PFSM-based control on swarms of
electrostatically and magnetically powered microrobots. The developed theory and
approach will pave way for control of large microrobot swarms for numerous
biomedical and microassembly applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.