* 1762212
* Urban Infrastructures Workshop: Analysis and Modeling for their Optimal Management and Operation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Nada Assaf-Anid, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2018
* USD 31,991.00

1762212 (Dong). The workshop on "Urban Infrastructures: Approaches for the
Modeling and Study of Interdependent Systems and Processes," to be held in New
York City in November 2017, will convene participants from the United States and
Europe, all key actors in the study of urban interconnected critical
infrastructure (ICI) systems and processes, including food, energy, and water
(FEW) distribution systems and processes. The overarching goal of the workshop
is to stimulate research on the optimization of interrelated urban
infrastructure systems and processes for the resilient and sustainable provision
of FEW. The workshop will also identify technical, socio-economic and policy
obstacles for this optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives are
to: 1) build a research agenda that supports active engagement and joint
approaches to resilient urban interdependent critical infrastructure systems and
processes; 2) explore solutions for innovative urban infrastructure synergies
for sustainable, green and livable cities, and the optimal provision of goods
and services and 3) form a global research and education community, with links
to local stakeholders, and share actionable agendas for change. The workshop's
programming team is led by New York Institute of Technology (NYIT) in
collaboration with City College of New York at the City University of New York,
as well as University of Applied Sciences at the Hochschule fur Technik (HFT) in
Stuttgart, Germany and the Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT). Team members
have started to collaborate on the identification of a research agenda for the
study of urban systems, related data and modeling frameworks, and for improved
understanding and sustainable development of evolving urban food, energy, and
water systems. NYIT will be leading the effort to engage additional academic,
government, and private entities in planning and participating in the workshop,
including representatives from Con Edison, NYC Dept. of Environmental
Protection, Mayor's Office of Sustainability, the U.S. EPA, the USDA, and other
stakeholders. The workshop os targeted to enhance scientific cooperation between
scholars and educators in the United States, Europe, as well as industry and
government agency representatives, urban planners and policymakers. The
workshop's white paper, defining scientific, engineering and information systems
and data challenges for optimal urban infrastructural systems and processes,
will be widely disseminated, thus broadening the impact of workshop findings.