* 1762282
* Understanding the Printing Dynamics during Inkjetting of Cell-Laden Bioink for 3D Biomanufacturing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Changxue Xu, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 334,911.00

Inkjet printing, where droplets of liquid are deposited onto a substrate in a
computer-controlled pattern, is one of the most promising technologies for
creation of 3D living tissues and organs. The adopted carrier fluid, referred to
as bioink, incorporates living cells. Due to cell-cell interaction, living cells
adhere to each other in the print nozzle to form cell aggregates. These
aggregates can clog the nozzle or result in unplanned droplets deposited on the
substrate, both of which can significantly affect inkjet printing reliability.
This project involves fundamental scientific research to understand the
mechanisms of living cell adhesion and aggregation during inkjet printing, and
how to control the printing outcomes. If successful, this research can bridge
jet-based bioprinting manufacturing science and biomedical applications, open
new avenues in regeneration of 3D functional tissues and organs, and
significantly advance the U.S. healthcare industry. The research outcomes will
be seamlessly integrated into a biomanufacturing course currently offered in the
Manufacturing Engineering and Bioengineering programs to increase participation
of female and minority students. The research will also be disseminated through
the regional summer camp (Explore Engineering) and national mass media to
educate and inspire the general public and the next generation of bioengineers.
Engagement of graduate students in the research activities will strengthen the
future workforce in bioengineering and advanced manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to gain fundamental
new knowledge regarding cell aggregation inside the printhead nozzle, and the
satellite droplet formation outside the nozzle during inkjet printing of cell-
laden bioink. During printing, the bioink is ejected from a piezoelectric
printhead to form droplets, which are precisely deposited on the substrate to
form 3D constructs layer by layer. It is believed that the nature of pressure
wave required to expel the bioink from the nozzle affects both the likelihood of
cell aggregation and satellite drop formation. To investigate cell aggregation,
cell adhesion will be simulated using a multiphase approach, which models the
bioink as a suspension coupling a viscoelastic fluid model with a solid model
for living cells. The governing equations for the conservation of mass and
momentum will be numerically solved under different excitation voltages and cell
concentrations. As the satellite droplet formation depends on the competing
actions of ligament radial thinning and axial contraction, both processes will
be modeled analytically to predict satellite droplet formation. Once the core
fundamentals are understood, the knowledge will be leveraged to generate process
phase diagrams in terms of non-dimensional numbers to ultimately identify
optimal printing conditions. Additionally, cell viability and proliferation will
be assessed immediately after printing and after 7-day incubation to confirm the
chosen inkjet printing conditions have no negative impact on the cells. The
resulting scientific knowledge is highly adoptable to other biofabrication
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.