* 1762577
* CDS&amp;E: A Computational Framework for Parsimonious Sonar Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Rolf Mueller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 714,082.00

Autonomous sensing systems play an increasingly important role in health care,
manufacturing, transportation, disaster response, national security and other
activities. Sensing systems in platforms such as autonomous vehicles often
require clear lines-of-sight and are inefficient. They generate large amounts of
data that cannot be processed by small platforms with limited onboard
computation. This project lays the foundation for a new transformative data-
centered efficient sensing platform based on bats' bio-sonar. The researchers
will develop a computational framework that facilitates estimation of
environmental parameters for sensing and navigation--enabling enhanced
performance in complex environments and with reduced hardware requirements. This
enables the use of autonomous devices for a broad scope of applications ranging
from cooperative robots to medical devices and micro-air vehicles. The project
will also offer multidisciplinary training to university students and will
engage K-12 students in outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a computational approach to advance the discovery and understanding
of parsimonious sonar sensing in complex environments. The researchers will
perform large-scale simulations to generate densely vegetated environments and
vegetation echoes; develop novel statistical models to extract echo signatures
and learn their relation to environmental parameters and design dynamic
algorithms for sensing and navigation. This computational approach provides
enabling tools--validated using simulated and experimental data--to advance the
community's ability to develop adaptive models for various sensing scenarios and
enable novel sensing paradigms. Simulation algorithms and algorithms for sensing
and navigation will be integrated into open source packages and made available
on GitHub. The conceptual framework will be published in appropriate
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.