* 1762807
* Modeling Rumor Spreading and Debunking Strategies on Social Media During Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jun Zhuang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 526,064.00

Increasingly, social media has been used as a platform for providing timely
crisis communication during a disaster. Unfortunately, rumor spreading, and in
particular, rumors that are later proven to be untrue, have been identified as
critical issues for the use of social media during disasters. For example,
messages that mistakenly describe a particular hospital or evacuation route as
closed have circulated during recent events. This project will contribute to the
NSF's Big Idea "Harnessing Data for 21st Century Science and Engineering" by
conducting fundamental research in data science and engineering in the field of
social media and disaster management. In particular, this project will build
novel models of how rumors currently spread on social media during disasters to
improve rumor control and debunking during future disasters. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be
insights to improve crisis information distribution and rumor management
practices, which will save lives, economic losses, and reduce panic, anger and
confusion during disasters. This project will support multiple PhD dissertations
and MS theses, and involve undergraduate students from under-represented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
model and optimize the decision-making processes of misinformed social media
users during disasters, to study effective rumor detection strategies, and to
design and analyze rumor spreading and debunking models for social media users
during disasters. To achieve the research objectives, the researchers will use
social network analysis, content analysis, decision analysis, game theory,
optimization, and simulation, to: (1) collect and analyze social media data to
identify potential rumor responding behaviors during disasters and the impact of
their responses on rumor spreading; (2) detect rumors from other information by
developing a rumor detection algorithm based on rumor text, comments, and
spreading patterns; (3) design and validate a decision making model of
individual social media users; and (4) study a new rumor spreading model to
study the interaction of spreading and debunking processes of social media
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.