* 1762420
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Apparent Race and Ethnicity with Applications to the Study of Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Kevin Quinn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 344,775.00

This research project will advance the quantitative measurement of apparent race
and ethnicity. Racial and ethnic categories often are thought of as natural,
discrete, and mutually exclusive. A person is either, say, an African-American,
an Asian-American, a European-American, or an Hispanic-American. But many people
are of mixed ancestry or mixed identity. There is growing evidence that the
societal discrimination and inequalities conventionally associated with racial
and ethnic categories vary within those categories. This body of research has
been limited, however, by serious measurement problems. The most widely used
measure of skin color is not reliable, and there is no generally accepted method
for quantifying racial or ethnic appearance beyond skin color. This project
adapts statistical measurement models that have been used in many other domains
to produce new, quantitative measures of racial and ethnic appearance. The
investigators will develop open-source software for generating the measures.
From a societal perspective, these results will have important implications for
government agencies and courts of law. Phenotype discrimination, for example, is
understood to be a civil rights violation. Judges, however, have struggled with
and generally rejected such claims in practice, due to doubts about whether
phenotype is something that can be measured
objectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test hypotheses
about the robustness of new, quantitative measures of racial and ethnic
appearance to variation in the dress and facial expressions of the persons being
observed and to variation in the identity and mood of the persons doing the
observing. The project is designed to answer questions that have long confounded
academic researchers, government agencies, and courts of law: Is there a
societal consensus about racial and ethnic appearance? To what extent does
racial/ethnic appearance depend on physical attributes of the person being
observed or on other factors, such as dress or socioeconomic status of the
person being observed? The investigators will examine whether different ways of
eliciting race/ethnicity perceptions (e.g., perceived skin color, perceived
stereotypicality, and perceived ancestry) yield measures that are congruent
across different populations of observers and robust to variation in the
apparent status and attitudes of the person being observed and the mood of the
observer.