* 1762211
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Gait Dynamics via Physical Human-human and Human-Robot Interactions at the Hands
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Lena Ting, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 05/31/2023
* USD 487,613.00

This project contributes to the understanding of how intelligent robotic systems
can use a model of human intent, perception, and behavior to enhance human-robot
cooperation, as may occur during rehabilitative gait training in physical
therapy. The project seeks to understand how small forces applied to the hand
can be used to alter clinically-relevant human gait patterns. The project is
significant because it generates the experimental data and models of human gait
and sensorimotor cognition needed to develop a robotic device that will interact
physically and intuitively with individuals with mobility impairments to enhance
their quality of life. By developing a robotic test-bed system and the models of
human sensorimotor behavior that will guide its actions, this project will serve
the national interest and advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health.

The project takes a three-stage approach to advancing the objectives of the
NSF's Mind, Machine and Motor Nexus (M3X) program, which are to understand how
the human mind controls body movements during the manipulation of machines, and
how machine response can shape and influence both the mindset and movements of
the human user. First, the project team will use novel instrumented devices and
motion capture technology to measure interactive human-to-human hand forces and
the resulting gait motions that occur during the proposed therapeutic
intervention. In Stage 2 they will use machine learning techniques to develop a
model of the motor and cognitive transformations that occurred during the human-
to-human experiments of Stage 1. Finally, the team will embed the models within
a novel robotic test-bed that will implement physical human-robot interactions
at the hands. Human-robot experiments will evaluate the ability of the test-bed
to promote desired changes in clinically-relevant gait characteristics such as
gait speed, step length and step cadence. Fundamental issues addressed by the
project include: 1) identifying the relationships between hand forces, gait
dynamics and perceived intents of the instructor (therapist) and student
(patient) that arise during a simplified version of rehabilitative partner
dance; 2) modeling those relationships so as to enable prediction of how small
hand forces indirectly change human gait dynamics; and 3) developing a robotic
gait coach capable of promoting desired changes in human gait dynamics. In
addition, the project supports education and promotes diversity through
innovative outreach activities that will engage teams of students and older
adults from underrepresented communities in the conception, design and
prototyping of mobility-related assistive technologies. The project outcomes may
have long-term impact on the quality of life of millions of Americans with
deficits of gait by developing a robotic system that can assist therapists in
their efforts to improve patient fitness, mobility, and independence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.