* 1762722
* GOALI: Improved Tool-Path Design to Reduce Assembly Costs of High-Speed-Machined Wrought and Additive Metal Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Arif Malik, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 476,173.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
provides the fundamental research needed to significantly improve the quality of
aluminum parts used in aircraft production. These high-value parts are made by
cutting complex shapes out of large blocks of aluminum on high-speed milling
machines. Because all parts need to fit perfectly when assembled into an
aircraft, it is critical that they have very precise dimensions. When parts fail
to assemble correctly, significant delays and cost overruns are incurred by the
aerospace industry because of re-work and scrap. Furthermore, the demand for
more precise parts creates significant technical and economic burdens on the
machine shops that make them. Therefore, this research project aims to create
new high-speed machining techniques that improve part quality, raise production
rates, and reduce material losses. In addition to helping the aerospace
industry, machine shops in the United States will benefit from the project as
they currently face costly trial-and-error when manufacturing aircraft parts. As
such, this project directly aids in economic welfare and national security,
since the aerospace and machining industries are strongly tied to both.
Knowledge from the research will also help spur competitive new manufacturing,
such as the machining of 3D-printed metal parts. The participation of diverse
students in this project (including a disabled veteran) as well as the exposure
of engineering education to teens with autism, will provide for valuable
educational and societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to
investigate initial residual stress distributions in wrought and additively
manufactured aluminum alloys, and how this knowledge can lead to new tool-path
designs that improve dimensional tolerances for high-speed-machined parts. The
technical approach involves combining inverse Cauchy stress prediction,
machining-induced residual stress modeling, and residual stress measurements to
determine whether initial residual stresses cause dimensional distortions in
monolithic aluminum parts to a greater extent than the aggregated thermal, wear,
and machining effects. Crack compliance tests, neutron diffraction, and high-
density point-cloud geometry mapping of feature-rich monolithic parts will be
used to identify residual stress patterns that regularly exist in wrought
aluminum materials prior to machining. Knowledge of the residual stresses will
be used to design new stress-compensated tool-paths for high-speed machining
processes. Contributions of the research include: knowledge regarding residual
stress patterns and their effect on geometric deviations during high-speed
machining; new statistical inference techniques that combine inverse stress
predictions with experimental measurements to characterize residual stresses as
random fields; and methods to design new stress-compensated stochastic machine
tool-path trajectories. Besides their significance in improving high-speed-
machining operations, the developed research techniques will also be tested on
emerging hybrid (additive/subtractive) manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.