* 1762749
* Collaborative Research: Soil-Structure-Water Interaction Effects in Buried Reservoirs - Centrifuge and Numerical Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Youssef Hashash, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 325,644.00

Buried water storage reservoirs are important lifeline structures in cities
worldwide, including major urban centers on the U.S. West Coast. Sudden release
of impounded water due to earthquake damage can lead to catastrophic flooding in
congested urban residential neighborhoods, and severely impede fire suppression
efforts due to earthquake related fires. This may lead to significant loss of
life. Moreover, these reservoirs are essential for post-earthquake recovery and
resumption of economic activity, and thus need to be seismically resilient.
Current state-of-practice for the seismic design of buried water storage
reservoirs is primarily based on simplified procedures. This project will
investigate the seismic response of buried reservoirs focusing on the
interaction of the structure, the soil and the contained water, with the
objective of advancing our ability to properly design this type of structure.
The research encompasses an integrated program of physical (centrifuge) and
numerical modeling. Understanding the fundamental interactions involved during
seismic loading has immediate implications for reservoir design, from both
geotechnical and structural engineering perspectives. This project will advance
the state-of-research and practice for a class of critical lifeline facilities
with essential life safety and post-earthquake recovery roles. In the context of
earthquake resiliency, this research will provide the data necessary to develop
more reliable estimates of anticipated performance of buried reservoir
facilities during and after a major seismic event, and will make inroads into
economic and environmental sustainability. By rendering critical infrastructure
more resilient, the findings of this project will improve the resilience of our
urban centers. In its outreach program, this project will impact student groups
across the nation via the contribution of educational modules as well as
research findings, and support the success of women in geotechnical engineering
in particular. The development of interactive K-12 educational modules and
engagement with K-12 female students, as well as groups visiting the NHERI
Centrifuge Facility at UC Davis, will foster the development of a long term
relationship and exposure of female students to geotechnical earthquake
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at studying the seismic
response of buried reservoirs focusing on the soil-structure-water interaction
(SSWI) including the poorly understood role of hydrodynamic loading. This will
be achieved through an integrated program of centrifuge and numerical modeling.
The experimental and numerical modeling is designed to quantify the influence of
the: (a) stiffness of the soil-wall system, (b) ground motion intensity, (c)
roof and backfill inertial response, and (d) fluid response, on the highly
nonlinear response of these structures. The NHERI centrifuge experimental
facility at UC Davis will be used for the tests. Experimental data will serve
two purposes: first, to understand soil-water-structure interaction in these
types of structures, and second to develop numerical modeling protocols and
experimentally validated modeling approaches that will allow the profession to
advance the capacity and reliability of existing predictive tools and realize
the benefits of performance-based engineering in the design and construction of
these important lifeline structures. Parametric studies using calibrated models
will be conducted to make design recommendations. Data from this project will be
curated, archived and made available to the public through the NHERI
Cyberinfrastructure DesignSafe data repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.