* 1762712
* GOALI: Additive Manufacturing of High Performance Elastomers via Vat Photopolymerization of Aqueous Polymer Dispersions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2022
* USD 439,761.00

Additive manufacturing processes, often referred to as 3D Printing, have shown
promise as a means for fabricating parts featuring complex geometries that can
be tailored to an individual customer and application. Vat Photopolymerization
is one method of additive manufacturing that offers superior feature resolution,
accuracy, and surface finish. However, despite these advantages relative to
other processes, Vat Photopolymerization has seen limited industrial adoption
for fabricating end-use products primarily due to the limited diversity and
quality of its processable materials. The narrow range of suitable materials can
be attributed to process-imposed constraints. For example, the resins must have
a low viscosity (flow easily) to aid part recoating prior to printing the next
layer. This prevents the use of polymers with high molecular weight, which
limits the printed material's strength and elasticity. To overcome this
limitation, this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
Program research project plans to use resins that consist of high-molecular
weight polymer 'particles' suspended in a low viscosity medium, e.g. water and
solvent. Successfully understanding the optimal composition and printability of
such resins will enable advanced manufacturing capabilities to realize the
printing of rubber and latex parts. This can be beneficial to key US based
automotive and aerospace industries by facilitating the printing of tires,
gaskets, and bushings. As this is an industry-university collaborative project,
the graduate students involved will gain an understanding of industrial
challenges and drivers, thus increasing their preparedness for the future
workforce. Additional educational opportunities will be provided for
undergraduate students and underrepresented minorities to further broaden
engagement in advanced manufacturing and material science topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this GOALI program award are to
(i) understand requirements for forming stable aqueous polymer dispersions, (ii)
understand how characteristics of dispersions influence green body strength and
photocuring kinetics, (iii) model the layerwise photocuring behavior of
dispersions, and (iv) map the processable material design space. The research
will test three hypotheses based on preliminary experiments: (i) improvement in
mechanical properties is due to the coalescence of the dispersed polymer
particles and formation of a high molecular weight, entangled network throughout
the scaffold upon drying, (ii) the observed sharp increase in strength seen at
low strains is attributable to the rigid scaffold created in the continuous,
aqueous phase during printing, and (iii) existing Vat Polymerization models for
relating scattering phenomena with exposure and cure depth must be adapted to
account for the dispersions' dynamically changing refractive index. This
research will result in (i) fundamental understanding of structure-property-
process relationships of Vat Polymerization dispersions, (ii) a model of the
photocuring behavior of polymeric dispersions that accounts for dynamically
changing refractive index, and (iii) a series of novel Vat Polymerization
elastomers with tunable mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.