* 1762884
* Roll-Imprint Manufacturing of Three-Dimensional Nanomagnetic Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2022
* USD 433,245.00

This grant promotes the progress of science by exploring the fundamental design
principles behind the roll-imprint process for manufacturing nanomagnetic arrays
for a wide range of applications, including individualized nanomedicine and
radar thus advancing national health, prosperity and security. Current
nanomedicine uses magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles in bio-labels for cancer
diagnosis and therapy and for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Magnetic thin
films are promising in circulators that block reflections from re-entering radar
sources, hence eliminating noise and enhancing performance. This project
disrupts both of these diverse technologies using three dimensional (3D)
nanomagnetic arrays. The arrays are essentially groupings of barcoded nanowires
that can be visualized as the pelt of a porcupine - shrunk to fit on the tip of
a pen. Individually, the 'quills' are so small that they are internalized by
cells, leading to effective cellular barcoding. As an array, or 'pelt', the
quill or nanowire assembly acts like a one-way mirror for radar signals. The
manufacturing process developed here enables rolls of 3D nanomagnetic arrays to
be produced with a yield of one billion nanowires per minute. Undergraduate and
graduate student training by two female electrical engineers supports education
and diversity and enables students to conduct research in medical diagnosis and
radar for self-driving cars for the benefit of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental design principles are established for
roll-imprint manufacturing of three dimensional (3D) nanomagnetic arrays,
including nanostructure design, process design, and quality control design. Two
underlying testbeds, radio-frequency identification (RFID) bio-labels and high
frequency circulators for self-driving cars, are used to verify the designs. For
nanostructure design, hierarchical nanostructures are composed of zero
dimensional (0D) nanodisks stacked into one-dimensional (1D) nanowires that are
inside two-dimensional (2D) arrays of columnar nanopores to make three-
dimensional (3D) structures. The magnetic spin structures are simulated to
facilitate design with experimental verification. The process design involves
roll-imprinting of aluminum before anodization to produce aluminum oxide
templates containing columnar nanopores with long range order. Electrodeposition
is then used to fill these nanopores with single component ferromagnetic metals
and multilayers according to the desired nanostructure designs. Quality control
design involves high frequency circuits, including coplanar waveguides to
measure ferromagnetic resonance and custom designed circulators to measure
composite properties. Importantly, the quality control design is directly
applicable for testbed success. Previous work has successfully demonstrated 3D
nanomagnetic arrays that were synthesized using planar components with areas of
square-centimeter. This work scales up manufacturing to square-meter per hour
rates in a step-continuous roll-to-roll process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.