* 1762324
* Collaborative Research: Computational Framework for Designing Conformal Stretchable Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jianliang Xiao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 212,972.00

Stretchable electronics can be stretched, folded, bent and twisted like a rubber
band while functioning like the conventional electronic device. This capability
enables extensive applications impossible for hard, planar integrated circuits.
Examples include flexible displays, stretchable biosensors, sensory skins, and
bio-inspired eyeball cameras. Conformal electronics is an important category in
which an electronic device is in a non-flat state, normally a complex 3D
geometry, under normal operating conditions. Under existing fabrication
techniques, the electronic systems are usually designed and fabricated as a flat
sheet and then transformed into the targeted 3D shape. This introduces
distortions that have an adverse impact on device performance and functionality.
This research project will advance techniques for the computer-supported
creation of customer-specified stretchable conformal electronics devices.
Outcomes of this research will enable the development of more complex, higher-
performing stretchable and conformal electronic devices with applications across
a broad and growing array of industries such as consumer electronics,
healthcare, automotive, aerospace, and textiles. The project also includes
activities to incorporate innovative research with teaching and outreach
activities. A focal point of this is education of displaced unskilled workers in
the areas of computer-aided design and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to create and evaluate a
systematic framework for rational design of stretchable conformal electronics by
integrating conformal geometry theory with the level-set-based topology
optimization approach. This research will harness both computational and
experimental approaches to pursue the following aims: 1) Extend the level-set-
based multimaterial topology optimization to flexible electronics design to
simultaneously optimize rigid electronic components and soft electrical
interconnects. 2) Devise new numerical algorithms based on the conformal
geometry theory to design the patterns of stretchable electronics devices in 2D
planar layout, which will yield the desired patterns of conformal electronics on
3D freeform surfaces after geometric transformation. 3) Identify effective
approaches to topology optimization with geometric feature control, considering
the fabrication process of stretchable electronics. 4) Validate the
effectiveness of the mapping and optimization methods using the electronic eye
camera as a testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.