* 1762312
* Understanding the Unique Fatigue Behavior of Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Yanyao Jiang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2022
* USD 373,644.00

Most structural components in engineering, particularly those bearing repetitive
loading and operating at an elevated temperature, are metals. Magnesium alloys
are some of the lightest metals and exhibit the very desirable high strength-to-
weight and stiffness-to-weight performance ratios. Moreover, these metals are
nontoxic, which also underline their potential for biomedical applications.
However, one major obstacle preventing magnesium alloys from a wider use is the
limited understanding of their fatigue behavior--material behavior under
repeated mechanical loads, which is unique among structural metals due to its
complexity. This award supports a fundamental study of the fatigue behavior of
magnesium alloys through direct experimental observations. The research will
provide basic knowledge of the mechanisms of deformation that lead to failure
due to fatigue, and a database of experimental observations to develop and
validate material models essential for the engineering design of magnesium-based
parts. The effort will promote the engineering science of light-weight, high-
efficiency alloys; and advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and
secure the national defense through cost-efficient applications in the
automotive, aerospace, healthcare, and defense industries. The research will be
integrated into an education program involving both graduate and undergraduate
students to facilitate an understanding of sophisticated scientific concepts in
magnesium research. For example, an educational video with interesting
experimental visuals and 3D animations will be developed for undergraduate
students and public; and self-directed and open-ended projects with relevance to
magnesium alloys will be integrated into the existing capstone senior design
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characteristic fatigue behavior of magnesium
alloys is the result of the existence of twins, twinning-detwinning activities,
and their interactions with slips and grain/twin boundaries. The overall
objective of this research is to understand how twins and twinning-detwinning
activities, respectively, contribute to fatigue damage in magnesium alloys. To
achieve this objective, three types of experiments will be designed and
conducted: 1) fatigue with no involvement of twins and twinning, 2) fatigue with
significant involvement of twinning-detwinning, and 3) fatigue with pre-designed
twins without involving twinning-detwinning. These experiments will be realized
using a magnesium alloy with a strong texture, and a proper design of the stress
state and loading history with respect to the material orientation. Ex-situ
experiments together with in-situ experiments using companion specimens will be
conducted to facilitate microscopic characterizations. Fatigue microcracking
with the influence of twins, twin-twin boundaries, and interactions of twining
and grain boundaries will be observed to elucidate the major micromechanisms
governing the fatigue processes. The results from the research will form a base
to develop mechanism-based fatigue damage models for magnesium alloys and
provide information for the design of magnesium alloys with improved fatigue
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.