* 1762941
* Manufacturing USA: Study of Self-Supporting Nanoclay as Internal Scaffold Material for Printing of Skeletal Tissue Constructs
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2022
* USD 414,965.00

This award supports research on three-dimensional (3D) extrusion bioprinting
processes using a unique, biocompatible, nanoclay additive. Material extrusion
bioprinting is a compression-based additive manufacturing process in which
material is forced to flow through a nozzle to produce continuous filaments for
layer-by-layer deposition. The addition of the nanoclay to hydrogels typically
used in printing will increase the geometric complexity and mechanical integrity
of the printed bioscaffold structures. Currently the extruded hydrogel should be
rapidly gelled (solidified) to hold its shape immediately after printing, and to
support the following printed layers. This limits the selection of printable
biomaterials to those exhibiting suitable rapid gelation mechanisms, and limits
the geometries feasible without the use of supporting materials that must be
later removed. The nanoclay addition to the hydrogel functions as an internal
scaffold material to hold the shape of the extruded material directly after
printing. The printed construct is only gelled after the whole part is finished;
this has the additional potential benefit of avoiding interlayer bonding issues
and enhancing the structure's mechanical integrity. If successful, this research
can advance U.S. bioprinting manufacturing capabilities and national welfare by
enabling personalized, printed scaffolds for skeletal tissue engineering
applications such as bone replacement and regeneration. The award will also
facilitate training of the future workforce as students across all levels will
gain exposure and experience in biomedical manufacturing. Additional educational
outreach activities include engaging high school students in STEM immersion
weeks organized by the Florida Center for Precollegiate Educational and
Training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
understand the characteristics and fundamental processing limitations of
thixotropic nanoclay only and nanoclay-hydrogel mixed colloids. Thixotropic,
self-supporting gels, in particular silicate-based nanoclay colloids made from
high-concentration Laponite nanoclay, transition from being viscous under static
conditions to less viscous when stressed. This thixotropic, self-supporting
property is also observed in various nanoclay-hydrogel mixed colloids, enabling
Laponite nanoclay as a promising internal scaffold material for nanoclay-
hydrogel composite 3D direct printing in air. To this end it is hypothesized
that nanoclay colloids prepared at certain aging times and concentrations form
an attractive gel state and result in a fractal network with thixotropic, self-
supporting property. To test the hypothesis, the microstructure of high-
concentration nanoclay colloids will be characterized using scattering and
microscopic technologies to reveal their unique gel state. The fluid dynamics
during nanoclay-enabled extrusion will be modeled using a volume of fluid-based
simulation approach, and the filament formability will be represented using a
set of non-dimensional numbers and further compared with experimental
observations. Based on the shear and tensile yield stresses of high-
concentration nanoclay colloids, the effect of material properties on the
printable geometry will be determined using the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory and
experimentally validated. Printed nanoclay-hydrogel scaffolds will be evaluated
in terms of their degradation, biological, and biomineralization properties for
skeletal tissue engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.