* 1762781
* RAPID:  Rescuing a living stocks collection damaged by Hurricane Irma
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* M. Patrick Griffith, Montgomery Botanical Center
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 45,139.00

A Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is made to the Montgomery Botanical
Center (MBC) to rescue 109 imperiled living stocks impacted by Hurricane Irma,
which caused extensive damage to living plant collections. Initial rapid triage
identified 109 living stocks that can be saved if acted upon quickly. The
condition of these 109 stocks has been stabilized, and this project will enable
these trees to be re-set and cared for during initial recovery. Numerous NSF-
supported research projects make use of the MBC living stocks in various
disciplines including systematics, physiology, ecology, paleontology. These
stocks are also used in structural biology, genomics, and pollination biology
studies. The collections being rescued by this project include plants of high
scientific value which have extensive provenance data, prior research use, or
exceptional rarity. Some of these living stocks represent the only examples held
in collections, and in one case, an example of a species thought to be extinct
in the wild. Living collections at MBC form the basis of MBC's outreach and
educational programming, reaching students at every level from pre-K through
Graduate School levels. Montgomery's formal and informal links with three nearby
colleges, Miami-Dade College, Florida International University, and University
of Miami, allow these living stocks to reach some of the most diverse student
communities in the US. Internships at MBC incorporate collections management to
help emphasize the importance of such collections for advancing science. In
addition, active research on collections management by MBC and its collaborators
leads to improved practice for botanic gardens and other living
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the initial righting and
staking 109 palms which were felled by Hurricane Irma, and are in danger of
desiccation and loss. Initial work involves clearing debris to allow access to
these specimens. Righting the largest of these specimens will require a tree
crane and backhoe working in tandem, along with a support crew to stake,
backfill and water these while the crane is holding the trunk in place. The
remaining palms will be righted using smaller equipment in tandem with the
backhoe and support staff. After righting and staking, the stocks will require
consistent management for pests and pathogens in during their re-establishment
phase. This includes regular screening for pathogens, health monitoring, and
collections management record keeping. Undergraduate research assistants in
agroecology and horticulture will be recruited to assist with all of these
skilled tasks, working directly with the curatorial staff of MBC.