* 1762905
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Nanomanufacturing of Vertically Aligned Boron-Nitride-Nanotube Membranes for Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Sangil Kim, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,119.00

Globally, there is untapped power equivalent to approximately 2,000 nuclear
power plants that could be generated at coastal estuaries from the mixing of
fresh and salt water. To date, however, there have been no economical ways to
extract this clean 'blue' energy from natural salt gradients. This is largely
due to the poor efficiencies and high cost of existing membrane technologies.
This Grant Opportunity for Academic Research with Industry (GOALI) collaborative
award supports fundamental research on a new approach to manufacturing membranes
for efficient energy conversion from salinity gradients, using boron-nitride
nanotubes (BNNT) as uniquely smooth, highly charged nanoscale pores. The new
nanomanufacturing process enables fabrication of energy-harvesting BNNT
membranes with power densities ten to 100 times greater than existing membranes,
in an efficient and cost-effective manner that can be scaled up to high
production rates and large-scale membranes many meter-square in size. The
knowledge base and nanomanufacturing methods that are developed enable renewable
energy generation from an under-utilized and non-intermittent power source, and
are also generally applicable to the design and manufacture of the specialized
membranes that are critical to many industrial processes. This GOALI
collaborative research, between an industrial partner, Chasm Technologies, and
Chemical and Mechanical Engineers at two universities, helps students develop
multidisciplinary skills and gain industry-relevant experience. Concerted
outreach efforts to spark interest in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics among women and under-represented minority students enhances
diversity and help fill US workforce needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GOALI
collaborative research project devises the first scalable, roll-to-roll-
compatible method for producing vertically aligned boron-nitride nanotube (BNNT)
membranes. This is achieved with a solution-based approach that deposits and
aligns oligomer-dispersed BNNTs under the influence of an external electric
field, and locks the nanostructure in position by in situ polymerization. The
project develops a fundamental understanding and methods for solution-based
fabrication at lab scales, targeting 1-10 cm2 membranes with pore densities of
108 - 1010 BNNTs/cm2. The availability of such membranes provides answers to
basic questions regarding ion and liquid transport in highly charged nanoscale
pores, the implications for molecular separations and electrokinetic energy
conversion. The academic collaborators are planning to work with industry
partner Chasm Technologies to develop the subsystems and processing steps (e.g.,
coating, electrokinetic alignment, curing, and post processing) to enable roll-
to-roll manufacturing of large-area BNNT membranes. Together, the team studies
scalability of the manufacturing process, membrane yield and performance as the
size is increased to 100 cm2 and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.