* 1762025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Refugees, Labor Markets and Urban Revitalization
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 17,599.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the role of refugee women in the
revitalization of American cities. The doctoral student will examine how urban
revitalization and gentrification in U.S. cities are linked to both refugee
women's direct labor in these resettlement cities and the economic pulse
generated by remittance flows from the labor of women relatives living in
displacement cities in intermediary countries. The project will directly benefit
society by investigating the relationship between refugee women and urban
economic development in the U.S. It will also promote teaching, learning, and
knowledge-sharing between diverse groups through collaborative partnerships with
refugee community organizations. Project findings will be shared with municipal
governments and nonprofit refugee service organizations to contribute to the
formulation of more effective, inclusive, and equitable refugee resettlement
policies.

This dissertation project investigates how refugee women's labor and translocal
linkages contribute to urban revitalization and gentrification in the U.S.
through their subsidization of urban landscape transformation. The project's
central questions are: (1) How does the focus on immediate and "full" employment
by refugee resettlement institutions shape refugee women's practices of unpaid
labor in their resettlement community? (2) How do refugee women in third country
locations support refugees based in the U.S.? (3) In what ways do refugee
women's translocal linkages, unpaid labor, and social reproduction practices
subsidize urban revitalization and facilitate gentrification in their
resettlement community in the U.S.? Using a variety of qualitative methodologies
such as interviews, a survey, extended observation, photovoice, and textual
analysis to investigate these questions via a case study of Rohingya refugees in
the rapidly gentrifying city of Aurora, Colorado as well as Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, a displacement site from which many Aurora-based refugees come. This
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award will provide support to enable
a promising student to establish an academic research career.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.