* 1762292
* Collaborative Research: Fracture Mechanics of Glasses with Nanoscale Phase Separation - A Multiscale Experimental and Computational Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mathieu Bauchy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2022
* USD 253,077.00

Although glasses exhibit unique properties, such as high strength and
transparency, their inherent brittleness seriously limits their use in many
practical applications. Extrinsic treatments can increase the toughness of glass
but typically compromise its optical transparency. As an alternative route, this
award supports fundamental research to elucidate how controlled nanoscale
composition may be used to enhance the resistance to fracture of glass. This
knowledge will accelerate the design of tough, yet transparent glasses. Insights
from this study will promote glass as a competitive material for a broader range
of applications, for which glasses have not been considered until now due to
concerns related to safety and reliability resulting from their risk of
fracture. Insights from this project will also lead to improved glass
performance in many existing applications,for instance, lighter automotive
windshields would result in significant energy savings. Thus, the research will
not only promote the progress of science but due to the prevalence of glass will
also advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. By integrating
multiple disciplines, including physics, material science, and mechanical
engineering, this research will train a diverse group of students in various
aspects of engineering and contribute to forming the next generation of
scientists that the U.S. glass industry critically needs to compete globally. In
addition, this award will support: inclusion of undergraduate students in
research, integration of research and education through extensive collaboration
with glass manufacturer Corning Inc., and recruitment of minority students and
outreach to K-12 students through university programs
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brittleness remains the main drawback of glasses. To
overcome this age-old limitation, this research aims to elucidate the effects of
nanoscale heterogeneities and controlled phase separation on the fracture
toughness of calcium aluminosilicate glasses,an archetypical model for alkali-
free display glasses. The bottom-up strategy relies on high-throughput molecular
dynamics simulations, benefits from topological constraint theory, and
culminates in peridynamic simulations to ensure the hand-shake of all the
considered spatial scales: atoms, microstructure, and continuum. These
predictions are systemically validated by experiments, which comprise structural
analysis and mechanical tests. This interdisciplinary effort will offer some new
insights in the thermodynamics and kinetics of phase separation in glasses. This
new fundamental knowledge will serve as a guide to elucidate the distinct roles
of the atomic topology, heterogeneity thereof, and nanoscale phase separation in
controlling the nanoductility and macroscopic toughness of silicate
glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.