* 1762188
* Multi-Material Properties via Multi-Field Processing on a Single Constituent Set
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Paris vonLockette, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2023
* USD 627,743.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge enabling the
processing of polymer matrix composites with controlled heterogenous
architectures that possess spatially varying mechanical and electronic/magnetic
properties throughout the structure. The work extends the range of materials and
structures accessible via additive processing techniques promoting the progress
of science and advancing national prosperity. Almost all modern materials
consist of a mixture or composite of materials which can act synergistically to
produce interesting and useful properties which do not exist in any of the
constituents. The research looks to the simplification of these additive
processing techniques by applying external electrical and magnetic fields during
the manufacturing process that leads to a spontaneous internal ordering of the
two phases. While state-of-the-art multi-material additive manufacturing
utilizes complex machinery and separate reservoirs for each material, this
process would simplify manufacturing by fabricating parts with a range of
material properties from a single material reservoir. Such processing has the
capacity to revolutionize additive manufacturing by fabricating fully
functioning devices through the control of the micro-architecture of the
composites and hence their material properties. The work will seek out material
and processing condition pairings that can achieve dichotomous properties,
allowing the source material to produce materials that are stiff or compliant,
magnetic or non-magnetic, conducting or insulating, etc. as needed locally
during component fabrication. For example, instead of needing conducting metals
surrounded by insulating polymer to fabricate parts with integrated wiring, this
work will determine specific processing techniques to produce locally conductive
and insulating regions within the part from the single material reservoir.
Structured polymer matrix composites which are critical to a wide range of
industries including aerospace, automotive, and healthcare developed through
additive manufacturing would simply product development and open new application
areas benefiting the U.S. economy and society. The outreach and educational
components of the work will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research and positively impact engineering education in an emerging
field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
experimentally and theoretically study and quantify the ability of uniform and
non-uniform electromagnetic fields and their gradients to develop micro-
architectures in polymer matrix composites that have not been achieved using
traditional uniform and single field processing. An electromagnetically assisted
manufacturing process can provide a viable, lower-cost route to multi-material
properties by reducing the complexity of these manufacturing systems down to a
set of process variables that lead to desired properties. Externally applied
electric and magnetic fields act orthogonally on the embedded barium hexaferrite
particles within the uncured composite due to the particles' planar shape and
crystallographic c-axis magnetization, allowing multi-axis control of particle
alignments. Furthermore, externally induced dielectrophoretic and
magnetophoretic particle-particle interactions allow control of the arrangement
of aggregates of particles, providing a second hierarchical level of control.
While dielectrophoresis and magnetophoresis are well known phenomena, this
research will provide new knowledge of how regulated interactions of both fields
with anisotropic particles can be used to develop micro-architectures that
produce extremum dielectric, magnetic, and mechanical properties. The research
team will perform computational multi-physics simulations of the electromagnetic
field processing to predict resulting micro-architectures. Finite element
modeling of the resulting micro-architectures will then provide estimates of
resulting material properties. Experimental fabrication of these composites
using predicted process variables, combined with an array of electromagnetic and
mechanical characterization, will be used to refine simulations and to direct
iterative experimental and computational trials, closing the loop with a multi-
level Monto-Carlo optimization scheme. Results of this work will provide data on
the process parameter, constituent, effective property design space that others
may use to fabricate materials with tailored properties in a general
electromagnetic processing context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.