* 1762739
* Diatom-Enabled Scalable Nanomanufacturing for Photonic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Xin Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2024
* USD 427,977.00

As a major group of microalgae, diatoms have long been the inspiration and
source material in many research fields. The intricate morphology of the
abundant nanostructured silicon dioxide exoskeletons (also known as frustules)
have led to numerous studies. To date, diatom frustules have been used in
fluorescence immunoassays because their nanopores provide large surface areas
for the bonding of bio-molecules. They have also been used as anode materials in
dye sensitized solar cells because of their excellent light scattering property.
The numerous nanostructures on diatom frustules are markedly uniform, however,
they are seldom used in the scalable manufacturing of nanopatterns. This award
advances the knowledge of how to utilize diatom frustule nanostructures on a
large scale, by developing a better understanding of the interaction between
diatom frustules and their surrounding gas/liquid/solid environments. This
understanding is harnessed to produce large-area, uniform diatom frustule
assemblies, followed by the replication of their nanostructures in two- and
three-dimensions. Specifically, the photonic properties of these assemblies and
their replicas are investigated and tailored towards specific photonic
applications. The project provides a series of outreach modules tailored towards
educating young researchers, including women and underrepresented minorities,
and for fostering their passion in nanoscience and nanomanufacturing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic
microalgae which are ubiquitous in aquatic environments and remarkably diverse,
with the estimated number of living species on the order of tens of thousands.
As a potentially low-cost biomaterial, diatom frustules contain dense arrays of
highly uniform nanopores, the diameters of which are as small as 40-60 nm. To
fully utilize these remarkable nanostructures, diatom-enabled scalable
nanomanufacturing approaches are explored in this work. Typical diatom frustule
morphologies (e.g. Coscinodiscus sp. and Pinnularia sp.) are used to investigate
different strategies in developing large-area frustule monolayers. This project
addresses the fundamental and technological issues of the interactions between
frustule and liquid-air and liquid-solid interfaces, and harnessing these
interactions to achieve uniformly oriented compact frustule monolayers for
subsequent nanopatterning. By analyzing computational and experimental results
of such interactions, this research seeks to optimize diatom monolayer assembly
formation through optimizing the frustule surface treatment and fluid flow
conditions. Following the frustule assemblies, nanopattern transfer techniques
are studied towards the 2D and 3D replication of frustule nanostructures through
surface micromachining and micro-molding techniques. In addition, the light
scattering properties of the frustule assemblies and their replicas are
investigated. The replicated nanopatterns mirroring the hierarchical nanopores
of the frustules are specifically tailored towards photonic applications, such
as IR absorbers and photonic crystal filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.