* 1762506
* Collaborative Research: Interphase Chromatin as a Complex Active Fluid: Experiments and Microscopic to Mesoscopic Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2022
* USD 398,887.00

Almost every human cell contains a copy of the 3-meters of genetic material
(DNA) that makes us unique. In an amazing achievement, the genetic sequence of
these enormous DNA molecules was decoded about twenty years ago. Despite knowing
the sequence, it remains unclear how these enormous molecules are packed into a
cell nucleus (approximately a six micrometer diameter sphere) in a way that the
genetic information can be useful. Understanding how the information in DNA is
made available for use by the cell is fundamental for advances in modern
medicine and to advancing health. During one phase in the growth of cells, the
molecules of the nucleus fill it in an uncondensed polymeric form that rapidly
moves because of natural thermal agitation. The molecular motion is not fully
understood, especially the coherent motions caused by the close packing in the
nucleus where many parts of the molecules move together. The goal of this
research is to determine the mechanisms of this dynamic self-organization using
a powerful combination of experiments, simulations and modeling. By providing a
microscopic description for the origin of coherent motions, the proposed
research will transform our understanding of the mechanobiology of the nucleus.
This project also will provide novel educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, who will receive training in advanced imaging techniques
and analysis, cellular biology, polymer dynamics, fluid mechanics, as well as
mathematical and computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will combine high-resolution live cell imaging experiments
with theoretical and computational models to probe and illuminate the
microscopic origins of interphase chromatin dynamics and its effect on the
spatiotemporal self-organization of DNA. To develop a close connection between
experiments and models, we will perform experiments in several cell lines with
different spatial distributions of chromatin. These experiments will provide
exquisite measurements of correlated motions over a wide range of length and
time scales, and will be used to decipher the contributions of internal active
forces on chromatin organization. Moreover, these experiments will guide
theoretical and computational models based on coarse-grained descriptions of the
chromatin as a confined and hydrodynamically interacting flexible polymer chain
driven internally by stochastic force dipoles representing active enzymes. We
will test the hypothesis that chromatin dynamics is primarily the consequence of
internal activity via hydrodynamic interactions, and use quantitative
comparisons between experiments and models to elucidate the symmetries,
frequencies, and intensities of active events responsible for coherent motion.
Such knowledge is critical for understanding the physiology of the interphase
chromatin dynamics in the cell nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.