* 1762626
* Multifunctional 2D Polymers and Hybrids via Crystal Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2022
* USD 394,743.00

This project advances the manufacture of crystalline polymer materials,
promoting both the progress of science and advancing national prosperity.
Crystallization as a materials processing technique is widely used in today's
industry to manufacture fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals and semiconductors.
However, in polymer engineering, the utilization of crystallization for
processing purposes is limited because it is challenging to control polymer
crystallization and even more difficult to grow polymer single crystals. Recent
work demonstrated that polymer single crystals-based two dimensional polymers
and hybrids have great potential in applications such as nanoparticle synthesis
and patterning, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, artificial nanomotors and
catalyst support. Uniform, functional, and controllable two-dimensional polymer
single crystals must be produced at large scale for principal commercial
applications, which is a major challenge to the community. This project develops
two processing platforms called continuous evaporative solution crystallization
and evaporative interface crystallization to produce these polymer crystals meet
this challenge. The educational component of the project includes developing
class modules, mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, and involving high
school students in the research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is developing a versatile processing approach
to synthesize polymer single crystal-based, two dimensional polymers and
hybrids. The major research activities of the work include: 1) Developing a
library of homo-crystal and hetero-crystal seeds to control the polymer single
crystal size and size distribution; 2) Improving the yield of polymer single
crystal growth using a continuous evaporative solution crystallization method;
3) Developing an evaporative interface crystallization method to grow wafer-size
two dimensional polymer single crystals; 4) Better understanding the growth
control of multi-component, end-dissimilar polymers in order to achieve two
dimensional polymer single crystals with nanoscale chemical heterogeneity. It is
anticipated that such an exquisite morphological control directly leads to two
dimensional hybrids with controlled nanoparticle type, loading, and spatial
distribution, which are critical for their intended applications in catalysis,
nanomotors and nanoparticle patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.