* 1762802
* Horizontal Ribbon Growth of Single-Crystal Silicon
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Brian Helenbrook, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 513,509.00

The manufacture of high efficiency solar cells to convert solar energy to
electrical energy currently makes use of a process known as the Czochralski
growth process to fabricate high quality silicon wafers. A lower-cost, more
efficient manufacturing approach for manufacturing these high quality single-
crystal silicon wafers, called horizontal ribbon growth, has been developed.
Compared to Czochralski growth, horizontal ribbon growth has the potential to
produce thinner and larger wafers at a faster rate and a lower cost, with up to
75% potential cost savings. Commercialization of the horizontal ribbon growth
process has been difficult, however, due to a lack of fundamental understanding
of the physics that control this process. This award supports research that will
contribute new knowledge related to a novel process for manufacturing single-
crystal silicon wafers called horizontal ribbon growth. There are currently no
models of the process that predict all of the phenomena observed in horizontal
ribbon growth experiments. Most importantly, the maximum growth rates attainable
have yet to be predicted. The goal of this work is to develop a model of the
process that can predict the experimentally observed phenomena including the
maximum growth rates. This model will then be used optimize the process so that
it can be successfully commercialized. This has the potential to promote the
development of new U.S. industries and to bring down the cost of solar energy to
the point that solar energy would be cheaper than any other energy source. In
addition, this research will contribute to work force training in the areas of
fluid mechanics, thermal engineering, and materials science as well as broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are currently no models that can accurately
predict the horizontal ribbon growth process, and there are many experimental
phenomena that occur that are unexplained. Developing a predictive model will
give a greater understanding of the process, which will reduce the time and
costs needed for commercialization. Because horizontal ribbon growth is not
well-understood or studied, there is also an opportunity to make significant
fundamental advances in our understanding of solidification kinetics. Studies at
molecular to continuum scales will be used to understand and develop predictive
models of the processes occurring. This understanding will then be applied to
optimize the process and could also lead improvements in other crystal
manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.