* 1762971
* Spin Functionality in Perovskite Stannates Through Complex Oxide Heteroepitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Yuri Suzuki, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Semiconductor materials have formed the foundation of
microelectronic devices that drive a wide range of technologies, including
information technology, energy applications and national security. In an effort
to improve energy efficiency and performance of existing microelectronics,
semiconductors with strong magnetic responses, or ferromagnetic semiconductors,
have been recognized as a possible alternative to current non-magnetic
semiconductors. This project addresses the challenge of identifying and
developing a new class of ferromagnetic semiconductors to enable improvements in
energy efficiency and performance. One class of promising ferromagnetic
semiconductors is based on a class of oxide thin films based on Sn, known as
perovskite stannates. The research involves the design, synthesis, and
characterization of stannate thin films with strong magnetic response.
Additional research activities include the training of undergraduate and
graduate researchers, including underrepresented minorities, who are likely to
find future employment in the information technology sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This integrated research and education
program is focused on the development of a new class of spin-polarized
semiconductors in epitaxial stannate oxide thin films through incorporation of
magnetic dopants. Research activities include unique approaches to magnetic
doping, including incorporating concentrations of magnetic dopants beyond the
solubility limits at thermal equilibrium and co-doping on both types of cation
sites. This research is timely as it exploits the recent development of high
mobility epitaxial stannate films and it may provide an avenue to a room
temperature ferromagnetic semiconductor that could make spin-based semiconductor
electronics a reality and may revolutionize the microelectronics industry.
Education aspects of this project include the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, and the development of an apprenticeship and modular
materials physics curricular program for local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.