* 1762556
* Human-Inspired Balance Control of Bipedal Walkers with Foot Slip
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 410,422.00

This project will contribute to the national welfare, health and prosperity by
advancing mathematical dynamic models that can accurately capture and predict
slip-and-fall accidents. Unintentional falls are the leading cause of nonfatal
human injuries and the second leading cause of accidental deaths. The fall-
related economic and societal costs for elders and professional workers are very
substantial, and foot slippage is one of the major causes. This project will
develop mathematical models and balance control strategies informed by human
motor skills. In collaboration with Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation, this
knowledge will enable development of innovative personalized assistive and
rehabilitation technology for prevention of slip-induced falls. The researchers
will also develop a number of integrated research and education programs to
attract students from underrepresented groups into engineering and involve
undergraduate students into research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slip-and-fall
consists of a series of continuously rapidly changing, whole-body human
movements. It is challenging to capture and model human motion and reaction to
slip due to complex slip biomechanics, human interactive neuro-musculoskeletal
control and lack of real-time sensing and assistive technologies for reliably
detecting the foot slip and helping design bipedal balance control under slip.
The project will emphasize (1) the development of new dynamics models to
understand and capture the bipedal walking locomotion under slip; (2) a new
human-inspired balance recovery design to prevent slip-induced falls; and (3)
experimental validation and testbed development to real-time detect slip and
effectively prevent slip-induced falls. The new knowledge and design tools
developed in this project will also serve as a cornerstone to further advance
understanding, modeling and control of unsteady, unstable, agile bipedal
locomotion and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.