* 1762602
* Probing the Effect of Ion Insertion on the Mechanical Stability of High Capacity Nanocomposite Anodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Katerina Aifantis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 347,671.00

Silicon based electrodes are the most promising next generation anodes for Li-
ion batteries due to their high energy storage density, however, they have not
been commercialized because they fail due to mechanical fracture very quickly. A
similar rapid failure due to mechanical instability must be overcome in
commercializing tin anodes for sodium-ion batteries. The material with the most
promising microstructure that can limit such fracture or instability is that of
silicon or tin nanoparticles coated with a matrix. The present award will use an
integrated experimental-computational approach to investigate the mechanical
behavior of these nanocomposites and will predict the interplay between the size
of the tin or silicon particles, the matrix material, and battery performance.
The successful end to the research will promote the progress of
interdisciplinary science and, on the application side, provide design guidance
for commercializing next generation electrodes. The resulting lithium-ion
batteries will have a longer lifetime and smaller dimensions than the current
ones, and will have a wide range of applications from cell phones to electric
vehicles. Sodium-ion batteries occupy larger volumes than lithium-ion and
therefore will be used in combination with renewable energy sources. This
project will, therefore, also allow for a more sustainable and environmentally
friendly US economy, thus advancing the national health, prosperity, and
welfare. The results will be disseminated to high schools and science museums to
motivate young students, especially from minorities, to study science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fully understand the mechanical behavior of
nanocomposite anodes an interdisciplinary approach will be followed which
combines detailed electrochemical experiments along with multiphysics modeling.
The specific focus is to determine the effect of lithium-ion (or sodium-ion)
insertion and de-insertion on silicon and/or tin nanoparticles coated with
polymers. A new computational model will be formulated and implemented, which
will allow for the prediction of the appropriate combination of particle size
and polymer coating that will inhibit damage at the interfaces of the
nanocomposite anodes during battery operation. Based on the theoretical
predictions new anodes will be fabricated and tested. Particularly high-
resolution electron microscopy will be able to capture the extent of damage at
the particle-polymer interface and verify the model. After experimental
validation, design guidance will be available for battery developers to
fabricate next generation electrodes for both lithium and sodium ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.