* 1762106
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Nanoparticle Growth from Nitrate (NO3) Radical Initiated Oxidation of Monoterpenes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Juliane Fry, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 162,727.00

This project combines the results of laboratory studies with numerical modeling
to investigate the growth of tiny nanoparticles in the atmosphere. It is
important to understand the growth of these tiny particles because they can
influence the formation and properties of cloud droplets. This research will
lead to the development of a mechanistic model to better predict the influence
of aerosol on climate and air quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory
experiments will be conducted to identify and quantify the gas- and particle-
phase products of the reactions of NO3 radicals with three common monoterpenes:
&amp;#945;-pinene, &amp;#946;-pinene, 3-carene, and an additional compound,
&amp;#945;-thujene, which is structurally similar to &amp;#945;-pinene and
should likewise form gas phase products that contribute minimally to
nanoparticle growth. These experiments will be conducted for a range of NO3
concentrations, humidities, and temperatures. Computational chemistry studies
will provide insight into possible reaction mechanisms and nanoparticle growth
due to monoterpene oxidation by NO3 radicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
objectives of the project are: (1) Implement computational chemistry methods for
elucidating reaction pathways and developing CIMS detection strategies; (2)
Perform comparative laboratory studies of NO3 radical initiated oxidation of
monoterpenes; and (3) Obtain chemical closure between gas phase precursors and
nanoparticle physicochemical properties. The process-level model for
nanoparticle growth, developed through this project, will be tested using
experimentally measured growth rates. Nanoparticle growth is directly tied to
the ability of these particles to influence cloud condensation nuclei
populations and affect the formation and properties of cloud droplets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project includes a "near-peer" program
that pairs University of California at Irvine graduate students with Reed
College undergraduates in order to facilitate scientific interactions and to
prepare the undergraduates for graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.