* 1762353
* Nanosecond Laser-Based High-Throughput Surface Nanostructuring (nHSN) and Process Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Shaoping Xiao, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 10/31/2022
* USD 550,794.00

This research project will study the fundamentals of laser and chemical
processing methods to create functional surface textures on metal alloys. The
fabricated surfaces have random micro- and nanoscale surface structures that
promote superhydrophobic (repels water), and highly anti-reflective
characteristics that are favorable for drag reduction, anti-icing, self-
cleaning, and light absorption applications. The processing method can both be
applied to many critical engineering materials including steel, aluminum,
titanium and magnesium alloys, and offer a high-throughput process chain capable
of treating large surface areas. By this method, the laser processing time will
be significantly reduced from hundreds of minutes per 6.5 cm^2 (square inch), as
currently required, to a few seconds. Realization of these potential
manufacturing gains will advance the national prosperity and welfare by
increasing U.S. advanced manufacturing competitiveness, and will find
application across many manufacturing sectors including aerospace, energy, and
defense. The award will also facilitate training of the future workforce as
students across all levels will gain experience in advanced manufacturing and
surface science fundamentals. Additional educational opportunities will be made
available for underrepresented freshman from rural areas of Iowa through the
Rural Scholar Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this project is to understand the underlying fundamental mechanisms driving the
nanosecond Laser-based High-throughput Surface Nanostructuring process. The
process comprises two steps: (1) water-confined Nanosecond Laser Texturing,
during which a high-energy, nanosecond pulse laser scans a metal surface
submerged in water, using a large spatial increment and a fast processing speed:
and (2) Chemical Immersion Treatment, during which the laser-textured surface is
further treated by immersion in a chlorosilane reagent. Specific tasks are aimed
at the following; 1) verifying that the increased laser power intensity
generates the desired surfaces via surface chemistry and microstructural
changes, 2) verifying that the competing mechanisms of chemical etching, and
surface silianization occurring during the chemical immersion treatment drive
the formation of the nanostructures, 3) determining the long-term endurance of
surface attributes in high-temperature, corrosive, and/or abrasive environments,
and 4) identification of the functional effects of random surface nanostructure
size, shape and variation on superhydrophobicity, capillary adhesive forces, and
anti-reflection characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.