* 1762595
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Control-Oriented Modeling and Predictive Control of High Efficiency Low-emission Natural Gas Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Javad Mohammadpour Velni, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2023
* USD 275,991.00

About 200 million internal combustion engines (ICEs) are produced in the world
every year and used in energy, transport and service sectors. Furthermore, ICEs
account for over 22% of the U.S. total energy consumption and produce the
largest portion of CO2 greenhouse gas emissions in urban areas. Dual fuel
natural gas (NG) engines in advanced low temperature combustion regimes
represent the state-of-the-art ICE technology with some of the highest reported
fuel conversion efficiencies and 25% lower CO2 emissions compared to
conventional engines. However, achieving a robust and high-efficiency
performance of these engines on a broad operational range using existing control
technologies is not possible due to their highly nonlinear and uncertain dynamic
behavior. This research aims at developing fundamental tools for dynamic
modeling and control of nonlinear systems and applying them to high-efficiency
low-emission advanced ICEs. The project will provide wide-ranging societal
benefits through three major impact areas: first, by advancing research in
nonlinear control systems, and mixing and reactive flow including combustion
systems; second, by providing direct benefits for control of combustion engines,
commonly used in power generation, automotive, locomotive, marine, oil and gas
drilling, construction, utilities and manufacturing industries; and third,
through educational and outreach activities delivered at industry sites, local
communities and science fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaborative effort between Michigan Technological University, University of
Georgia, and the industry partner, Cummins Inc. The project intends to develop a
suite of innovative control-oriented modeling and stochastic predictive control
design tools to address control challenges for advanced dual fuel natural gas
engines, as well as a broad range of other nonlinear and stochastic dynamic
systems. The outcomes of this project result in six main components that
include: (i) characterizing the dynamics of dual fuel NG engines in advanced
combustion regimes, (ii) building the first physics-based control-oriented model
for advanced dual fuel NG engines, (iii) developing new analytical tools for
deriving models through the powerful fusion of machine learning and classical
multivariate methods, (iv) providing solutions to fill the gaps between first-
principles models and data-driven methods for estimating an accurate model, (v)
bridging the gaps between parameter-varying systems and stochastic controls, and
(vi) constructing, testing, and validating the combustion controllers for dual
fuel NG engines. The outcomes from these six theoretical, modeling and
experimental contributions will be generic dynamic modeling and predictive
control design tools for nonlinear and stochastic industrial systems that are
demonstrated on engine test-beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.