* 1762818
* GOALI: Experimental and Computational Approaches to Tailor Properties of Additively Manufactured Semi-Crystalline Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Amy Peterson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brigid Mullany
* 10/31/2018
* USD 297,872.00

Material extrusion, a form of polymer additive manufacturing in which a filament
is extruded layer-by-layer onto a bed, can manufacture components with geometric
complexity far beyond that possible with conventional manufacturing methods.
Building the part in layers, which enables great geometric freedom, also limits
the mechanical integrity of the printed part. The bonding quality between
printed layers yields parts with lower mechanical strength than if they were
manufactured by traditional molding methods. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project seeks to understand how polymer
properties and processing conditions interact, and how they can both be
manipulated to enhance interlayer bonding in material extrusion additive
manufacturing. The knowledge gained will be leveraged to both tailor polymer
properties for additive manufacturing processes, and to print components with
mechanical properties appropriate for functional applications. Success will
greatly enhance the competitiveness of the US additive manufacturing base by
providing a pathway towards the manufacture of cost effective, functional
polymeric components. This award will also facilitate training of the future
workforce; both graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the
research activities and will gain experience in advanced manufacturing and
polymer science. As this is an industry-university collaborative project with
Henkel Corporation, the students involved will also gain an understanding of
industrial challenges and drivers. Planned workshops on polymer additive
manufacturing will disseminate the knowledge to industries seeking new
opportunities in this manufacturing arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will test the hypotheses that interlayer diffusion is a function of the
difference between extrusion temperature and glass transition temperature, and
that weld strength is dependent on the difference between the glass transition
temperature and melt temperature as well as temperature-dependent wetting. This
necessitates an understanding of the thermal characteristics of the material and
the additive manufacturing process, and how they affect physical and mechanical
properties of a printed structure. Towards this goal, three major research tasks
will be undertaken: 1. Determine the role of the difference between the glass
transition and melt temperatures in weld strength and residual stress of printed
semi-crystalline polymers; 2. Understand the impact of crystallization kinetics
on the crystalline morphology formed in additively manufactured structures; 3.
Understand how glass reinforcement affects crystallization, heat transfer, and
mechanical properties. By understanding the role of assembly conditions on
resulting physical and mechanical properties, the work will lead to improved and
tailorable physical and mechanical polymer properties essential to structure
functionality. This research will also provide guidance in how to formulate
polymers for additive manufacturing, based on thermal and physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.