* 1762015
* CSR: Small: Client-Centric Consistency
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lorenzo Alvisi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The isolation guarantees offered by a storage system regulate how multiple
transactions executing concurrently read and write data correctly. Similarly,
when data is replicated and updated at geographically-distinct locations (as do
Facebook and Twitter), consistency guarantees specify which data is visible to
clients that access different replicas. This project will develop a new
programmer-centric model for expressing rigorously, in a single framework, the
isolation and consistency guarantees offered by geo-replicated storage systems.
It will then leverage the new model to seek more efficient ways to implement
these guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will proceed along three
thrusts. First, it will seek to express isolation and consistency guarantees as
properties of states that applications can observe, instead of relying on
invisible histories of low-level read/write operations. Second, it will seek to
overcome the current scalability bottlenecks that arise with slow or faulty
servers, which have, to date, stifled industry's interest in deploying causally-
consistent geo-replicated data stores. Third, it will leverage its unified
treatment of consistency and isolation to support, for the first time, generic
read/write transactions on top of a scalable consistent data
store.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project directly addresses the growing interest
in both research and industry towards large-scale, transactional distributed
systems. By confronting key obstacles to scalability, it will contribute to
bring to industrial fruition over two decades of academic research on causal
consistency. Further, by establishing a common language to discuss consistency
and isolation, it will enable more fruitful exchanges between the systems and
database research communities, who, because of their primary focus on,
respectively, consistency and isolation, have often been talking past each
other. The project, with its tight integration of both theoretical and
experimental research, is ideally suited to introducing graduate and
undergraduate students to research, and will offer a new approach to teaching
consistency and isolation in graduate and undergraduate courses in distributed
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes (papers published,
presentations, and a repository of the software and workloads used to
demonstrate the results of the project) will be made available for download at
the address http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/lorenzo/projects/CCC/, where they
will be kept for five years.