* 1762389
* Instabilities in Shape Memory Alloys and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Stelios Kyriakides, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 476,657.00

One of the most unique properties of shape memory alloys, like NiTi, is
pseudoelasticity, which is the ability of the material to be deformed at room
temperature to strains of a few percent and return to its unstrained
configuration when unloaded. This unique characteristic is derived from a
diffusionless transformation between two solid-state phases, which can be
induced by changes in either stress or temperature. These characteristics are
being exploited for novel structural applications in diverse fields; however,
the design of shape memory structures is complicated by the: inhomogeneous
deformations associated with the coexistence of the two phases during
transformation, thermomechanical interactions, and significant tension-
compression asymmetry. This project will use an integrated experimental-
computational approach using material and structural samples to unravel these
complications to enable the design and wider use of this unique class of
materials. This project will progress the science of smart materials; advance
the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and secure the national defense by
enabling shape memory structural applications, like biomedical devices,
aerospace components, damping and energy absorption, microelectromechanical
systems, and morphing structures. In addition to the training of MS and PhD
graduate students, the project includes undergraduate participation to attract
them to research and graduate school. Outreach to K-12 students through lectures
and laboratory demonstrations will be used to expand their interest in STEM
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pure bending experiments on NiTi tubes have
revealed complex interactions between the prevalent material nonlinearities with
structural ones that lead to localization, collapse and failure. The proposed
study has three main components: (i) Experiments on NiTi tubes loaded under
bending, tension, compression, pressure, and torsion are planned in order to
explore the results of these interactions and the associated limit states and
provide a basis for developing the necessary analytical tools. (ii) A recently
developed constitutive model framework that captures the tension-compression
asymmetry and the inhomogeneous deformations associated with tensile stress
states will be expanded to include thermal effects. The model will be calibrated
using a spectrum of uniaxial, biaxial, and thermomechanical experiments. (iii)
The constitutive model will be implemented in finite element models of the
structures studied, testing their ability to reproduce the measured structural
behaviors and the associated limit states. This multi-pronged approach to this
class of problems involving interacting material and structural instabilities
should provide the necessary tools for designing shape memory structures. The
fundamental nature of this investigation is expected to also impact other
materials that exhibit propagating instabilities like L?ders banding in steels,
foams, and wood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.