* 1762157
* RAPID: Measuring freshwater exports from Galveston Bay after Hurricane Harvey
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Kristen Thyng, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 134,964.00

The unexpected and unprecedented flooding in Houston caused by Hurricane Harvey
poses several human health and coastal ecosystem risks due to toxins remobilized
by the floodwaters and severe modifications to salinity of regional coastal
waters. Following the extreme flushing event, the salinity of Galveston Bay was
set to near zero, an extreme condition that can impact the ecosystem and
biodiversity of the area. The goal of this project is to understand how
Galveston Bay and the adjacent coastal waters respond to this extreme freshwater
forcing event. Time-critical measurements of currents, temperature and salinity
will be undertaken at various locations within Galveston Bay and offshore, and
at three different times following the flooding event. The measurements will
allow: (1) quantification of residence time of Galveston Bay; (2)
characterization of salinity structure within the bay; and (3) identification of
the salinity structure and extend of the offshore plume from Galveston Bay.
Analysis of the data will assist in establishing the time scales required for
the reintroduction of salt into Galveston Bay, following the extreme flushing
event that reset the Bay?s salinity to near zero. Through the new and timely
observations generated by this proposal, a more accurate prediction of
baroclinic circulation, which controls transport and fate of pollutants
introduced into flood waters will be achieved. Thirteen superfund sites were
flooded by this event; chemical plants were compromised; automobiles and
households were inundated; and, unknown amounts of resuspension may have exposed
buried contaminants. The results of this study will provide an understanding of
the fate of these chemicals in the aquatic ecosystem. The data collected will be
instrumental in testing and improving numerical models using extreme conditions,
thus allowing for better and more accurate predictions. The observations in
combination with a numerical modeling suite that will quantify and predict
circulation and tracer concentrations in the region will serve as a template for
coastal managers to create a nowcast/forecast system for future extreme events.

Theory suggests that the net mixing that occurs across a near-field or tidal
plume is scaled by the density difference between the outflow and receiving
waters and is proportional to the discharge. These variables are also often
confounded, since high discharge is associated with fresher estuarine outflow.
Hence, a large density difference between the estuarine outflow and receiving
waters is expected. Since there has been significant rainfall runoff throughout
coastal watersheds up coast of Galveston Bay, and because of the position of the
Mississippi/Atchafalaya plume, the receiving waters offshore of Galveston Bay
are expected to be very fresh. At the same time, the discharge from the Bay is
still quite high. This offers a unique opportunity to examine a large near-
field, river plume (the outflow from Galveston Bay) dynamics, in a high
discharge scenario with much smaller density anomalies than those typically
observed. Such conditions will allow the discharge and density anomaly effects
on the near-field mixing and tidal plume dynamics to be disentangled.