* 1762507
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Two-Dimensional Materials by High Speed Compressible Gas Flow Exfoliation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Syed Rizvi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2022
* USD 398,598.00

Two-dimensional materials are atomic layer thick nanomaterials that have unusual
electrical, photonic and mechanical properties. Graphene, boron nitride, and
molybdenum disulfide are examples of two-dimensional materials that are finding
numerous applications in next-generation electronics, composites, consumer
goods, energy generation, and healthcare. One of the main barriers to commercial
adoption of two-dimensional materials is the lack of scalable nanomanufacturing
processes that can take a lab bench process and put it on the factory floor.
This project offers new knowledge for addressing this challenge via fundamental
research on a novel method that entails rapidly producing flakes or nanosheets
of two-dimensional materials by employing high-pressure gas flow. Unlike the
wide assortment of existing methods that require time based treatment, this new
two-dimensional material nanomanufacturing process is rapid and continuous, thus
providing the high throughput production capacity demanded by plant-based
manufacturing. In addition, this process is environmentally friendly and
produces materials of quality that is either better than or comparable to those
produced by existing methods. The results of this work advances the nation's
prosperity and security by boosting competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing
efforts on the international stage and promoting broader adoption of two-
dimensional materials into next-generation nanotechnology-enabled products. The
project is multidisciplinary and involves manufacturing, fluid dynamics,
computational simulations, and materials science. Several graduate and
undergraduate students are trained in these disciplines through this project.
The research multidisciplinary approach and outreach activities jointly help in
broadening participation of women and underrepresented minority students in
advanced research and significantly impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compressible flow exfoliation produces few
layered two-dimensional (2D) materials in a continuous manner using a high-
pressure multiphase gas flowing through a narrow orifice, followed by collection
in a suitable solvent. This project fills the knowledge gap on the mechanisms
and scalability of exfoliation in the presence of a rapidly expanding gaseous
phase. In particular, it contributes to the knowledge of how 2D materials
interact and fragment in the presence of high shear and shockwaves. This
research involves performing process experiments guided by gas dynamics
principles and computational fluid dynamic simulations that test the high shear
rate exfoliation hypothesis. Throughput, yield and flake quality of the
processed 2D materials are optimized and their link to the gas, particle and
post-processing colloid characteristics are established. The feasibility of the
compressible flow exfoliation approach are demonstrated by integrating the
processed 2D materials into next-generation nanotechnology-enabled systems such
as gas-barrier nanocomposite films and electrically conductive inks for
printable electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.