* 1762119
* Collaborative Research: Self-Centering Pendulum Shear Walls in Buildings via Nonlinear Elastic Kinematics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Rigoberto Burgueno, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 339,690.00

A grand challenge in structural engineering is to develop building systems that
can resist loads from extreme natural hazards, such as hurricanes or
earthquakes, with minimum or no damage. Such building systems could enable
immediate occupancy and minimum economic losses after an extreme event,
contributing to continued national prosperity and welfare. Progress has been
made towards addressing this challenge with the development of unbonded, post-
tensioned, shear walls (UPSWs) in buildings; yet limiting issues for designing
such shear walls remain. This research will explore an innovative concept for
structural shear walls to resist lateral loads in buildings and perform damage
free during an extreme event. The concept consists of coupled, unbonded, post-
tensioned, reinforced concrete walls that interact with the foundation via a
curved surface. Lateral deformations will be accommodated through a pendulum-
type motion as the wall slides along the bottom curved surface. Lateral
resistance will be provided by friction along the curved surface and the
vertical unbonded post-tensioned cables. The post-tensioned cables also will
help restore the wall to its initial configuration. Energy dissipation of these
coupled pendulum walls will be provided by incorporating connecting devices that
use elastic buckling and release accumulated elastic energy during the walls'
deformations. The system response thus will leverage the resulting deformations
rather than trying to constrain them, as in traditional systems. The result will
be new technology related to the design of damage-free structural building
systems, and a new way of thinking about leveraging system geometry and
deformations for enhanced resilient and sustainable buildings. Parallel to the
research effort will be complementary educational and outreach components,
including the training of two Ph.D. students, research experiences for
undergraduate students, a project website with tutorials and research findings
for undergraduate and graduate students and practitioners, and outreach
activities for middle and high school students. The tutorials, as well as data
from this project, also will be made publicly available in the NSF-supported
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org).

The core idea of this research is that of a new design philosophy envisioned to
be unrestricted by traditional material failure limit states. This philosophy
will be verified through a new concept for coupled UPSWs. The material response
limitations of rocking UPSWs will be addressed by harnessing the nonlinear
kinematic behavior resulting from coupled system deformations. Thus, the project
objective is to develop the enabling theory and technology for a new concept of
UPSWs that can perform damage free and unrestricted by material failure limit
states. This objective will be achieved through two unique and complementary
features: (1) individual walls gliding along a circular path with no separation
at the footing interface, and (2) continuous energy dissipation via devices with
controllable elastic instabilities along vertical wall joints. This concept will
be designated as a pendulum UPSW system, as it rotates about a fixed point on
the wall. The approach to be followed will be to characterize the in-plane
response of pendulum UPSWs as viable lateral load resisting elements, develop
and characterize the use of elastic meta-materials and meta-structures for
dissipating energy via elastic instabilities, and characterize the response of
pendulum UPSWs coupled with elastic multi-stable structures as connectors. A
combination of analytical, numerical (finite element), and experimental methods
will be used. This research will lead to the fundamental integration of system
geometry and deformations for the design of lateral load resisting structures
that are resilient and sustainable. The study will promote new design concepts
that harness deformations for optimal performance rather than performance
objectives set to target material limit states. The research also will
contribute to the use of nonlinear elastic instabilities in large-scale
structural systems. Theory and methods related to damage-free structural
systems, friction models, and elastic energy dissipation devices will also be
advanced.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.