* 1762010
* Spokes: Medium: Western: Collaborative: Big Data to Promote Community Learning and Impact
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hengchun Ye, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 948,683.00

The project will create a partnership among California State University Los
Angeles, City of Los Angeles (LA) GEOHub, Community Partners, and the Social
Equity Engagement geo-Data Scholars (SEEDS) Program to provide access to and
greater utilization of the city's big data collection. The partnership will
introduce GeoHub data as decision making tools to highly motivated, ethnically
diverse, and civic-minded students and increase participation of citizens in
using GeoHub data. The project activities will promote widespread access to and
understanding of LA's open data portal among a broad cross-section of the
population, especially groups that are traditionally disadvantaged and less
likely to be digitally connected. It will provide training that will allow
citizens and non-profits to become proficient in the use of big data, empower
citizens so that they can see data-driven government in action and effectively
participate in civic decision-making, and make local cities more livable and
equitable for all. With citizen involvement, open data portals can become
sustainable and independent of political changes in the local, state, or
national governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City of Los Angeles will provide
California State University Los Angeles, community partners, and non-profit
organizations GeoHub accounts to access software and apps free of charge and
train California State faculty members who will, in turn, train their students
in GeoHub's data and visualization applications. The students will help
Community Partners to train non-profit organizations to use GeoHib for all of
their service needs. This approach will effectively reach large numbers of users
and contributors in diversified communities. The project will produce course
modules with GeoHub hands-on service learning activities in disciplines across
humanities, social sciences, geosciences, political sciences, public health, and
civil engineering. It will also generate data access and visualization manuals
and support community-based research projects. The project plan aligns with the
Western Big Data Hub big data education and literacy efforts and contributes to
the Hub's cross-sector activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources
(IUSE): EHR Program (NSF 17-590). IUSE supports projects that are designed to
improve student learning through development of new curricular materials and
methods of instruction and development of new assessment tools to measure
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.