* 1762458
* Facility Support: High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,361,197.00

This project will continue NSF support of the University of Texas High-
Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Facility (UTCT) as a shared multi-user
facility supporting geoscience research. Computed tomography (CT) is ideally
suited for many geological applications, as it nondestructively creates 3D
imagery of the interiors of rocks, fossils, meteorites and other materials.
Successful application of this technique requires both advanced instrumentation
and experienced operators to optimize data acquisition and processing, and the
ability to design and implement rigorous and well-targeted 3D data analysis
strategies. UTCT serves both as a source of high-quality data for investigators
without access to CT instrumentation, and as a repository of experience and
expertise in all aspects of CT data acquisition and analysis, both through
individual consultation and collaboration and by teaching short courses. Having
UTCT as a national resource thus reduces the number of instruments the nation
needs to conduct CT-involved research, and helps those instruments that we do
invest in to be used to best advantage. Advances in CT data acquisition and
processing at UTCT have also been used in many other fields. UTCT also provides
leadership in management and curation of CT data sets, through our long-term
investment in the DIGIMORPH digital library. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide partial support of the UTCT facility operating expenses for the
next three years, including staff, equipment maintenance, and computing
infrastructure. In addition, funds will be used to upgrade the primary CT
instrument to enhance data processing speed and the flexibility of the detector
gantry to enable scans of larger objects and scanning at higher resolution. The
facility support will allow for timely and high-quality service for a large user
base; development of new CT methodologies; and expansion of short courses in
HRXCT data acquisition, visualization, and
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.