* 1762560
* Design and Investigation of Electrospun Artificial Muscle Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Shengqiang Cai, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2022
* USD 438,174.00

This grant will support the research that will create new knowledge relevant to
soft robotics and active structures that are widely used in biomedical,
manufacturing and energy sectors and will serve to advance our national health
and prosperity. The grant allows the design and investigation of artificial
muscle fibers fabricated from electrospinning technique. Artificial muscle
materials can generate an active deformation and force when subjected to
external stimuli, behaving like real muscle. Previously developed artificial
muscle materials have often suffered from poor scalability and slow response,
which greatly limit their applications. Consequently, performance of artificial
muscle has been increasingly recognized as one of the bottlenecks in designing
novel soft robots and active structures. The artificial muscle material in this
grant will have superior mechanical properties, a faster response rate, diverse
actuating modes and excellent scalability. These new materials will contribute
to the rapidly developing fields of soft robotics, novel actuators and energy
conversion systems. The project will also provide interdisciplinary education
and training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students and seeks to
attract underrepresented groups into science and engineering. Short disseminated
demonstrations of artificial muscles to be developed will serve as an attractive
education and research platform for disadvantaged, first generation high school
and college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The artificial muscle assembled from
electrospun polymer fibers can be easily fabricated into different shapes with
various actuating modes, scaled up and down to various sizes, made to respond to
different stimuli. A comprehensive understanding of processing-structure-
property relationship for the electrospun polymer fibers is essential for the
rational design of the artificial muscle fibers. The research team will
electrospin three different types of polymer fibers: semicrystalline polyamide,
polyelectrolyte and liquid crystal polymer, conduct systematic chemo-thermo-
mechanical characterizations of these individual fibers using novel
electrospinning tools, and design artificial muscle with diverse actuating modes
by assembling these polymer fibers into different
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.