* 1762160
* Neighborhoods in Space-Time Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 07/31/2017,08/31/2020
* Sergio Rey, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 319,630.00

This research project will advance the way in which neighborhoods are defined in
urban social science research. The definition of a socioeconomic neighborhood is
an important and central issue across many research domains. Neighborhoods serve
as the organizational units to frame empirical research that has examined a wide
array of issues, including the ability of social networks to produce collective
efficacy in a spatial context, the relationships between concentrated poverty
traps and violence, spatial sorting and segregation, and the role of
neighborhoods as seeds for wider urban economic development. Despite this
importance, consensus has not yet emerged regarding how to operationalize
neighborhoods in practice. Moreover, the role of spatial structure largely has
been ignored in existing approaches to neighborhood definition. This project
will produce new methods for neighborhood identification and analysis that draw
on recent developments in geographic information science and spatial statistics.
These new methods will enhance the urban social science toolkit enabling
researchers to carry out empirical work that can be replicated, thereby moving
urban policy research onto stronger analytic foundations. The new methods and
analytics will be implemented in a publicly available open-source longitudinal
neighborhood analysis package. The project will provide training to a post-
doctoral research associate and will include a partnership between academia and
industry, with applications to commercial market segmentation and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will advance understanding
of the spatial dimensions of neighborhoods. The project will focus on three
central aims. First, a number of underexamined issues associated with defining
neighborhoods in spatial and temporal contexts will be investigated. These
issues are related to the lack of a spatially explicit approach to neighborhood
definition in the current literature and the impacts of ignoring the dynamics of
spatial clustering and heterogeneity. The second aim is to develop new methods
for neighborhood delineation and analysis that address these issues. These new
methods will include local measures to identify hot-spots of neighborhood change
within individual urban areas as well as global measures that summarize the
overall amount of spatial change in a given metropolitan area. The third area of
activity will be the implementation of the new methods for neighborhood
delineation in an open-source framework to provide social scientists with a
platform of flexible, scalable, and advanced spatio-temporal clustering methods
that support replication and enhance the existing infrastructure of social
science research on urban dynamics.