* 1762463
* Collaborative Research: Brittle-to-Ductile Transition and Strength of  Silicon Nanowires at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ting Zhu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 274,503.00

Silicon is the most commonly used material in the modern electronic and
micro/nano electro-mechanical systems. Brittle fracture is a serious roadblock
to the development of reliable silicon nanostructures for practical use in
micro/nano devices. Initial evidence suggests that at elevated temperatures,
brittle to ductile behavior transition is possible in silicon nanowires, which
presents hope for more reliable applications. This research will advance the
fundamental understanding of the deformation mechanisms underlying such
transition at elevated temperatures. The findings will provide the mechanical
basis for the design of strong and ductile silicon nanostructures at elevated
temperatures, thus advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare. In
addition, the project will promote the progress of nanoengineering by developing
novel experimental and modeling methods for nanoscale research at elevated
temperatures. For broader impact, appropriate lessons from research will be
integrated into a course module for an Atlanta high school with a large minority
student body as well as in an undergraduate course at North Carolina State
University. Moreover, undergraduate students will be recruited to perform
advanced research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently a critical lack of
fundamental knowledge and understanding of the thermomechanical behavior of
nanoscale silicon (Si) at elevated temperatures. The objective of this project
is to quantify the temperature, strain rate, and sample size effects on the
strength and brittle-to-ductile transition (BDT) in Si nanowires, with the help
of novel in-situ thermomechanical experimentation in transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and atomistic modeling. To understand BDT and associated
strength-controlling deformation mechanisms, the research involves three tightly
coupled thrusts: (i) to measure and calculate the yield/fracture strengths of Si
nanowires at different temperatures, strain rates and sample sizes and analyze
the data based on the Weibull statistics; (ii) to obtain activation parameters
(including activation energy and activation volume) of Si nanowires as functions
of temperature, strain rate, sample size, surface and internal structures, and
to perform in-situ TEM characterization of dislocation and fracture mechanisms;
(iii) to conduct the molecular dynamics and atomistic reaction pathway modeling
to elucidate the rate-limiting dislocation mechanisms that control the strength
and BDT by coupling modeling results with in-situ measurements and TEM
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.