* 1762452
* Close Non-Bonded Contacts: Effects on Structure and Conformational Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Pascal, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

In this NSF project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert Pascal, Jr. of the
Department of Chemistry at Tulane University prepares new compounds that contain
interacting functional groups in very close, but non-bonded contact and/or
interacting molecular surfaces whose extent of contact varies with conformation.
Some of these molecules are likely to exhibit "world record" shortening of bond
distances and non-bonded contact distances. Many of these compounds have highly
unusual shapes that are essentially unknown in the natural world. The research
is fundamental in nature and will improve our understanding of chemical bonding.
These compounds may also possess unique chiroptical and photophysical properties
that would make them candidates for chiral catalysts, chiral sensors, or organic
electronic materials. They also provide stringent tests of the accuracy of
computational methods that are widely used in the chemical and biological
sciences. The research is ideal for the training of laboratory chemists at all
levels, including students from underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In,in-cyclophanes, complex polyphenyl aromatic
molecules, and polycyclic aromatic structures containing strongly interacting
surfaces share a common feature: conventional and dispersion-corrected density
functional theory (DFT) calculations describe them quite differently, but which
of these methods better agrees with experiment? (1) The proposed in,in-
cyclophanes contain functional groups pressed very close together along the
central axes of the molecules, but the two types of DFT calculations give
significantly different interatomic distances. (2) The proposed polyphenyl
aromatics have chiral lowest-energy conformations, but the two types of DFT
calculations give very different barriers for racemization. (3) The proposed
molecules with interacting aromatic polycycles may adopt distinct conformations
that either maximize or minimize intramolecular van der Waals interactions, but
the two types of DFT calculations give very different equilibrium constants for
their interconversion. X-ray crystallography, dynamic NMR spectroscopy,
chromatographic resolution on chiral supports, and NMR determination of
equilibrium constants are being employed to judge the accuracy of the various
computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.