* 1762616
* Surface-enabled Manufacturing of Nanowheels for Metamaterial and Nanomotor Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ning Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,182.00

Colloidal assembly is envisioned as an effective method for the bottom-up
fabrication of nanostructures for a broad range of applications from sensors to
photonics to biomedical devices. This award investigates the application of
rotating magnetic fields to paramagnetic nanoparticle colloids to form wheel-
like clusters well suited for assembly into metamaterials and nanomotors. The
process involves manipulating interparticle interactions and thus controlling
colloidal structure formation. This project shows a microfluidic pathway to
fabricating complex three-dimensional nanowheels. Potential applications of the
nanowheels are in building optical metamaterials and disrupting bacterial
biofilms. One potential near-term benefit of nanowheels and nanomotors is their
use in medicine. Colloidal nanowheels can ablate blood clots using a
physiochemical mechanism that results in dissolution rates significantly higher
than clot dissolving drugs. Thus, the project outcomes potentially impact
national health and well-being. The research on nanowheel manufacturing and
translation is integrated with education and outreach programs to inspire young
students in the field of colloid and interfacial science. Research results are
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. Plans are to enhance
diversity in research programs by involving undergraduate students and
recruiting talented underrepresented high school students and mentor them toward
university study in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many desired
colloidal nanostructures are inaccessible because of thermodynamic and kinetic
constraints on their assembly and separation from the mixture. This project
overcomes these limitations and shows a microfluidic pathway to fabricating
complex three-dimensional nanowheels of different size, shape and composition.
The research work takes advantage of the nanowheels' unique rolling behavior on
topographically patterned surfaces to fractionate them into purified streams
based on size and shape. The project's experimental framework, inspired by
rotation of nanowheels and their interaction with properly designed roads,
provides a transformative route to assemble and fractionate colloidal clusters
efficiently. The underlying nanowheel rotation mechanism that exists at the
interplay of fluid mechanics, field directed assembly, and tribology represents
a significant advancement in the field of colloidal assembly. The outcome of
these studies is a new assembly approach that accelerates translation of
colloidal assembly into practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.