* 1762803
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Quantitative Three-Dimensional Understanding of Cardiac Arrhythmias
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Elizabeth Cherry, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2020
* USD 234,989.00

This project aims to develop a better understanding of what initiates some of
the most lethal heart rhythms using mathematics and data assimilation methods
used in weather forecasting. The detailed behavior of cardiac cells and tissue
cannot be measured directly, especially inside of the heart muscle. This project
will develop and validate new ways to estimate the behavior of the heart during
abnormal rhythms. The knowledge gained will be used to identify ways that could
be used to improve the effectiveness of treatments for these abnormal rhythms as
delivered by electrical devices. The research efforts will also contribute to
broadening participation of underrepresented groups and integration of research
into both classroom teaching and informal education. The success of this project
will therefore directly contribute towards the progress of science to advance
the national health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many cardiac arrhythmias develop when
the propagation of electrical waves through cardiac muscle, a process that
triggers contraction, is disrupted. Despite the importance of understanding
these arrhythmias and notwithstanding advances made through experimentation and
computational modeling, many unanswered questions remain, especially regarding
what happens in the typically unobserved thickness of cardiac tissue. This
project will involve studying the role of tissue thickness on the development
and progression of complicated spatiotemporal dynamics for certain types of
arrhythmias such as tachycardia and fibrillation, when experiments often reveal
little obvious correlation between surface observations. In particular, the
detailed effects of potentially therapeutic electrical interventions will be
analyzed. To accomplish these goals, data assimilation, a technique from weather
forecasting, will be applied to recover high-resolution estimates of complex
cardiac electrical states observed in experiments using spatiotemporally sparse
observations of only one state variable. The response of the cardiac system when
methods to control the dynamics are applied will be quantified. The resulting
improved understanding of the heart's behavior and response to control attempts
could lead to improved control methods that can restore normal behavior across
the heart's thickness more reliably, more quickly, or with lower energies
compared to standard methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.