* 1762949
* Temperature Dependence and Dynamics of Cold Few-Atom Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/16/2017,07/31/2018
* Doerte Blume, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 8,765.00

Achieving the control of matter at the quantum level requires the detailed
understanding of many-body systems at the quantum level. This project is
expected to enhance the understanding of quantum mechanical processes of
fundamental importance, in particular the thermodynamical properties of
ultracold few-body systems of fermionic atoms. Ultimately, understanding quantum
mechanical phenomena from a bottom-up perspective will have important
technological implications for a wide range of every-day tasks ranging from
improved cell phone technology to improved surgical tools. Today's world is
technology driven and requires a highly skilled workforce. This project will
train the next generation of young scientists. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in all aspects of the project, and the analytical and
computational skills that the students gain will prepare them well for future
pursuits in industry and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance science by developing numerical and analytical tools that allow for the
study of the temperature dependence and dynamics of quantum mechanical few-body
systems. Few-body physics has played an important role in the development of
quantum mechanics from the very beginning. For example, the helium atom, one of
the simplest atoms of the periodic table and an effective three-body system, has
been instrumental in developing a concise understanding of electron-electron
correlations as well as fragmentation and (auto-) ionization. The experimental
realization of ultracold fermionic gases consisting of a small number of
particles (two, three, four, etc.) provides a new theoretically accessible model
system with which to study quantum mechanical few-body phenomena at zero and
finite temperature. Moreover, time-dependent measurements can be compared
directly with theoretical predictions. This project aims to conduct theoretical
studies of cold few-atom systems. Finite-temperature calculations for trapped
few-atom systems will be performed using an efficient and flexible path-integral
Monte Carlo code developed by the investigator, which has been shown to yield
reliable results for small bosonic and fermionic systems over a wide range of
temperatures. The path-integral Monte Carlo code will be made available to the
broader scientific community as part of the Venture Fund for Software Reuse
program. Time-dependent studies will be performed using an efficient and highly
accurate grid-based time propagation scheme that expands the time evolution
operator in terms of Chebychev polynomials.