* 1762369
* Multifunctional Fibers for Damage Detection in Reinforced Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Henry Sodano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 340,623.00

Fiber reinforced polymer composites are revolutionizing the future of structural
materials by providing more materials that are lighter and more energy
efficient. Such composite materials, however, are susceptible to a number of
failure modes and it is difficult to identify the reasons behind the failures
using the traditional nondestructive evaluation techniques that exist today.
This research seeks to develop a new approach to monitor the integrity of
composite materials using piezoelectric sensors that can convert deformations of
material into electrical signals. By interpreting these signals, it may be
possible to determine a material's operational lifetime. If successful, this
advance will lead to a paradigm shift in use of fiber reinforced polymer
composites through the integration of damage detection sensors into the
materials such that they simultaneously enhance mechanical strength. Broader
impacts of this project extend from advances in nondestructive evaluation and
structural health monitoring, to smart materials. The proposed education and
outreach program is also comprehensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort focuses
on the development of true multifunctional fiber reinforced composites that can
use functional materials to both enhance strength and provide embedded damage
sensing. The main objective of this research is to advance the current state of
art in the fabrication of the next generation of structural composites and
structural health monitoring methods. The research will perform a fundamental
investigation into the development of embedded and distributed SHM sensors in
fiber reinforced composites based on a piezoelectric whiskerization technique
recently developed by the PI. The approach will seek to utilize the
piezoelectric interphase as a pseudo acoustic emission system where rather than
tracking the released of elastic energy as an acoustic wave, the composite will
produce a voltage output. Our research will seek to elucidate the behavior of
these unique interfaces in the presence of damage and to develop experimental
methodologies to probe the mechanical integrity of the material. The development
of the proposed damage detection schemes for composite materials would provide a
critical tool to advance safety in this growing class of materials. Furthermore,
these processes can reduce maintenance costs by forgoing schedule based
maintenance for data based repairs. Beyond the economic impacts of this work,
interfaces are ubiquitous and the tools developed will provide a modern
materials research approach for electronics, catalysis and other applications
where bonding between dissimilar materials is
relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.