* 1762891
* Virtual Experiments and Design of Particulate Composites with the Inclusion-based Boundary Element Method (iBEM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Huiming Yin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 320,604.00

This project is to establish a new computational approach to the design and
manufacture of particulate composites. The performance of a composite changes
with many factors, so developing a new composite commonly requires a large
number of experiments to optimize the manufacture parameters if a parametric
experimental approach is adopted. Through accurately reproducing the complex
material processing and testing by virtual experiments, physical experiments can
be reliably simulated on the computer, and thus significantly reduce both the
material development time and cost. Application of the inclusion-based boundary
element method (iBEM) is planned to create high fidelity simulation of the
material behavior and will be used for the virtual experiments of the
particulate composites. While the principles and methodologies developed can be
applied to general composites, this project focuses on lightweight concrete
(LWC), which is made of foam particles mixed in a cement paste. Its unique
thermal, acoustic and lightweight properties make it an excellent material for
energy efficient building envelope. This project will produce a new tool to
accelerate the design and development cycle of advanced materials, which will
produce significant benefits to our manufacturing industry and thus to the U.S.
economy. The multidisciplinary research covering theoretical, numerical and
experimental aspects will promote our student research and education in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates computation, experiments, and micromechanics together to
establish a new design paradigm that advances the state-of-the-art of the design
of particulate composites in the following aspects: 1) The random particulate
microstructure generation algorithm will provide a practical method to construct
digital composite materials; 2) The iBEM, simulating each inhomogeneity as an
inclusion with an eigenstrain through the Green function technique, will avoid
meshing inside the representative volume element (RVE), enable the simulation of
&gt;1000 inhomogeneities, and therefore provide a more objective, realistic
description of material samples; 3) Interactions of inhomogeneities across two
length scales (micron and millimeter) will be evaluated to predict the failure
process through the microstructural evolution of the composite, and; 4) The
virtual experiments, validated by a few actual experiments, will reproduce the
mechanical behavior on computer and accelerate material design and the
optimization process of new composite materials. The success of this project
will not only establish our LWC design method, but also lead to a breakthrough
in computer-aided design (CAD) of particulate composites. In addition, it will
demonstrate the iBEM as a new continuum method to study particle interactions of
many-particle systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.