* 1762245
* Collaborative Research: Teasing apart how specific nanoparticle features relate to environmental fate and contribute to ecotoxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Stacey Harper, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2021
* USD 287,751.00

Silver nanoparticles are extensively used for their antimicrobial properties in
an increasing number of consumer and commercial products and as bacterial agents
in the treatment of wastewater. Because of their high demand, over 500 tons of
engineered silver nanoparticles are produced globally. While the properties of
these nanoparticles are important for their antibacterial activity, some may
also influence toxicity. The environmental impacts of silver nanoparticles
independent of their ion leaching are challenging at best. Studies designed to
evaluate the nanoparticle-specific effects of silver nanoparticles have been
limited because of their propensity to undergo ionic dissolution. Furthermore,
discrepancies over the relative contribution of ion to particle toxicity remain
prevalent in the literature primarily due to differences in study design.
Consequently, there is a great need to understand how silver nanoparticles with
diverse characteristics impacts the interaction with organisms by controlling
for the confounding effects of ionic contribution to toxicity as compared to
particle effects. The researcher's proposed studies will contribute to the
scientific understanding of how the properties of these nanoparticles play a
role in biouptake, nanoparticle-biological interactions, and ecotoxicity. The
research will involve the elimination of the effects of particle surface
oxidation and ionic dissolution, which has complicated toxicity studies in the
past. This contribution is significant because it will improve our ability to
identify features of silver nanoparticles that make them eco-disruptive and
predict how these features lead to adverse environmental outcomes. All data will
be shared through the open-source knowledge base of Nanomaterial-Biological
Interactions (NBI) globally for modeling efforts and will support the
development of safety protocols, exposure guidelines, and regulations that
protect human and ecosystem health. Furthermore, this research will provide
design rules for the assembly of new classes of silver nanoparticles that could
be commercialized without concern regarding rapid particle degradation and
release into the environment. In addition, this project is designed to
incorporate students from diverse backgrounds and will help build future
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) talent.

The researcher's overall aim is to improve our understanding of the specific
physiochemical features that dictate nanoparticle-biological interactions.
First, they will design a series of lipid-coated silver nanoparticles that are
differentially shielded from ion dissolution. Differentially shielded silver
nanoparticles will be prepared by encapsulating silver nanoparticles of varying
size and shape with a hybrid lipid-membrane to protect the surface from
oxidation and ionic dissolution. Changes in the localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR), thermal electron microscope (TEM), and (Inductively-coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) will be employed to monitor silver ion
dissolution from the suite of nanoparticles. Second, they will identify features
of lipid-coated nanoparticles that lead to particle instability. The
agglomeration kinetics of the hybrid lipid-coated silver nanoparticles will be
assessed using dynamic light scattering and nanoparticle tracking analysis.
Third, since the goal is to ultimately relate these material features with
nanoparticle-biological interactions, the researchers will determine the uptake
and toxicity of the silver nanoparticle suite. Based on preliminary
investigations, the hybrid lipid-coated silver nanoparticles with a robust
coating should elicit minimal toxicity and a decrease in surface coverage should
lead to a respective increase in toxicity. A well-established embryonic
zebrafish assay will be used to identify vertebrate morbidity and mortality
resulting from exposure and hyperspectral imaging (HSI) will be used to
visualize nanoparticle uptake in whole animals. Finally, the researchers will
assess the potential ecotoxicity of the suite using a novel nanocosm assay.
Hyperspectral imaging will be used to visualize nanoparticle biodistribution
among bacteria, algae, crustaceans, and fish in the small-scale freshwater
assay. Collectively, the use of well-characterized silver nanoparticles tuned
for ion release will allow the PIs to tease apart the relative contribution of
the nanoparticle and ion to biouptake, toxicity, and potential for environmental
impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.