* 1762522
* Fundamental Studies on Electrochemical Separation Process for Titanium from Mixed Scrap
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ramana Reddy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 382,471.00

This grant will support fundamental research that will contribute new knowledge
related to an electrochemical manufacturing process, promoting the progress of
science and advancing national prosperity. The increase in demand for titanium
in transportation industries has created a need for the development of an
alternate technology that is low cost, energy-efficient and environmentally
benign. This award supports research to enable a novel pathway for the
electrochemical manufacturing of titanium from domestic metal sources (i.e.
scrap) using ionic liquid electrolytes at low temperatures (about 100 degree
centigrade). Electrochemical studies will be combined with computational process
modeling. It is envisioned that this new low temperature electrochemical
manufacturing of titanium will be an environmentally benign process with
significant reduction in energy consumption and cost as compared to the
conventional process. Therefore, results obtained from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including electrochemistry, metallurgical and materials engineering,
computational science and manufacturing. The multi-disciplinary approach in
research and training program on manufacturing technology will educate students,
build a future work force, broaden participation of underrepresented student
groups in research activities and positively impact STEM and engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new electrochemical manufacturing process
studied in this work can overcome several limitations existing in the
lightweight metals manufacturing process involving high temperature thermal
process resulting high losses of metal values, high energy consumption and
generation of greenhouse gases. However, some scientific and engineering
barriers are yet to be overcome to realize the full potential of electrochemical
manufacturing process. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on fundamental
understanding of science of titanium metal manufacturing technology. Both
experimental and electrochemical modeling studies will be conducted. The
research will generate fundamental understanding of thermodynamic and transport
properties of electrolytes and electrode materials, and diffusion coefficients
of the electro-active species. It will also significantly enhance our
fundamental understanding of separation of complex chemical species and
electrochemical reaction mechanisms. This will be input to the development of
the electrochemical process (CFD) model. The electrode charge-transfer reactions
and the reaction kinetics for species will be incorporated into this new model.
The electric field, fluid flow, current density and species distribution at the
electrodes as a function of applied voltages, temperatures and species
concentrations will be modeled. The model will be validated using the
experimental results. Correlations of model results verified with experimental
parameters results, as well as process modeling and optimization for the metal
manufacturing process will be carried out. Results of this research are
potentially transformative to lightweight metals manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.