* 1762829
* Switched Adaptive Control Methods for Electrical Stimulation Induced Cycling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Warren Dixon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,116.00

This project will create new control methods to maximize the effectiveness of a
commonly prescribed rehabilitation therapy for individuals with neurological
conditions (NCs), including stroke, spinal cord injury, and traumatic brain
injury. Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) cycling uses an externally
applied sequence of voltages to cause the individual's leg muscles to contract
to propel a recumbent cycle. The repetitive, coordinated motions of cycling can
help restore limb function. An electric motor is available to augment the
person's own muscles, if needed. This project will determine how to switch
between different muscle groups and the motor to ensure desired behaviors,
despite differences in muscle strength and endurance between individuals. For
example, the project will examine methods to enable an FES cycle to adapt to the
individual attributes of a new participant within a known time interval. The
results will be validated in populations of individuals with NCs to demonstrate
clinical efficacy. This project will advance the national health by improving
the quality of life for individuals with NCs. In addition to these direct
benefits, the project will introduce top undergraduate students to advanced
research methods in this critical area of
biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in new methods of
control design for uncertain nonlinear hybrid systems, including adaptation
strategies and timing conditions. Essential aspects of the project include 1)
the formulation of Lyapunov-based theorems to facilitate adaptive control for
arbitrary switching between stable subsystems with a non-strict Lyapunov
function; 2) the formulation of a dwell-time switching condition to ensure
stability when switching between an uncontrolled (unstable) and adaptive
controlled subsystems, as well as a data-driven method for learning a strict
Lyapunov function from a given non-strict Lyapunov function; 3) the formulation
of a switching controller that can bound the system response within a particular
region of state space. Generalized theoretical outcomes will include new
insights for the nonlinear systems and robotics communities. The experimental
results will provide an inroad to longitudinal clinical studies in specific
patient populations, with the potential to improve clinical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.