* 1762545
* GOALI: Friction Stir Joining of Bulk Metallic Glasses and Their Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Zhenhai Xia, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 539,296.00

Bulk metallic glasses are a relatively new class of engineering materials with a
combination of exceptional properties and unique processing ability. Their high
strength, elasticity, corrosion resistance and soft magnetic properties make
them attractive for a range of military, medical, sporting, and industrial
applications. However, joining of metallic glasses remains a major challenge
across multiple length-scales. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research will use a solid-state joining approach to achieve
large sections of bulk metallic glasses with superior surface properties. Use of
these structures as bio-implants could potentially lessen the likelihood of
tissue inflammation, bone deterioration and replacement surgeries thus advancing
national health and welfare. Use of stacked metallic glasses as penetrator
shields on armor vehicles and spacecraft protection against orbital debris
impacts will significantly advance the national defense interests. The proposed
project will be collaborative in many aspects, with active engagement between
the academic and industrial partners, including an industry internship for two
graduate students funded by the project. It will provide a rare opportunity for
students to integrate classroom concepts with industrial research and
development. The project will engage students from underrepresented groups and
will contribute to educating the next generation of scientists/engineers in
advanced manufacturing. The project will also benefit society by exposing K-12
students and teachers to emerging areas in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this GOALI project is
to achieve fundamental scientific understanding of friction stir joining process
for amorphous metallic alloys and their composites by an integrated experimental
and modeling approach. The research project will build on promising preliminary
experiments to connect the understanding of material flow in adjoining layers
during friction stir joining process, multi-scale deformation behavior,
molecular dynamics simulations, and large-scale finite element modeling. The
unique and fundamental scientific contributions resulting from the proposed work
will be four fold. Firstly, the research will advance knowledge of shear mixing
and metallurgical bond formation during high strain processing of amorphous
metals and composites. Secondly, it will enable understanding of deformation
mechanisms resulting from the interaction of different microstructural features.
Third part involving atomistic-scale models will create knowhow on free volume
evolution in response to high strain. Lastly, the proposed research will help in
the development of a framework to predict location specific properties
consisting of spatially resolved structure evolution from the temperature,
cooling rate, and strain distribution. The main innovation of the proposed
research lies in achieving homogeneous and stacked structures of amorphous
metals that are unattainable using existing technologies with the hypothesis
that intense shear mixing at the interface between amorphous metallic components
ruptures the surface oxide resulting in pristine metal flow and metallurgical
bonding. The high strain during processing is expected to increase atomic-scale
inhomogeneity in metallic glasses leading to rejuvenation and markedly improved
mechanical properties compared to cast amorphous
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.