* 1762035
* Data-driven Multiscale Damage and Failure Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2022
* USD 569,040.00

Damage and failure of materials is commonplace; the ability to predict damage
and subsequent failure in engineered systems is foundational to design, and
critically important when failures are expensive and even life-threatening. As
manufacturing technologies become more advanced, particularly with the advent of
additive manufacturing where nearly any shape or form can be made by local
application of material and heat, so too must the methods used to predict the
mechanical response of these components. The computational modeling framework in
this research will enable a wider application of these advanced manufacturing
technologies thorough a rigorous understanding of the material performance of
parts made with these methods. An extensive experimental characterization and
validation effort will form the basis of this computational framework. As such,
this research will promote manufacturing sciences and knowledge for the fields
where shape and form considerations outweigh production rate concerns, e.g., in
biomedical and aerospace industries. The manufacturing advances enabled by this
research will directly benefit the U.S. economy, advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare, and secure national defense through technological
innovations, e.g., through reduced aircraft fuel consumption from lighter
additively manufactured parts. The intersection of domains required for this
research, including: manufacturing, mechanical engineering, materials science,
and computational sciences, will support interdisciplinary collaboration that
can lead to crosscutting improvements in engineering education for the modern
age. As part of this project, outreach to high school students will be performed
to foster interest in engineering, undergraduate summer interns will be
recruited to conduct state-of-the-art research, and specialized graduate student
projects will be created related to advanced modeling and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated outcome of the research is a
predictive computational theory for damage and failure of complex, hierarchical
materials such as metal alloys. The effort builds on data-driven, reduced order,
and multiscale principles under the traditional framework of mechanics with the
potential for a transformative new theory. Initially, fundamental
characterization experiments (including x-ray tomography and diffraction) will
be conducted to understand the relationship between material microstructures and
mechanical properties in additively manufactured metals. This information will
be used to calibrate micromechanical models, and simulations will be used to
populate a database of synthetic microstructures and their mechanical response.
From this, a new concurrent multiscale theory based on reduced-order methods
will be developed, capable of capturing nonlinearity both in geometric and
material response. This method will query the database constructed in the first
phase for mechanical information and use that data to predict damage and
failure, particularly for metals parts made with additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.