* 1762247
* Estimation of Critical Battery States via Strain and Stress Measurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anna Stefanopoulou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 337,692.00

Energy storage utilizing lithium-ion batteries is ubiquitous from cell phones
and satellites to vehicles and the electric grid. All these applications require
reliable estimates of the available power and energy. Consumer concerns, such as
range anxiety for Electric Vehicles (EVs), hamper market penetration. Such
concerns can be alleviated by improving estimates of critical battery states
such as capacity and internal resistance that change over time. This research
seeks to address those concerns by improving battery health diagnostics. This
advance will benefit all battery-powered devices and could be especially crucial
for the second-life use of automotive batteries for energy storage on the
electric grid which has the potential to enable more substantial penetration of
renewable resources through expanded utilization of existing battery technology.
Experimentally validated models of the battery mechanical response and its
connection to battery health would fill a critical gap in the availability of
public-domain data and models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of the art
battery estimation methods relies on the cell terminal voltage measurements, and
the plan is to improve the battery health diagnostics in this project by
measuring and interpreting the battery cell expansion which happens when the
electrode layers fill and empty with lithium-ions during charging and
discharging. This research aims to create a multi-physics model and estimation
techniques to harness the information in the deformation of the electrodes and
to analyze the measured electrical and mechanical signals to enhance battery
health estimation. The graphite electrode exhibits distinct expansion patterns
as it fills with lithium-ions, which can enable diagnosis of electrode-specific
degradation. Several fundamental gaps in the modeling of multi-scale inter-
dependent thermal, electrochemical and mechanical responses of the battery need
to be addressed before the benefits of this approach can be realized in relevant
usage cycles involving dynamic charging and discharging. Moreover, the accuracy
of joint state and parameter estimation depends on the operating region and the
current excitation or usage profile. Systematic techniques to assess the
identifiability would benefit from physics-based models that can be used to
investigate the influence of various degradation mechanisms, cross-sensitivity
with thermal swelling, sensor location, and commercially relevant
packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.