* 1762331
* Manufacturing USA: Microwave Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) with Metamaterial Lens for High Resolution Characterization of Multimaterial Interfaces in Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Lalita Udpa, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2023
* USD 414,275.00

Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites are used in manufacturing of
automotive, aircraft, bridges and civil infrastructures, since they offer
excellent strength-to-weight ratios that allow for weight reduction without
sacrificing performance. One of the limitations for wide acceptance of FRPs in
mass-produced vehicles and structures is joining technology for dissimilar
materials, specifically adhesive bonding of FRPs to metals. This award supports
fundamental research needed for developing an non-destructive evaluation (NDE)
system that will detect manufacturing defects in FRPs such as disbonds,
delaminations, resin rich areas, fiber waviness, etc. that need to be captured
early to ensure safety and reliability of resulting structures. While the
immediate impact area of this award is in NDE imaging for manufacturing
innovation, the research has broader applications and impacts to many industry
sectors critical to the U.S. economy including biomedical, energy, aerospace,
automotive and civil infrastructure. This research crosses the disciplines of
manufacturing, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, materials science
and imaging science. It is focused on basic research that impacts the aerospace,
automotive, medical products, defense and civil infrastracutre sectors, and
therefore directly impacts economic welfare and national security. The multi-
disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research and positively impact engineering education. The PIs are active
participants in MSU's existing ENSURE program (Engineering Summer Undergraduate
Research Experience) and NSF funded HSHS program (High School Honors Science),
which are both excellent avenues to recruit a diverse set of students from
underrepresented and minority groups to engage in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to develop a
novel, hybrid electromagnetic imaging system (HEMIS) that combines microwave NDE
measurements, time reversal data-processing and a specially designed
metamaterial lens that will allow focusing of energy at selected locations such
as the bond lines in multimaterial composite joints. The major research
contributions of the project include: 1) design of a novel antenna with
appropriate bandwidth, 2) design and fabrication of a metamaterial lens with
desired material properties such as negative refractive index and 3) development
of time-reversal processing algorithms for interpreting measurement data in
terms of bond integrity. An integrated experimental and simulation-based study
will be conducted to get a better understanding of the phenomenological aspects
of these sensor systems and their interaction with the interfaces. Such an
approach will allow exploitation of these sensor systems for a wide range of
applications. Successful completion of the project goals will result in an NDE
system that will allow rapid inspection of large components, thereby increasing
efficiency and reliability of advanced composites
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.