* 1762657
* Manufacturing USA/GOALI: Visualizing Nanoscale Evolution during Aluminum Alloy Melt Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Rachel Goldman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Reducing the weight of vehicles that move people and goods on land, sea and air
is critical for improving fuel economy and increasing mission payload. Aluminum
alloys are used in the automotive and aerospace industries to meet this need
because of their high strength-to-weight ratio. For improved fuel efficiency,
however, higher strength and lighter weight alloys are needed, and this can be
achieved though the incorporation of nanosized particles in the aluminum matrix.
A novel approach to producing the nanoparticles has been developed based on the
introduction of gas bubbles directly into the molten aluminum. Blowing nitrogen
gas into the melt can produce aluminum nitride particles that are 50 nanometers
in size. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
award supports fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to control
the particle size and shape which lead to optimized mechanical properties and
performance. The results from this research will enable industry to scale up
this process from small laboratory melts to commercial size ingots, which will
enable the development of lightweight alloys for ground, air, and sea
transportation, with direct benefit to the U.S. economy. The students involved
in this research will have the opportunity to interact with the engineers from
industry who are part of the team. An integrated experimental and modeling
approach will be utilized, which is forming the new basis for materials
engineering education. Outreach activities emphasize the mentoring of women and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The incorporation of 50-200
nanometer particles has been shown to improve the strength and high temperature
stability of aluminum alloys. However, due to agglomeration of the nanoparticles
and insufficient bonding at the nanoparticle-matrix interface, the mechanical
properties of the composite material are often degraded. A new approach, in
which the reinforcing nanoparticles are generated directly in the molten metal
via an in-situ gas-liquid reaction has been shown to produce nanosized,
dispersed AlN and TiC particles. In this project, the nano- to micro- structural
dynamics governing the process will be investigated. Insights from these
fundamental studies will guide the identification of a process condition window
for large-scale in-situ aluminum nanocomposite manufacturing, which produces a
nanoparticle morphology and distribution with optimum mechanical properties. To
examine the nanometer-scale thermodynamic and kinetic processes, in-situ
reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) will be utilized during
alloy nitridation in a molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) system. For in-situ 3D
nanoparticle visualization, a mini-melter will be developed and 3D visualization
of the nanocomposites will be achieved using synchrotron-based X-ray
nanotomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.