* 1762567
* Collaborative Research: Interfacial Self-healing of Nanocomposite Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Qiming Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 270,354.00

Self-healing polymers are synthetic materials capable of autonomously repairing
damages without human intervention. They have shown great potentials for
sustainable technologies in diverse engineering applications, including
artificial muscles and skins, flexible electronics, soft robotics and many
others. Nevertheless, the state-of-the-art design of self-healing polymers
remains at the trial-and-error stage with insufficient theoretical guidance.
This award supports fundamental research to elucidate the self-healing mechanics
of nanocomposite hydrogels that consist of water-mediated polymer networks
crosslinked by nanoparticles. The knowledge obtained from this project will
provide mechanistic insights into self-healing polymers that are able to restore
their functionality after damage. The research will not only promote the
fundamental science of self-healing mechanics, but also advance the national
health, prosperity, and welfare through further development and enhancement of
soft-materials based sustainable technologies. This project will also train a
diverse group of students in the areas of solid mechanics, polymer science,
mechanical engineering, and high-performance computing for next-generation
workforce development. The educational objectives of the project will be
realized through curriculum development, undergraduate research opportunities,
summer research program for high school students, research experience for K-12
teachers program, and K-12 outreach program. Special efforts will be made to
involve underrepresented students in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
extensive studies in the syntheses and applications of self-healing polymers,
constructing the mechanistic relationship between self-healing properties and
material/healing settings remains challenging. The key technical barrier is how
to physically model the microstructure evolution of the polymer networks during
the self-healing process. The central hypothesis of this project is that the
self-healing strength of nanocomposite hydrogel is governed by the diffusion of
polymer chains across the fractured interface and subsequent crosslinks formed
with nanoparticles. To test this hypothesis, the project integrates molecular
dynamics simulations and analytical theories to study microscopic diffusion-
reaction behaviors of polymer chains during self-healing process and macroscopic
interfacial strengths after self-healing. The computational and theoretical
predictions will be systematically validated with experimental studies of
nanocomposite hydrogels composed of several material compositions, such as
particle concentration, particle size, and water fraction, and under various
external healing controls, such as temperature and delaying time. The
interdisciplinary effort will open promising avenues for quantitatively
understanding the multiscale mechanics of self-healing polymers and providing
fundamental design principles of high-performance self-healing
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.