* 1762698
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Large-area Two-dimensional Tellurene for High-performance Wearable Piezoelectric Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Wenzhuo Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2022
* USD 546,906.00

Piezoelectric nanomaterials convert mechanical signals into electrical power and
promise to revolutionize emerging self-powered technologies. Current methods for
making piezoelectric nanomaterials are restricted by growth substrates, reaction
pressure and temperature, which limits their economic manufacture. This award
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
a low-temperature, substrate-free, scalable nanomanufacturing process. The novel
process involves solution-based nanomanufacturing of a new piezoelectric
nanomaterial, two-dimensional tellurene, with high productivity and high
quality. Piezoelectric nanomaterials exhibit superior mechanical and
piezoelectric properties to their bulk counterparts and are increasingly
preferred for applications in energy, healthcare, sensors, and biomedical and
wearable devices. Therefore, results from this research benefits the U.S.
economy and society. This research involves several disciplines including
manufacturing, materials science, electrical engineering, device physics, and
data science. The multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden participation of
women and underrepresented groups in research and positively impacts engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal solution process can overcome
several limitations existing in nanomaterial manufacturing. These range from
energy budget, scalability, environmental control, and working temperature.
However, some scientific barriers are yet to be overcome to realize the full
potential of the hydrothermal solution process for manufacturing of 2D
nanomaterials. This research is will fill the knowledge gap on the mechanisms
for the 2D tellurene formation during hydrothermal synthesis. The objectives are
(1) to explore the unique advantage and capability of low-cost, scalable
solution-based manufacturing for growth of tellurene nanomaterials with control
over their production yield, morphology and dimensions, and (2) to uncover the
process-structure-property-functionality relationships in designing,
manufacturing, and integrating the tellurene-based wearable piezoelectric
nanodevices. The research team will pursue a physics-based theoretical model to
predict the structural and piezoelectric properties of tellurene manufactured by
the hydrothermal process and conduct experiments to verify the model. The
research team will test the hypothesis that surfactant type and concentration
are the determining factors for controlling the thickness and hence the
piezoelectric behavior of tellurene, and in so doing, will establish the
relationships between process parameters and material functionality (e.g.,
piezoelectricity) in hydrothermal nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.