* 1762920
* PBS NewsHour Coverage of Post-Harvey Research of Extreme Weather
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 11/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project was submitted in response to the NSF
Dear Colleague letter (NSF 17-128) related to Hurricane Harvey along the Gulf
Coast. The PBS NewsHour team will produce 9 stories for national distribution
using multiple broadcast and online channels that will engage the public and
increase their understanding of the science and engineering research being
conducted to better predict and mitigate the impact of future storms. Hurricane
Harvey was the first of several storms in 2017 that hit first Texas then Florida
and the Caribbean creating unprecedented devastation. This project aims to help
the public better understand the science behind storms, and how scientists and
engineers are actively collecting data, developing new models, using new
technologies, and studying the environmental recovery. The PBS NewsHour team has
in place experienced science journalists, production facilities, and a
distribution network that can quickly develop media stories based on the work of
scientists and engineers in the field, many of whom are funded by NSF. The
NewsHour has a strong track record of telling stories that are scientifically
accurate yet highly engaging and understandable to a diverse audience.
Researchers from several universities including Texas A&amp;M, Rice University,
and Norfolk State University are advising the NewsHour team and may also be
featured in some of the media. The team will also use their existing
collaboration with education researchers at New Knowledge, Inc. to seek audience
feedback on proposed/produced media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential audience
reach of these stories is extensive. Stories that are broadcast on the nightly
PBS NewsHour reach 1.6 million people. The NewsHour's website currently reaches
6 million while their YouTube channel has 40 million views. They have a growing
audience of younger viewers who mainly get their news on social media channels
such as ScienceScope and Apple News. EXTRA is another service offered just for
teachers.