* 1762086
* Singularities, Toric Geometry and Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Hans Ulrich Walther, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation in an international conference which will take
place in Chemnitz (Germany) on "Singularities, Toric Geometry and Differential
Equations" from March 19 to March 23, 2018. The use of differential equations is
an omnipresent tool in the mathematical investigation of physical, chemical and
biological phenomena, and dominates engineering applications as well. The
conference will bring together international experts in the areas of commutative
algebra and differential equations. The award will provide financial support for
a number of US based graduate students and postdocs to attend this conference,
thereby infusing our current generation of developing researchers with the
latest trends and methods of the area. Sufficiently senior graduate students
will have the opportunity of showcasing their own research in a poster session.

The core of the meeting will be focused on D-modules, a mathematical area that
traditionally sits between singularity theory and representation theory, but
which also has intriguing ties with topology, algebraic geometry, and Hodge
theory. The talks, given by international experts from around the world, will
touch on hypergeometric differential equations, applications to string theory,
irregularity sheaves and twistors. Recent discoveries that will be reported on
touch Stokes structures, toric geometry, Milnor fibers and topology of
singularities. Further information is available at the conference website,
https://www-user.tu-chemnitz.de/~sevc/SingToric2018/