* 1762320
* Symmetry Projected Coupled Cluster Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Gustavo Scuseria, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 456,537.00

Gustavo Scuseria of William Marsh Rice University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop accurate and affordable computational methods for
challenging molecules. The systems of interest have several electrons that
influence each other in ways that lead to many states with similar energies.
Systems of this type are called "strongly-correlated" and can exhibit novel
properties which have the potential to spur technological advancement in a
number of fields. However, these systems are challenging to theoretically
describe and are often intractable for current computational methods. Professor
Scuseria's group is developing a new approach that is accurate and can be
applied to large, realistic systems, all the while giving superior results for
strongly correlated systems. The researchers are working both to continue to
develop the new approach and to apply the method to important systems like
transition-metal clusters and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in order to
provide useful insights into technologically-relevant systems. Dr. Scuseria is
involved in outreach activities in the Houston area. Specifically he is
organizing events with the Latin American Graduate Student Association at Rice
University. He provides informal advice about job opportunities in academia as
well as in industry. Dr. Scuseria is also involved in the Rice Science Cafe,
where ideas about science and technology are discussed with the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong correlations are ubiquitous and technologically
important, but unfortunately cannot be accurately described except by a handful
of computational approaches. One of the more promising approaches for the
treatment of strong correlation is the use of symmetry projection, i.e.
recovering the symmetry-preserving component of a broken-symmetry wavefunction.
Symmetry projection is black box, and symmetry projected mean-field methods can
be applied to systems with dozens or even hundreds of strongly correlated
electrons. In order to reach quantitative accuracy for strongly-correlated
systems, the Scuseria group is working to extend their symmetry projected mean-
field methods to symmetry projected coupled cluster theory. This theory combines
the advantages of symmetry projection for the description of strong correlation
on the one hand with coupled cluster theory for the description of weak
correlation on the other, becoming a form of black-box multireference coupled
cluster theory. The new approach has the potential to efficiently and reliably
treat weak and strong correlations on equal footing while affording the
straightforward computation of properties and other expectation values. While
the Scuseria group continues to develop and extend symmetry projected coupled
cluster theory, their current applications of the approach are strongly
correlated systems which display spin frustration and accompanying magnetic
order, which should provide valuable insights for future technological
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.