* 1762918
* Collaborative Research: Downburst Fragility Characterization of Transmission Line Systems Using Experimental and Validated Stochastic Numerical Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Abdollah Shafieezadeh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 209,596.00

Downbursts, referring to downward high intensity winds associated with
thunderstorms, pose a major threat to power transmission grids in many parts of
the United States. Considering the distributed size of the power transmission
infrastructure, significant investments will be needed in order to upgrade the
existing systems and properly design new infrastructure to resist downburst wind
forces. The goal of this research is to develop an integrative experimental and
numerical framework that is capable of characterizing the extent of
vulnerability of the power transmission infrastructure against downbursts, and
identify the most critical components. The framework will provide knowledge that
can help reduce outage-induced societal disruptions caused by downbursts, and
thus enable continued national prosperity and welfare following a downburst
event. Using this framework, various significant factors for the downburst
performance of transmission systems and potential causes of past failures will
be investigated. Moreover, this research will develop the first generation of
downburst fragility models for transmission tower-line systems (TLSs) using
experimentally validated numerical models. These fragility models are crucial
for risk-informed decision making for design and management of the transmission
grid in order to mitigate future failures and enhance the resiliency of the grid
against extreme weather events. The numerical and experimental studies will
provide the knowledge needed to enhance design methodologies to include
downburst wind loads for transmission line systems. The research findings will
be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses at Florida International
University (FIU) and The Ohio State University to better prepare the future
generation of infrastructure engineers. Project data will be archived and
publicly shared in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org/).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop an integrative experimental and
numerical framework to characterize the fragility of transmission line systems
against downbursts. The experimental research will involve developing a
versatile downburst simulator at the NSF-supported NHERI Wall of Wind (WOW)
Experimental Facility (EF) at FIU. Using this simulator, a scaled, aeroelastic
multi-span TLS will be tested; the results will be used to experimentally
validate high-fidelity finite element models of coupled transmission tower-
insulator-conductor-foundation systems. Through these experimental and numerical
investigations, new knowledge will be gained with regard to the aerodynamic
behavior of conductors and drag and shielding effects on lattice tower sections
under non-synoptic downburst wind fields. Moreover, these investigations will
reveal extreme nonlinear behaviors of transmission line systems in post-elastic
regimes when towers are damaged or conductors fail. The research also will
provide new physics-based insights into the role of uncertainties in the
downburst performance of TLSs. Failure modes that are unique to or are more
likely to occur under non-synoptic downburst loadings, as compared to those
under synoptic hurricane loadings, will be identified and characterized. The
produced data and models will be integrated to develop the first generation of
multi-dimensional demand and fragility surfaces for TLSs under downbursts at
component- and system-levels using highly efficient and accurate machine
learning techniques. In addition, the experimental downburst simulator at the
NHERI WOW EF at FIU will provide the natural hazards community with a unique
testbed with dual simulation capabilities to generate both non-synoptic and
synoptic winds and analyze the impacts on buildings and other structural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.