* 1762350
* Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Alcohols, Amines, and Carbon-Carbon Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* William Jones, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 454,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. William D. Jones of the University of Rochester is developing new catalytic
materials capable of removing hydrogen from organic molecules to make more
valuable products. In this new method, hydrogen is transferred from the organic
molecule to a carrier molecule using a metal catalyst. The carrier molecules are
then recycled many times. Dr. Jones is studying the individual steps of the
reaction cycle. These catalytic reactions have applications in the synthesis of
pharmaceuticals and may also provide a better understanding of how electrical
energy from hydropower or wind turbines could be captured and stored for later
use on demand. Dr. Jones is engaged in outreach activities to inform the public
about novel new concepts for energy storage and organic compound synthesis. He
and his group participate in public radio shows such as WXXI Connections, and
speak on television news programs. The researchers include both undergraduate
and graduate students who are being trained to solve difficult technical
problems of broad societal interest. This research advances the national health
and prosperity by contributing to technical innovations in the pharmaceuticals
and renewable energy industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jones is developing
homogeneous transition metal catalysts that can be used to dehydrogenate
alcohols, amines, and heterocycles electrochemically. The group is studying the
use of new and known catalysts in combination with quinones as electron transfer
mediators, as the latter have the ability to undergo reversible electrochemical
reduction and oxidation, and show promise as mediators with transition metal
catalysts. The group is examining stoichiometric reactions for alcohol and amine
dehydrogenation with various quinones as hydrogen acceptors. The group is also
developing electrochemical recycling of the hydroquinone hydrogen acceptors. By
proper choice of solvent and electrolyte, an electrochemical route for
dehydrogenations is being extended to substrates that can produce heterocycles
such as indoles and quinolones. Finally, this electrochemical method is being
used in applications for dehydrogenation of activated C-C bonds to generate
oxidized organic products that serve as building blocks in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industry. This work has the potential to occur with dihydrogen as
the only byproduct, using electrochemistry to provide the driving force for the
thermodynamically uphill reaction. This work is focusing on the use of these
catalysts in organic synthesis, but also can find applications in hydrogen
storage, and fuel cells. The students engaged in this research are learning
advanced techniques for handling sensitive compounds and therefore are being
trained as Highly Qualified Personnel (HQP) for work in advanced industrial
research labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.