* 1762791
* Measurement of Contractility-induced Residual Stress for Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ghatu Subhash, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2023
* USD 554,978.00

Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine hold the promise of rebuilding
organs for transplants and reconstructing diseased tissues. A critical challenge
for tissue engineering is the ability to design them to mimic mechanical
properties of the tissues they replace. Biological cells are not passive but
actively alter their surroundings by reaching out, grabbing onto the protein-
based scaffold around them and contracting to cause internal stresses. These
cell-generated stresses are an important consideration in human health and
disease because they alter mechanical and failure behavior of tissues. This
study will use an integrated experimental and modeling approach to measure the
effect of living cells embedded in engineered tissues as they contract and
continuously alter mechanical behavior. The knowledge gained in this project
will help predict quality of overall tissue-engineered products, thereby
advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare, while promoting the progress
of biomechanical sciences. To ensure this research has broader impact, a wide
range of outreach and educational activities are planned, e.g., training of K-12
teachers through the Research Experiences for Teachers program, and developing
"Explore Research" videos for the public. In addition, the University of Florida
Curie Lecture series, which brings in outstanding women scholars to the
university, will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to monitor mechanical changes in engineered tissues composed of bio-
compatible polymeric scaffolds with embedded living cells using innovative high-
resolution, in-line techniques. Stress fields in these tissues will be measured
with micro-Raman spectroscopy at one-micron resolution. Furthermore, Raman
spectroscopy data will be used to develop computational bio-composite models
that quantify the contributions of cell contraction to the constitutive response
of engineered tissues. This approach of utilizing spectroscopy on engineered
tissue surrogates is novel and provides a potentially transformative means for
tracking stresses around cells. Consolidated experimental and modeling results
will highlight design differences based on gel, cell shape, cell density, and
cell contraction with the goal of providing new guidelines for customizing
properties of tissues for intended applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.