* 1762757
* Collaborative Research: Innovation in Sustainable Mass Timber Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Scott Cyphers, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2021
* USD 270,053.00

Mass timber technologies, with their promise of improved resource utilization
and sustainability, have brought a new excitement to the U.S. building industry.
These technologies are allowing a renewable resource to enter into areas of
construction that were previously not feasible due to a variety of technical
constraints. Despite the promise that mass timber holds, wood is ultimately a
natural material with inherent variability and peculiarities. Before a new
engineered wood product can be brought to market, extensive and expensive
laboratory testing is required to establish its reliable properties. This
project will enhance the opportunities for increased use of timber by
understanding the fundamental mechanics necessary for accurate performance
prediction, including response and behavior under extreme events. The work will
exploit advances in both computational modeling and materials characterization
techniques, such that structural performance can be reliably predicted. The
outcomes of the work will benefit both the manufacturers of wood products, by
allowing them to better optimize their fiber resource, and the architects and
engineers who develop new structural systems. For these parties, the new
predictive capability will streamline both structural/architectural innovation
and product development. Existing ties with both the wood products industry and
the architectural community will ensure appropriate dissemination of
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to realize the above outcomes, specific
research activities will focus on a computational framework that will feature a
novel mechanisms-based, isogeometric embedded-lattice model approximating the
internal structure of mass timber. It will simulate the mechanical behavior at
multiple scales including the effect of interfaces and defects. This
computational model, which explicitly incorporates material morphology, will be
calibrated through an experimental program that isolates and measures the micro-
and meso-scale morphological features that dictate material behavior, and it
will be validated through structural component-scale testing. Since the approach
is designed to capture the physical mechanisms that dictate behavior, larger
scale phenomena, such as size effects, will be predicted as a natural outcome of
the simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.