* 1762431
* Beyond the unsaturation ratios (UK37' or UK37) of long chain alkenones: unlocking the hidden treasure trove of alkenone-producing haptophytes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 401,335.00

The proposed research aims to bring and calibrate a new set of molecular tools
that permit a more in-depth and quantitative understanding of underlying
mechanism driving climate variations. The new molecular tools will overcome the
problems of the existing methods that are extremely problematic in ocean
settings close to continental margins and estuaries because of entangled
molecular signals. Once calibrated, the new molecular indices will provide new
ways to study past temperature variations at unprecedented details. The research
also has great potential to establish novel molecular approaches that allow
quantitative assessment of changes in sea surface salinity - a very important
indicator of regional hydrological changes. The study will also greatly advance
our understanding of biochemistry and genetic control of lipid biosynthesis in
isochrysidales (a class of haptophyte algae that are among the most dominant
photosynthetic organisms in the global oceans) in a wide range of ocean and
continental environments. Specifically, lipids like alkenones and alkenoates are
unique biomarkers produced by isochrysidales that not only permit quantitative
past climate and environmental reconstructions, but are also regarded as among
the top candidates for biodiesel production using algal biomass in the near
future. The funds will also support graduate students who, together with the
PIs, actively participate in a wide range of broad-impact activities such as
teaching science at local GK-12 schools, many of which have substantial
population of underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical
merit of the research can be summarized as follows. The unsaturation ratios
(UK37' or UK37) of long chain alkenones (LCAs) are among the most successful
paleo-sea surface temperature (SST) proxies ever developed, and have been widely
applied for over three decades. A recent study by the PI, however, suggests that
the true power of this important class of biomarkers has yet to be fully
unleashed. For example, a newly discovered freshwater/oligosaline haptophyte
species with characteristic alkenone profiles distinct from marine and saline
water counterparts open up new opportunities for quantitative continental
paleoclimate studies. Important recent progress made by the research team in
both gas and liquid chromatographic separation of alkenones/alkenoates permits
accurate, comprehensive and simultaneous quantification of up to 32 alkenones,
alkenoates and their structural isomers (~5 - 10 times more compounds than old
analytical methods) and a corresponding new suite of SST proxies based on
isomeric ratios and non-C37 alkenones. These developments promise to extend
alkenone proxies to previously inaccessible regions, including: 1) marginal seas
where alkenones are contributed by both open-ocean and coastal species; 2) high
latitude regions where alkenone concentrations are low and the traditional
alkenone-temperature relationship fails. Comprehensive biomarker profiling has
great potential to refine chemotaxonomic differentiation of different
groups/species of alkenone-producing haptophytes, with implications for
quantitative apportionment of species inputs in mixed aquatic settings and
assessing past sea surface salinity (SSS) changes. This proposal aims to
systematically analyze a large suite of core top ocean sediments, and to culture
selected haptophyte species/key strain varieties, to calibrate the new SST and
SSS proxies and to establish high quality biomarker profiles for
chemotaxonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.