* 1762277
* Physics-Based, Nonlinear, Multi-scale, Topology Optimization Framework for Designing Additively Manufactured Energy Dissipating Structural Fuses for Steel Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Kapil Khandelwal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2023
* USD 464,058.00

The long-term vision of this award is to render steel building systems in the
United States to be more robust and resilient in their performance under extreme
seismic events in order to reduce damage and loss of life, and thus enable
continued national prosperity and welfare following such events. To achieve this
vision, the research goal of this project is to create a physics-based,
nonlinear, multi-scale, topology optimization (PB-NMSTO) framework for designing
optimal energy dissipating structural components, within a building, using
advanced additive manufacturing methods. This project will benefit the academic
research community and practicing design engineers by providing an integrated
PB-NMSTO design framework. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students in adopting and using additive manufacturing technologies for
addressing complex civil infrastructure performance during natural hazard
events. The project also will provide a springboard to educate future U.S.
engineers through outreach activities at predominantly Native American and
Hispanic serving middle and high schools and will foster increased participation
of underrepresented groups in STEM areas. Data from this project will be made
publicly available through the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure Data Depot (https://www.designsafe-ci.org/). Dissipation
of energy in building systems under extreme seismic events is a critical design
concern. Steel building systems are designed such that plastic energy
dissipation (PED) occurs in special components, called energy dissipating fuses
(EDFs), while the remaining structural system stays elastic. In steel EDFs,
energy is dissipated through multi-scale processes related to material
plasticity and damage, and the PED capacity of an EDF depends on its topological
design. At present, EDF designs are mostly experimental-based, and there is
little insight on how/if these designs are optimal. More importantly, as the
design space is constrained by manufacturability, this design methodology
severely limits the performance levels that can be realized by full utilization
of the material PED capacity. To focus the design efforts on functional
optimality, multi-scale plastic-damage models, combined with topology
optimization and additive manufacturing, will be introduced in the PB-NMSTO
framework for the full exploration of the design space. This will be
accomplished by: (a) developing a fundamental understanding of the multi-scale
physics of PED in structural steel under cyclic loads, and then (b) using this
understanding to solve the inverse problem of topology optimization with the
goal of optimally controlling the physics of PED in optimized topologies. It is
envisaged that the PB-NMSTO framework will provide the next generation state-of-
the-art design paradigm for performance-based design optimization of EDFs that
can be additively manufactured.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.