* 1762961
* Computational Modeling for Predicting 3D Cancer Cell Invasion into the Extracellular Fiber Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,200.00

Physical interaction of a cell with the surrounding tissue is very important in
cancer metastasis, wound healing, development, angiogenesis and many other
normal and disease conditions. We still have only a small quantitative
understanding of this for real tissues. One type of interaction that is not
understood quantitatively is where a cell extends thin structures called a
'filopodia' that sense chemicals and "feel" the stiffness of the surrounding
parts of the tissue. This research will create a three dimensional (3D) model of
filipodia from the finest scale, to model the molecules in the 3D network of
collagen fibers around the cell through the intermediate scale, where the
molecules for viscoelastic mesh structures that undergo large deformations
caused by the filopodia pushing and pulling on the network, and at the largest
scale, model the migration of the cell as a coordinated activity of multiple
filopodia, secretions of molecules that change the surrounding mesh and the
pulling forces of the cell. This research will help to bring computational cell
mechanics into the mainstream by building a 3D cell migration simulation
software for researchers, educators, and students. The tools will be available
as web tutorial modules and open software for educators, students, and
researchers around the world. The project will also form a Forum of software
users and research collaborators. This research project will further the goal of
the United States to understand the activities of cells that contribute to
health and disease of its citizens.

This project's computational model will significantly advance the quantitative
understanding of 3D cell invasion into the ECM fiber network. It will include
cell-ECM interactions at the binding kinetics level and integrate the numerous
key mechanisms into the modeling of whole cell-level migration. In vitro
microfluidic experiments will be conducted to determine unknown parameters and
verify the computational model. The resultant model will be used to predict how
cell migration in 3D ECM is influenced by the stiffness and, also, ECM porosity,
single fiber diameter, and cross-linker properties. It will be used to predict
whether there is an optimal MMP secretion level for 3D cell invasion into ECM;
too much secretion of MMP rapidly degrades the ECM fiber network and makes it
too soft, while too little secretion of MMP impedes the cell to invade into ECM.
A group of cells can communicate with one another through stress and strain
propagation in the ECM and create migratory behaviors as a collective event. The
emergent behavior of collective cell migration will be predicted using the
multi-scale computational model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.