* 1762202
* GOALI: Laser-based Layer-by-Layer Nanomanufacturing of Water Insoluble Drug-Loaded Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 258,939.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
research that contributes new knowledge related to the use and understanding of
a nanomanufacturing process known as matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation
for processing pharmaceuticals. Matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation has the
potential to revolutionize the way pharmaceuticals that do not dissolve in water
are manufactured. Manufacturing processes are available to place these
pharmaceuticals within small spherical containers that are known as liposomes.
However, the high cost to make pharmaceutical-loaded liposomes makes
accessibility to these pharmaceuticals difficult for individuals and communities
with limited resources. Matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation involves layer-
by-layer deposition of drug-loaded thin films on three-dimensional printed
needles for delivery with greater precision and lower cost than current
technologies. New combinatorial chemistry, drug design, and drug screening
mechanisms have led to the development of a large number of new water-insoluble
pharmaceuticals. This research advances the production mechanisms for these
drugs thus benefiting the U.S. pharmaceutical industry and improving patient
quality of life. This GOALI project involves several disciplines including
nanotechnology, laser technology, pharmaceutical science, manufacturing science,
and materials science. It helps broaden participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in research through activities at the North Carolina
Museum of Natural Sciences and local schools. Collaborations between North
Carolina State University and Lynntech, a company that develops medical
products, propels commercialization and clinical translation of
nanomanufacturing of pharmaceuticals using matrix assisted pulsed laser
evaporation technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The matrix assisted pulsed laser
evaporation nanoscale manufacturing process can overcome several limitations
associated with conventional pharmaceutical manufacturing techniques such as
cost and delivery precision. By this process, drug-containing thin films can be
formed on drug delivery substrates with excellent control over coating
thickness, roughness, and homogeneity. This award overcomes several scientific
barriers to realize the full potential of matrix assisted pulsed laser
evaporation for processing pharmaceuticals that do not dissolve in water. This
research is to fill the knowledge gap on the relationships among processing
parameters, structure, chemical properties, and biological functionality for a
drug that can be used to treat a common type of skin cancer (basal cell
carcinoma) as well as fungal infections. The development of layered
nanocomposite films, which extend the amount of time over which the drug is
released, has the potential to reduce the number of times that a drug needs to
be administered for effective treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.