* 1762362
* Collaborative Research: Time-Dependent Response of Reinforced Concrete Buildings near Collapse
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ying Tian, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 233,798.00

This research project will investigate the near-collapse behavior of reinforced
concrete buildings under sustained gravity loads. Nearly half of the building
collapses in the U.S. due to causes other than natural disasters are related to
construction or design error, deterioration, or overloading. The majority of
these failures result in partial or total collapse and occur during the service
life of the building under sustained gravity loads. The formation of local
damage and the evolution from local failure to global collapse are often not
immediate; instead, they are complex time-dependent phenomena, for which little
knowledge exists. The fundamental knowledge obtained from this project will
facilitate better interpretation of early warning signs of building collapse for
more prudent evacuation, rescue, and stabilization decisions; advance prediction
and evaluation of a damaged building safety; and ultimately inform design for
safer and more robust buildings able to resist collapse. These outcomes will
reduce the economic and societal impact of building failure. The project will
partner with the engineering community for immediate dissemination of the
research, engage under-represented groups, and increase public scientific
engagement, and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of sustained loads on collapse
evolution of two common types of reinforced concrete buildings, moment frames
and flat-plates, will be studied by experimental simulations and numerical
modeling. The project will identify and model the response of structural
components sensitive to time-dependent concrete damage under sustained high
stresses, examine and model the response of substructures under sustained high
stresses caused by an initial local failure, identify system level response and
the interaction among most impacted components, and evaluate collapse risk. At
the material scale, the research generates knowledge for confinement effects on
concrete creep at sustained high stresses; at the component scale, the research
will generate knowledge of the effects of creep and shear crack opening on the
sustained loading response of columns, axially restrained beams in frames, and
slab-column connections; at the system scale, the research will lead to a
crucial understanding the performance and collapse risk of frame and flat-plate
systems under high sustained loads and the collapse evolution
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.