* 1762401
* RUI: Linear trimers of Fe, Co, and Ni with unique structural, magnetic, and electrochemical properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Gary Guillet, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 205,462.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program in the NSF Chemistry
Division. Dr. Gary Guillet of Georgia Southern University's Armstrong Campus
investigates strategies to synthesize compounds containing three metal ions and
two metal-metal bonds with the atoms and bonds arranged linearly. The study of
metal-metal bonding is an area of intense research because of the unique
properties of compounds that contain this type of bond. While there are many
examples of compounds that contain two metal ions with a metal-metal bond
between them, there is a dearth of compounds containing a larger number of
metals with metal-metal bonding. Even more rare are compounds with metal-metal
bonds that are linked in series. Dr. Guillet investigates the factors that
affect the strength of the bonding, and the physical properties and reactivity
of the compounds. This adds significantly to the understanding of metal-metal
bonding within multi-metallic compounds and impacts fields such as molecular
wire design. The student body of the Armstrong campus is diverse group and many
students are minorities underrepresented in the chemical sciences. About 37% of
the chemistry and biochemistry majors are first generation college students. In
order to close the education gap in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics, it is critical to expand access to research experiences for
students. Institutional data clearly shows that students graduate faster if they
participate in undergraduate research compared to their peers. With funding from
this grant, Dr. Guillet is mentoring and promoting these
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dimetallic complexes of transition metals are
abundant and thoroughly studied. However, extending these compounds by addition
of a third metal forming linear, trimetallic, complexes is synthetically
challenging and there is a dearth of these complexes. Most examples that exist
of trimetallic complexes are supported using the ligand dipyridylamine. Novel
trimetallic complexes are required to study the properties of these extended
systems and new ligands are needed for this purpose. Dr. Guillet is
investigating the synthesis of a novel ligand family designed to support
trimetallic complexes of Fe, Co, and Ni. The physical properties of these
complexes are being examined using multinuclear NMR, X-ray diffractometry, UV-
Vis spectroscopy, and IR spectroscopy. Dr. Guillet is also investigating the
reactivity using electrochemistry as well as synthetic redox reactions. Work on
this project is expanding the understanding of ligand characteristics necessary
to support trimetallic complexes and elucidate the characteristics of metal-
metal communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.