* 1762493
* Spokes: MEDIUM: SOUTH: Collaborative: Enhanced 3-D Mapping for Habitat, Biodiversity, and Flood Hazard Assessments of Coastal and Wetland Areas of the Southern US
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Timothy Dixon, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 857,998.00

The risk to coastal populations and infrastructure from flooding due to sea
level rise, severe storms, and river discharge will increase for U.S. southern
states. The vision of this project is that communities occupying low-lying
coastal areas of the southern US will be protected and develop in a sustainable
manner through planning based on knowledge, conservation, and wise use of
sensitive lands. Researchers from the University of South Florida's College of
Marine Science and the School of Geosciences, Texas A&amp;M University Corpus
Christi, and Google Earth Engine are collaborating with the South Big Data Hub
through this project to develop more accurate, ultra-high resolution
topographic, land cover, and urban environment geospatial products. The project
examines in detail areas that were directly impacted by Hurricanes Harvey and
Irma in 2017, and identifies flood-prone areas across the region. The 3D maps
show habitat diversity, needed to plan for conservation and development in these
important ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the
improved topographic and land cover maps of the south States within 50 Km of the
coast from Texas to Florida (an area &gt;220,000 square Km). The maps will be
constructed using a Big Data approach, using detailed historical airborne LiDAR
(Light Detection and Ranging) data collected from airplanes merged with high
spatial resolution (&lt;2 m pixel) multispectral commercial satellite imagery.
The project will also include research into detailed 3D mapping of urban areas
using Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods; specifically the project will map
portions of Houston/Corpus Christi in Texas, and Tampa/Saint Petersburg in
Florida, using Kite Photography and light aircraft. The production of land cover
maps and digital elevation models requires the fusion of very large amounts of
disparate data and efficient, automated techniques. The project will develop the
strategies to aggregate these data into useful products using Google Earth
Engine and a High Performance Computing cluster. The project will distribute all
products openly via NOAA's Digital Coastal portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.