* 1762809
* Structural Dynamics Identification Using Motion Estimation and Video Magnification
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Christopher Niezrecki, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 376,410.00

This project aims to explore the use of a non-contact, video camera-based method
to identify small motions and dynamic behavior of structures. This has the
potential to help engineers understand complex dynamic behavior of 3D
structures, including, for example, wind turbines, bridges, aircraft, ships, and
automobiles. This will help in structural health monitoring, as well as in
testing numerical model predictions of deformations of large, complex
structures. Videos can be recorded, and deformations and dynamic behavior
distilled using a portable electronic device application (app) developed for a
cell phone. This will permit simplified use of the technology by researchers,
design engineers and field inspectors. The research team will work with high
school students to integrate the video sensing technology into their curriculum.
The project will also involve female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of this project is
to understand and quantify the relationship between the structural dynamics
extracted via camera video motion magnification and the true dynamic motion. The
project has the potential to transform the way large-scale experimental modal
analysis and three-dimensional (3D) structural dynamics identification is
currently performed. The successful completion of the work will lead to a better
understanding of vision-based structural dynamic parameter extraction and how
the processed data is affected by environmental and operational variabilities.
This work will integrate the phase-based motion estimation technique with 3D
digital image correlation and point tracking to achieve an understanding of how
two-dimensional camera measurements can be used to extract quantitative 3D
motion. The successful outcomes of this project will address the existing
knowledge gap between the factors that contaminate the related algorithms and
the processed results, while quantifying uncertainty for video-based structural
dynamics identification. The research will generate a systematic understanding
of how extracted optical flows are associated with dynamic motions. Achieving a
quantitative understanding of how different parameters influence the results for
phase-based motion extraction and video magnification will lead to a
transformative new approach for non-contact measurement that can impact system
identification, validation, and structural health monitoring of various
infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.