* 1762109
* IOS RAPID: Does adaptation to urbanization promote resilience during a natural disaster? A test of brown anole (Anolis sagrei) behavior and stress after Hurricane Irma.
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Bobby Fokidis, Rollins College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 10/31/2018
* USD 45,210.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resilience is the capacity for
individuals to cope with stressful challenges and recover successfully from any
adverse effects of said challenges. Such challenges are met with a physiological
response that involves the secretion of stress hormones into the blood and their
accumulation in the brain resulting in the expression of adaptive behaviors,
such as fight or flight. Individuals frequently exposed to stress in day-to-day
life are predicted to recover more rapidly both behaviorally and
physiologically, e.g., they are more resilient. Scientists have recently
documented that anole lizards in urban Orlando have a lessened stress response
when compared to rural counterparts, possibly as a means to cope with the
challenges of urbanization, which could increase their resilience to stressful
events. Hurricane Irma provides an unprecedented opportunity to test this "urban
resilience" hypothesis by comparing how urban and rural populations perceived,
responded and recovered from this natural disaster. Using data collected prior
to hurricane landfall, this work will investigate stress hormones and their
accumulation in the brain, and stress-related behaviors in both urban and rural
lizard populations as they recover from the hurricane's impact. Understanding
resilience in this context is valuable to conservation managers concerned about
how natural disasters impact wildlife and potentially facilitate non-native
animal invasions, such as the famed South Florida python invasion following
Hurricane Andrew in 1992, which typically begin in cities. Conceptually this
study can also inform how low resilience leaves individuals susceptible to the
prolonged effects of extreme stress, such as occurs with post-traumatic stress
disorder. This work will involve undergraduate students in data collection and
analysis and provide opportunities for presentation of findings at national and
international conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Enduring natural disasters requires resilience, the ability
to successfully cope with and recover from the adverse effects of extreme
challenges. Prominent in resilience is the ability to successfully manage the
stress response, a hormonal cascade initiating in the brain and ultimately
involving the secretion of glucocorticoids from the adrenal gland.
Glucocorticoids alter metabolism and behavior to permit survival during stress
and frequent activation of this response can attenuate their secretion to avoid
the cost of excessive accumulation which could negatively impact neural
function. Preliminary data show urban populations of the invasive brown anole
(Anolis sagrei) have an attenuated stress response compared to rural ones
suggesting urban lizards may exhibit greater resilience. An unprecedented
opportunity to test this "urban resilience" hypothesis occurred when Hurricane
Irma made landfall. This research will provide undergraduate student
opportunities to conduct research on circulating and neural glucocorticoid
levels and stress-related behaviors in urban and rural lizard populations
sampled immediately before and after Hurricane Irma to determine the time taken
to return to "baseline" conditions prior to landfall. Understanding resilience
in this context informs conservation managers interested in how hurricanes can
promote accidental invasions of exotic species, such as happened with Burmese
pythons after Hurricane Andrew in 1992. Such invasions usually start in cities,
where potential invaders must simultaneously cope with both city and disaster
associated stressors, yet this interaction has never been explored. Data from
this study can be used to inform disorders characterized by low resistance to
extreme stress, such as post-traumatic stress disorder.