* 1762530
* Advanced Integrated Design Optimization Method to Realize Ultrasonic-Phase-Change Actuated Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Loh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 611,146.00

The goal of this project is to enable the optimal design and fabrication of a
material for soft robotic applications. Soft robots have potential for
functionality, versatility, adaptability, and safety exceeding that of
traditional robotic systems. However, it is challenging to create materials
capable of supplying the forces and motion required for soft robotics. This
research will create a new method for optimally designing and fabricating
advanced shape-changing materials that can be used in soft robotic applications.
Like in biological systems, shape change will be encoded within the architecture
of the material system. The design technique to be pioneered in this research
will establish this encoding in a manner tailored to the specific robotic system
problem. Outcomes of this study will enable more advanced soft robotic systems
with capabilities beyond what is possible with current technology. This research
will enable to novel technologies such as micro-robotic vehicles, bio-inspired
soft robots, and micro-propulsion devices. The project will prepare students for
careers designing and optimizing advanced soft robotic systems. It also will
yield new educational modules to promote training in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create an
optimization method to enable a tailored design of soft material and soft
robotic systems based on a novel actuation modality. The research approach is to
formulate multi-scale topology optimization for designing a soft material system
with different sizes and geometries of embedded fluid cavities that change phase
when certain cavities undergo local resonances induced by propagating narrowband
ultrasonic waves. Five primary research tasks will be investigated. First, this
project will begin with multi-physics modeling to characterize the constitutive
relationship that governs ultrasonic wave excitation with phase-change
actuation, considering different geometries and material properties of the soft
structure, cavities, and in-fill liquid. Second, multi-scale topology
optimization will be formulated, and coupled with the finite element model from
the first task, for designing the material architecture to optimize for desired
shape change. Third, additive manufacturing coupled with liquid infill during
prototyping will enable the realization of these optimized multi-scale
structures. This will then be experimentally validated for shape change by
ultrasonic-phase-change. Having demonstrated proof-of-concept and fourth, multi-
objective topology optimization will output solutions that will enable the
entire structure to attain multiple states of motions (i.e., displacement
positions, such as various degrees and angles of bending of a long, slender
structure). The final task integrates the advances from all previous tasks to
fabricate optimized, multi-phase, soft prototypes that can be actuated to
achieve different motions. This project will lead to the first multi-scale
topology optimization for smart material-structural systems, linking directly
the actuation material design to achieve the desired motion at the structural
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.