* 1762034
* Spokes: MEDIUM: MIDWEST: Smart Big Data Pipeline for Aging Rural Bridge Transportation Infrastructure (SMARTI)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniel Linzell, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,988.00

America's bridges received a C+ from the American Society of Civil Engineers
(ASCE) in 2017. Additionally, the US ranks only 11th world-wide in terms of
infrastructure competitiveness. America's infrastructure, particularly its
50-100+ year-old bridges, is in poor health, representing a hidden crisis. Rural
areas, due to their lower population density and distance from urban centers,
are acutely affected by this crisis, particularly in terms of public safety and
economic growth. Limited budgets for planning and maintenance only serve to
exacerbate the crisis. To better inform future research, the research team held
collaborative conferences and workshops, and conducted stakeholder surveys to
identify issues impacting rural bridge health. Outcomes from these activities
underscored the value of big data technologies to address the crisis and
informed the proposed work. The mission of this multi-institution and multi-
sector project is to produce a big data pipeline for rural bridge health
management that improves transportation network performance and enhances
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will combine existing and new
datasets to address challenges of relevance to bridge owners using scalable and
replicable big data pipeline components. Activities will inform bridge owner
decision-making by integrating existing datasets and data collected using next-
generation health monitoring technologies (e.g., contact and non-contact
sensors, unmanned aerial vehicles) with innovative data management techniques.
Socio-technical impacts associated with potential decisions will also be
assessed. Aging, rural bridge testbeds will be selected in consultation with
public and private owners to produce data products that facilitate decision-
making and ultimately, provide economical and reliable solutions that improve
bridge health. Results from the research will be shared with engineers, owners,
and builders at workshops hosted by the research team. Project findings will be
disseminated through publications, conferences, meetings, and forums. The
research team will engage with the Big Data Hubs and Spokes network to make
data, methods, and results available across regions. By extension, project
findings will also benefit activities used to monitor and manage other important
infrastructure assets, including highways, buildings, power grids, offshore oil
platforms, water networks, and other civil
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.