* 1762336
* Collaborative Research: Maximizing the Expected Value of Engineered  Systems Through Coordinated Verification
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Christian Wernz, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2021
* USD 95,967.00

Verification is a crucial process in the development of complex systems during
which engineers build confidence that their system functions as intended.
Because resources are limited, engineers must be strategic in the planning and
execution of verification activities. Many large engineered systems are composed
of parts and subsystems developed by different firms, which complicates system
verification. Much of the verification process is reactive rather than proactive
and impacted by schedule and budget pressure. This research project will create
and evaluate a mathematical framework of incentives as a coordination mechanism
among engineering teams during system verification. Individual teams will define
their own verification strategies while maximizing the value of the overall
system. If successful, this research will benefit the public through increased
safety and efficacy of commercial products and public services. It will enable
U.S. industry to be more competitive by making system verification more
efficient and effective. The project also includes active recruiting and
mentoring activities that will advance the interests and skills of women and
other underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to mathematically derive value-maximizing system
verification strategies for multi-firm systems engineering projects. This method
enables computing verification strategies that maximize a firm's objective
function, while accounting for the interdependencies between the firms, the
components they develop, and the value of the overall system. Moreover, the
framework will account for and enable the design of contractual agreements
between firms in order to ensure that locally optimal firm verification
decisions contribute to the global goal of maximizing system value. To achieve
this research objective, mathematical methods from operations research, decision
theory, and economics will be combined and advanced into one framework. The
mathematical foundations of the research include partially observable Markov
decision processes for deriving optimal verification strategies for each firm,
multiscale decision theory to mathematically capture the interdependencies
between firms, and contract theory to design effective contracts that can
implement globally optimal verifications strategies. Studies of engineering
projects will provide empirical evidence about these
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.