* 1762395
* Promising Practices for Addressing the Underrepresentation of Women in STEM: A Comparative Analysis Across Scientific Disciplines
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Ashley Bear, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 752,000.00

The scientific and engineering communities have been working towards improved
representation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM for decades, and
while progress has been made, women and, in particular, women of color remain
underrepresented in many scientific and engineering fields at many levels in
STEM education and stages in STEM careers. This study of the National Academies
will seek to understand institutional barriers to implementing promising
practices for improving representation of women in STEM, such that those
barriers can be removed or overcome. Importantly, this study will not put the
onus on women, but rather will focus on helping institutions understand how to
remove barriers that exist because of outmoded institutional structures.
Moreover, considerable energy will be invested in examining the evidence behind
the most successful policies, practices and strategies that have demonstrated
effectiveness in opening doors to women's participation and success in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An appointed study committee of experts under the
auspices of the NAS Committee on Women in Science, Engineering, and Medicine
(CWSEM) will undertake the following activities: 1) a comparative examination of
research on why women are more underrepresented in some STEM disciplines
compared to others; 2) a review, analysis, and synthesis of existing research on
policies, practices, programs and other interventions for improving recruitment,
retention, and sustained advancement into leadership roles of women in specific
STEM disciplines and at different stages in career trajectories; 3) an
investigation into why effective interventions have not been scaled up or
adopted by more institutions and workplaces; and 4) the development of evidence-
based recommendations for implementing promising policies and practices to
improve both representation and leadership of women within specific STEM
disciplines. The study will also place a strong emphasis on the intersection of
race and gender by considering the accumulated research on specific barriers
faced by women of color in STEM and the research on policies and practices that
have had an impact on the representation of women of color in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is very timely for academic institutions and
organizations, the private sector, as well as state and federal legislators and
federal agencies that have a major interest and commitment to equity in STEM.
Upon completion and publication of the final report, the National Academies will
undertake an intensive set of communication and outreach activities with
stakeholders in academia, industry, government, Congress, and professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.