* 1762384
* Collaborative Research: Friction in Flatland - Contact, Adhesion, and Friction of 2D Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2022
* USD 260,768.00

Two-dimensional materials are layered materials having atomic- to nano-scale
thickness. They are increasingly being explored and used for a multitude of
applications that take advantage of the materials' layered structure. However,
the properties of the interfaces between the layers are still poorly understood,
due in part to challenges associated with direct measurement of such properties
at very small length scales. The goal of this project is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the effect of material properties, including composition,
phase, and crystallinity, on the critical properties of interfacial contact,
adhesion, and friction. This will have broad technological impact, since
investigation of layered materials is needed to optimize and transform their use
in applications that rely on these critical properties to function effectively.
The focus of this research is on layered materials that are relevant to current
and emerging applications, including those in the automotive, aerospace, and
electronics industries, thereby promoting the progress of science; advancing the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; and securing the national defense. The
research objectives of this project will be complemented by activities focused
on providing opportunities for students from underrepresented groups, including
involving the large Hispanic population at University of California Merced and
leveraging successful outreach programs at University of Pennsylvania. The team
will also engage with pre-college audiences, building on the PIs' track records
of public and youth engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
the nanoscale interfacial contact, adhesion, and friction behavior of transition
metal dichalcogenides, including molybdenum disulfide. Research on these
materials will be carried out through optimally-matched atomic force microscopy
and accelerated molecular dynamics simulations, taking advantage of the unique
capabilities of the PIs. Optimal matching allows simulations to be validated by
experiments, and experimental findings to be fully explored in atomically-
resolved detail by simulations. Availability of probe tips and substrates coated
with well-defined, ultrathin transition metal dichalcogenides using recently
developed techniques will enable isolation of the effects of composition, phase,
and crystallinity for both self-mated and heterostructure interfaces. This novel
approach will yield fundamental insights into the mechanical properties of
transition metal dichalcogenide interfaces that are needed for rational and
predictive design of materials, devices, and systems composed of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.