* 1762096
* SOCRATES: Microphysical Processes in Southern Ocean Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 06/06/2017,05/31/2021
* Greg McFarquhar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 821,509.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work funded under this award is
part of a larger field campaign titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation,
Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The primary activity of the
campaign is the deployment of a Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained
by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for Atmospheric
Research. The GV will be based in Hobart, Australia and make multiple flights
across the South Polar front collecting data on SO clouds and the meteorological
conditions in which they occur. The GV is equipped with dropsondes to record
ambient meteorological conditions, radar and lidar to observe the clouds, and
instruments mounted on the wings or positioned behind inlets to to sample,
collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles (liquid droplets and ice
crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO activities planned
internationally and by other US agencies, including surface observations taken
on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island at 54 degrees
South. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue addressed here is the relative
abundance of supercooled liquid water (SLW) droplets and ice particles in SO
clouds, as SLW is more prevalent in SO clouds than their Northern Hemisphere
counterparts. When ice crystals form in clouds they tend to grow at the expense
of liquid droplets, as water preferentially evaporates from droplets and
condenses onto ice particles through the Wegener-Bergeron-Findeisen process. The
PIs hypothesize that the persistence of SLW in SO clouds is due in part to a
lack of ice nucleating particles (INPs), particles which trigger freezing within
liquid droplets. INPs are much less common than cloud condensation nuclei (CCN),
the particles onto which water vapor condenses to produce liquid droplets, as
ice nucleation can only occur on particles which have a conducive crystalline
structure. Lack of INPs is a reasonable conjecture as many ice nucleating
materials such as soil minerals and plant matter come from land and might thus
be unavailable over the SO. But ice nucleation can also be driven by fragments
and splinters of ice from the breakup of graupel and other frozen precipitation
particles, and the PIs hypothesize that this sort of "secondary nucleation" is
hampered by factors including limited cloud depth, weak cloud updrafts, and low
precipitation rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The examination of controls on the
depth, amount, and longevity of SLW in SO clouds is conducted using several
wing-mounted probes to characterize raindrops, cloud droplets, and ice
particles. Instruments including a Cloud Droplet Probe (CDP), a two-dimensional
cloud probe (2DC), and a 2-D stereo probe (2DS), are used to generate size
distributions for particles from 25 microns to 2mm. A Particle Habit Imaging and
polar Scattering probe (PHIPS) is used to determine the shape of ice particles,
and two additional probes are used to determine cloud SLW content. The wing-
mounted probes are used along with data from inlet-based instruments to assess
the relative importance of secondary ice formation compared with primary
nucleation. Data collected by airborne radar and lidar provides information on
cloud ice particles and droplets on larger spatial scales as well as information
on cloud updraft and downdraft strength. Further work is performed using
numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The campaign has broader impacts due to
the potentially significant role of SO clouds in determining the sensitivity of
global climate to external forcing from greenhouse gas increases and other
factors. In addition, the pristine conditions of the SO are the closest
available analog to the pre-industrial atmosphere and thus campaign observations
could be helpful in understanding the anthropogenic contribution to aerosols and
aerosol-cloud interactions. Data from the campaign will be used to develop
better representations of clouds in models used for weather prediction and
climate impacts assessments. The data will be made available to the worldwide
scientific community, thus the campaign has broader impacts by creating a
community resource for basic science research. Educational broader impacts
include the participation of three graduate students in campaign and post-
campaign activities. Several outreach activities are planned for the deployment,
involving public speaking and tours of the aircraft. Social media outreach is
also planned, through blog postings, twitter, and a Facebook page.