* 1762862
* Fusing Data Analytics with Hydraulics in a Hydroinformatics Approach for Water Distribution System Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jian Liu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 502,364.00

This project will develop a novel scheme that seeks to provide full-scale
monitoring from individual households to the entire water distribution system
(WDS) by inexpensively combining various kinds of measurements from real-time
metering of individual premise use to system flow and pressure conditions over
time. The monitoring system will provide predictions on hydraulic conditions
across the WDS over time. Comparing these predictions with field measurements
capabilities in smart ways will increase burst detection accuracy, reduce
detection time and improve accuracy of locating bursts resulting in shorter
repair times, and lower costs and damages. Field demonstration and validation of
the approaches within this project will demonstrate the active approach to burst
detection/location. The project will promote inter-disciplinary graduate and
undergraduate education and training, enhance research opportunities that
promote female and underrepresented minority groups, and attract K-12 students
to engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to develop a new generation of WDS monitoring systems within a new
interdisciplinary hydroinformatics paradigm by fusing hydraulic knowledge with
data-driven spatio-temporal analytics. The real-time burst detection algorithm
will employ likelihood ratio test statistics to compare predicted and measured
pressures and flows in conjunction with multivariate control charts to maximize
event detection rates and avoid false alarms. After a burst is determined to be
occurring, the approach returns to the WDS hydraulics to estimate responses to
bursts at various locations and correlate measurement deviations to predicted
conditions. Given the relatively low implementation costs, the concepts and
technologies developed in this research will have significant commercial
potential in a sizable international market. The project will demonstrate a
platform for water utilities to rapidly assimilate new sensing technology and
reap broader benefits as opportunities to incorporate this expanded data
resources in WDS control systems are clear. The spatio-temporal sensor fusion
mechanism will enhance data analytics for solving problems in other complex non-
stationary systems where real-time modeling, monitoring and decision-making are
of interest. The integrated systems and civil engineering research collaboration
and the link to practice through field studies offer unique opportunities for
establishing an inter-disciplinary education program, for multidisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and for student research
opportunities. Broad dissemination will be ensured by maintaining data and case
libraries, publishing papers in conferences and refereed journals, and
collaborating with industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.