* 1762018
* Non-Born-Oppenheimer Effects in the Framework of Multicomponent Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Sharon Hammes-Schiffer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 320,000.00

Sharon Hammes-Schiffer of Yale University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop computational approaches to study the interaction between
electrons and protons in chemical systems. The coupling between electrons and
protons plays a vital role in many important biological processes such as
photosynthesis and respiration. They also play a role in technology, for
example, in energy production in solar cells. Developing computational methods
to accurately describe this coupling is challenging. Electrons and protons are
so light that they must be treated quantum mechanically. Hammes-Schiffer and her
coworkers develop quantum mechanics methods that are computationally efficient.
These methods are applied to specific processes of biological and chemical
relevance. The Hammes-Schiffer research group also maintains and enhances a
website containing software and educational tools related to this topic. The
computer programs, tools, demonstrations, and tutorials available on this web
site will enable scientists in a broad range of fields to learn about this
topic. In addition, this project facilitates technological and biomedical
advances through a better understanding of the coupling between electrons and
protons. An important example is the design of more effective solar cells and
other alternative, renewable energy sources. Another example is the design of
more effective drugs through modification of enzymes that rely on the coupling
between electrons and protons.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to develop new theoretical and computational approaches that
will provide insight into the underlying fundamental principles of photoinduced
proton transfer and proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions, which
play a vital role in a broad range of biological and chemical processes. The
specific issues to be examined include the roles of nuclear quantum effects,
such as proton delocalization and zero-point energy, as well as non-Born-
Oppenheimer effects, which are often significant in these types of reactions.
The method development is conducted within the framework of the nuclear-
electronic orbital density functional theory (NEO-DFT) approach, which treats
key nuclei, such as the transferring proton(s), quantum mechanically on the same
level as the electrons within the framework of DFT. The focus is to develop the
multicomponent time-dependent DFT (NEO-TDDFT) approach for calculating excited
electronic, proton vibrational, and electron-proton vibronic states. This
approach is used to compute excitation energies and transition densities for
photoinduced proton transfer and PCET systems. The NEO-DFT and NEO-TDDFT
approaches is being incorporated into a publicly available electronic structure
package. In addition, tutorials are being created to explain how to perform NEO
calculations and to highlight the unique capabilities of this approach.
Furthermore, a web site on PCET is being enhanced to convey useful information
to the community and to provide useful tools, scripts, and programs relevant to
studying PCET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.