* 1762158
* Exploring the consequences of individual differences in preschoolers' causal stance
* EDU,DUE
* 08/16/2017,08/31/2021
* Amy Booth, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,295,679.00

It has been increasingly recognized that promoting scientific literacy must
begin early while foundational attitudes, knowledge and skills are taking shape.
This project, conducted by researchers at the University of Texas and Loyola
University of Chicago, will explore preschoolers' attunement to causal
information -- referred to as their causal stance -- as a key component of this
foundation. For example, the researchers are interested in the degree to which
children seek out information about how unfamiliar objects work or can be used.
By advancing our understanding of the origins and outcomes associated with the
strength of children's causal stance, this project will support the development
of early interventions aimed at facilitating children's participation and
success in science, with a particular focus on at risk children. As such, its
goals are particularly well aligned with the learning and learning environments
strand of the Education and Human Resources Core Research (ECR) program. The
project also has implications for professional workforce development and
broadening participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
implement a four-year longitudinal design to address two core research goals.
First, with respect to outcomes, researchers will test the hypothesis that the
strength of children's causal stance at 3 years of age (measured in terms of
children's preferences, as well as patterns of inquiry and exploration) is
predictive of their scientific literacy and interests at 5- and 6- years of age
(measured by standardized tests and surveys). Second, with respect to origins,
researchers will test the hypothesis that variability in the degree to which
parents talk about, and otherwise highlight, causal information (in both the
laboratory and in a children's museum) relates to the strength of their
children?s causal stance, as well as their longer-term scientific literacy and
interests. Together, these investigations will inform discussions regarding the
role of early experience in shaping scientific literacy, and relatedly, when and
in what ways we might optimize children?s engagement and success in science.