* 1763973
* Rectifiability of Measures in Euclidean and Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Raanan Schul, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 179,997.00

One aspect of modern technology is that it is easy to collect data. A very
challenging task is to sift through a large collection of data in order to find
meaningful information. One would like to organize the data, or at least part of
it, in such a way that it is easy to use. Imagine the data as being all images
on the internet, and the "organization" that you seek is being able to map out
which images are those of a specific person of your choosing, sub-ordered
according to the activities in which he or she is engaged. Organizing large
amounts of information in a useful way, or sorting through it and finding pieces
you care about, are tasks that can be transformed, or related to, mathematical
questions. This proposal attempts to address some of these questions. Basic
questions are mathematical analogues of the following: What kind of structure
can we hope to get after organizing the data? How much of the data can we expect
to organize in a useful way? Do answers change if we are willing to "lose" some
information in the process? Will we know the amount data lost? And, last but not
least, can we, in a practical way, access the organized data or a significant
part of it?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many applications one is given a large data
set represented as a subset of a metric space, such as R^d for large dimension
d, and seeks to `faithfully' represent a `large' portion of this data set as a
subset of R^k for dimension k much `smaller' than d. `Faithfully' here, means
that one can still perform the same data mining tasks on the image of the data
portion. This task has thus far yielded much attention from computer scientists
and applied mathematicians using a wide range of approaches. The framework of
dimensionality reduction also includes data compression and data approximation.
These have applications in many areas of science. Geometric Measure Theory and
Geometric Function Theory are tools whose use in this matter has not been fully
exploited. A key point is that often the given data set has some additional
geometric structure, for example small Hausdorff dimension (a discrete
analogue), or being close to a union of low dimensional manifold. This allows
one to use harmonic analysis and geometric measure theory. The project aims at
studying mathematical questions motivated by this. Basic questions to be
discusses can be phrased as "When is part of a metric measure space composed of
Lipschitz images of `standard' pieces and how do we find these pieces?" or "When
is a collection of points best described in a low-dimensional way?". The tools
to be used come from a combination of Harmonic Analysis and Geometric measure
theory, which is usually referred to as quantitative
rectifiability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.