* 1763218
* RAPID: Constraints on Policy Learning After Disaster
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Kristin Taylor, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/29/2020
* USD 55,000.00

The objective of this study is to understand why communities that have
experienced a natural disaster decide to reduce the risk of a future disaster.
Communities learn from the experience of disaster but often that learning does
not lead to a policy change that reduces risks. Furthermore, communities vary in
their capacity to mitigate future disasters. The broader impact of this study is
to identify the limits on policy learning about disaster mitigation after a
community has experienced a disaster. It is critical to understand why one
community may be more vulnerable to a disaster than its neighbor. Hurricane
Harvey presents a case for understanding the limits on policy learning after a
disaster because of the range of communities it affected across Southeast Texas.
Data will be collected using a series of semi-structured interviews over several
months with local government officials - mayors, emergency managers and city
planners - in communities affected by Hurricane Harvey. The intellectual merit
of this project is the use of data collected directly from local government
officials on policy learning after a disaster across time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks what are the constraints on policy
learning after disaster? The central theory of this project is that local
governments will attempt to engage in policy learning after a natural disaster
but those efforts will not necessarily lead to a policy change that reduces
future risk. This theory is based on the idea that the process of policy
learning can stall or halt when local governments are assessing information
about mitigating natural hazards. This study examines policy learning after
disaster in the context of Hurricane Harvey because of the range of communities
it impacted across Southeast Texas. It hypothesizes that information is the
critical factor for policy learning and that learning can be constrained by (1)
the types of sources a community looks to for information, (2) whether the
information is credible, (3) whether the local government officials tend to be
myopic in how they consider the information. Data will be collected using a
series of semi-structured interviews over several months with local government
officials?mayors, emergency managers and city planners in communities affected
by Hurricane Harvey. Previous studies of policy learning have relied on ex-post
analyses of government documents to infer the presence and meaning of policy
learning. However, this project will gather data in real time, thereby capturing
the decision making process for how information is considered and used.
Furthermore, it allows local government officials who are engaged in the process
of policy learning to speak for themselves and their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.