* 1763272
* NSF-Simons Center for Multiscale Cell Fate Research
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Arthur Lander, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

The NSF-Simons Center for Multiscale Cell Fate Research at the University of
California, Irvine will provide a stimulating and empowering intellectual and
physical environment for innovative team research at the interface between
mathematics and biology. A cell's fate -- differentiation into a specific
biological cell type -- is determined by several interlinked factors: cell-
intrinsic mechanisms, signals from the local environment outside the cell, and
messages the cell receives from other cells. Despite unprecedented amounts of
experimental data at single-cell resolution, how cell fate is determined remains
not fully understood. Challenges to development of a theory arise from
information crosstalk at multiple temporal and spatial scales, as well as from
the need to mine, integrate, and model the new single-cell "big data" derived
from experimental measurements. To address these challenges and to establish a
founding paradigm for multiscale cell fate research, a team of mathematical
scientists and biologists will develop novel mathematical, computational, and
statistical tools to analyze cell fate through a multiscale lens. The Center
will carry out a coherent program for community building, interdisciplinary
training and workforce development, and diversity enhancement to expand the
mathematics-biology interface and to promote the convergence of mathematical and
biological sciences. The Center will produce cohorts of interconnected young
researchers and will nationally seed the next generation's laboratories. The
knowledge gained will create new multiscale mathematics for analyzing big data
and modeling complex systems, with broader applications to regenerative
medicine, embryonic development, and birth defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF-Simons Center for Multiscale Cell Fate Research will establish new
understanding of mechanisms and principles of cell fate control through
investigation of emerging behavior of cells across scales. The study aims for
transformative insight into cell fate, with a focus on three biological themes:
cellular complexity and plasticity in skin, stochastic dynamics and migration of
neural crest cells, and epigenetic control of stem cell specification. While
each theme addresses different gaps in understanding of cell fate, they all
emphasize emergent complexity arising from multiscale interactions, and they
share several mathematical aspects. The Center aims to develop new mathematical
methods driven by these specific cell-fate questions as well as broader
biological applications. Data-driven and principle-based multiscale models of
cell fate will guide experiments, with subsequent feedback to the modeling
efforts. Three concerted efforts will be made to enhance overall capacity of
research and training at the interface between mathematics and biology: 1)
expanding mathematical sciences proximal to the biology interface, 2) connecting
mathematical scientists across the spectrum, and 3) fostering mathematical
scientists' ability to connect directly to experiments. A wide range of new and
closely interconnected community-building and outreach programs, including
community-initiated Interdisciplinary Opportunity Awards, a Convergence
Accelerator Team program with national reach, a BioBridge Clinic on experimental
techniques, and a Mathematical Experience through Learning Research program for
high school students, will be developed and implemented to achieve the Center's
ambitious goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.