* 1763981
* RI: Medium: Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Human Attention Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Dimitrios Samaras, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,198,950.00

The process by which people shift their attention from one thing to another
touches upon everything that we think and do, and as such has widespread
importance in fields ranging from basic research and education to applications
in industry and national defense. This research develops a computational model
for predicting these human shifts in visual attention. Prediction is
understanding, and with this model we will achieve a greater understanding of
this core human cognitive process. More tangibly, prediction enables
applications to anticipate where attention will shift in response to seeing
specific imagery. This in turn would usher in 1) a new generation of human-
computer interactive systems, ones capable of interacting with users at the
level of their attention movements, and 2) novel ways to annotate and index
visual content based on attentional importance or interest. This project
combines computational work with cognitive science and digital media, providing
an entry to computer science through valuable learning experiences for women and
underrepresented minorities who might otherwise be intimidated by traditional
computational work. The project broadens the exposure of underrepresented
minorities to STEM through partnerships with several ongoing efforts at Stony
Brook University, including the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) and
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a synergistic
computational and behavioral approach for modeling the movements of human
attention. This approach is based on an assumption that attentional engagement
on an image (or video frame) depends on both the pixels that are being viewed
and the viewer's previous state. Based on this assumption, visual attention is
posed as a Markov decision process, and inverse reinforcement learning is used
to learn a reward function to associate specific spatio-temporal regions in an
image, corresponding to the pixels at a viewer's momentary locus of attention,
with a reward. Under this novel approach, the attention mechanism is treated as
an agent whose action is to select a location in an image or image frame that
will maximize its total reward. This model is being evaluated against a
behavioral ground truth consisting of the eye movements that people make as they
view images and video in the context of free viewing and visual search
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.