* 1763237
* Mechanism and Role of Enzymatic P-Methyl Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Susan Wang, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2020
* USD 327,775.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Dr. Susan Wang at Washington State University to
characterize the unusual chemistry used by two enzymes that methylate phosphorus
atoms: the "P-methyltransferases", PhpK and SD 1168. Compounds containing bonds
between carbon and phosphorus (C-P) play important roles in agriculture,
industry, and medicine. The C-P bond is resistant to being broken by water,
making compounds that contain this stable structural feature commercially
useful. In addition, it has been suggested that C-P formation may provide a
mechanism for marine organisms to store, preserve, and cycle phosphorus. This
project will investigate the physiological roles of the only known enzymes that
form carbon-phosphorus-carbon (C-P-C) linkages, the "P-methyltransferases."
Undergraduate and graduate students will receive broad multidisciplinary
training in chemistry and biology. These trainees will also participate in an
outreach program introducing rural and/or low-income preschool children to the
life sciences as a potential career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus here
will be on two"P-methyltransferase enzymes, PhpK and SD 1168, that methylate
phosphorus atoms. Both enzymes are capable of producing precursors for the
important natural product phosphinothricin, a broad-spectrum herbicide with
antibiotic properties. Both PhpK and SD 1168 are believed to utilize a
combination of vitamin B12 and free radical chemistry to form C-P-C bonding
sequences. SD 1168, from the marine bacterium Shewanella denitrificans, exhibits
broader substrate specificity than PhpK. While its true biological function
remains unknown, SD 1168 is a potential candidate for future engineering efforts
to produce new C-P-C compounds. A multifaceted, collaborative approach combining
spectroscopic, synthetic, molecular biology, microbiology, and crystallographic
techniques will be used to determine the enzymatic mechanism for P-methylation
and to pinpoint the physiological role of SD 1168 in its host organism. The
results of the proposed research will provide insight into unusual, difficult
chemistry and have implications for the biosynthesis of C-P natural products and
related compounds.