* 1763632
* SHF: Collaborative Research: Biocompatible I/O Interfaces for Robust Bioorthogonal Molecular Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Milan Stojanovic, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 116,000.00

Sugar molecules can exist in two forms that are the mirror image of each other
but otherwise indistinguishable, like the left and right hand. All DNA molecules
in nature contain right-hand sugars that cause them to assume the well-known
double-helix shape with a right-handed twist. Proteins in cells in nature
recognize the right-handed DNA in order to perform useful cellular functions,
one of which is destroying single-stranded DNA. Over the last decade, DNA has
come to be used in synthetic devices for sensing, computing, and diagnosing
pathogens and disease. However, when these devices are introduced into a cell,
they are prone to being destroyed by these proteins. This project will develop
devices using left-handed DNA, which is not found in nature and is resistant to
this form of degradation. In particular, the project will develop (1) input
interfaces, for signaling from targets of interest, such as small molecules or
natural DNA (D-DNA), to left-handed DNA (L-DNA), and (2) output interfaces, for
signaling from left-handed DNA back into a relevant natural molecular pathway
(such as DNA translation and transcription). This development will enable future
devices that can sense multiple markers of the state of a cell (healthy or
diseased), then integrate the sensors using DNA computing, and finally act on
the cell, for example to destroy it if diseased, but the device itself will
consist mainly of left-handed DNA and will therefore be robust in the cell. The
project will involve both graduate and undergraduate students. It will be
interdisciplinary, involving computer science and biomedical engineering, and
will be carried out at the University of New Mexico and Columbia
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of the project is to study the
binding interactions between L-DNA (left-handed DNA) molecular logic devices and
naturally occurring molecules. This study will produce a toolbox of basic
techniques for implementing input interfaces that can detect naturally occurring
target molecules, which in turn, can translate those binding events for
information processing within a bio-orthogonal L-DNA logic circuit. This will be
done by characterizing the actuation of hybrid L-DNA/D-DNA molecular computing
components by pure D-DNA input strands. The second aim of the project is
developing output interfaces that will enable L-DNA systems to produce some
effect on the environment (i.e., carry out some form of actuation) as a result
of their programmed molecular computations. Specifically, the project will focus
on one particular mechanism for generating a useful output signal from an L-DNA
molecular logic circuit, namely, gene knockdown by the allosteric "activation"
of sequestered antisense D-nucleic acids by an L-DNA molecular circuit.
Together, these will provide a mechanism for L-DNA molecular logic circuits to
actuate via control of gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.