* 1763434
* III: Medium: Massively Parallel Data Analytics on Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Saman Amarasinghe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

The rise of connected devices and the Internet has led to unprecedented growth
in the volumes of data that computers must store and process. This enormous
growth in data volumes coincides with a growing demand for immediate answers and
interactive analytics. Increasingly companies need real-time reports of sales,
network traffic, anomalies, and other business trends. Internet-connected
devices, like cars and industrial plants, demand even more real-time analysis of
data. These trends mean database and data analytics platforms must deliver ever-
faster performance from machines, a fact that has driven the dramatic interest
in scalable multi-node processing systems, like Hadoop and Spark, which
distribute the processing of large data sets across clusters of machines.
Unfortunately, because of the way these platforms are engineered, they provide
shockingly poor utilization of the hardware resources on each node, often times
yielding single-node throughput that is thousands of times lower than what the
raw hardware is capable of. In this project, an orthogonal direction will be
pursued; a system, called Proteus, will be built that will obtain performance
that utilizes hardware to the fullest extent possible, focusing on yielding a
scalable system that fully utilizes all available computing resources. If
successful, this project will have broad impact because databases and data-
intensive parallel computing systems are used by millions of enterprises around
the world, both on-site and in computing clouds; optimized implementations of
these systems that better exploit hardware will improve response times and
reduce hardware and energy costs, resulting in billions of dollars of cost
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteus will parallelize across many cores on a
single processor, as well as take advantages of many-core systems such as GPUs
and Intel's Xeon Phi. In addition, Proteus will also be able to exploit large
diverse clusters of hardware, but the aim is to do that without giving up this
efficiency, rather than accepting inefficiency as a given of distributed
computing. To do this, research in the Proteus project will focus on four key
areas: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Developing optimized implementations of individual
database algorithms, such as top-k sorts, sequential scans, random lookups,
graph and machine learning algorithms for GPUs and CPUs. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Building
cost models that predict the performance of these algorithms on heterogeneous
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Developing intermediate languages that abstract
details of the underlying hardware, to hide the nuances of these different
platforms to but without giving up performance. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Building an
optimizer that uses cost models to place these plans onto a heterogeneous mix of
hardware to obtain the best overall performance for each query
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.