* 1763546
* CSR: Medium: Rethinking Distributed SSD Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Freedman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Modern storage technologies, such as solid-state disks (SSDs), have increased
their capacity by increasing density: representing more digital bits in the same
physical media. To do so, their margin of error for representing data has
shrunk, and the resulting bit error rate has risen. While disks employ error
correcting codes to mask such bit errors, these error rates rise as disk blocks
age, by being (over)written, and eventually the disk fails. Thus, as density has
risen, disks' expected lifetimes have plunged. This research rethinks how to
build scalable and cost-effective storage through a cross-layer design to the
storage stack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For most datacenter applications, objects
are already replicated between multiple devices, and this application-layer
redundancy can be leveraged for increased reliability. This research thus
explores a new approach for end-to-end reliability for SSD storage systems:
datacenter flash devices should be far less reliable and push error visibility
and correction up to the distributed application layer. The design challenges
and implications of providing such a holistic, cross-layer approach are explored
through three research thrusts: at the individual disk layer, at the local file
system, and at the distributed storage system layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
extending the lifecycle of disks by several orders of magnitude, this research
has the potential for the adoption of new SSD storage technologies, significant
cost savings, and enabling new applications to use SSDs. Due to the plunging
lifecycles of newer generations of SSD technologies, large datacenter
applications have been unable to integrate these new generations in a number of
scenarios (e.g., workloads with heavy write rates, including databases and
caches). Given this research's potential for orders of magnitude of reliability
improvements, it provides a potential path out from this reliability cliff of
the hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Code, data, and results relating to this
research will be made available via a git repository, hosted publicly at
https://github.com/princeton-sns/crosslayer-storage/. Materials will be
available throughout the Award term and at least five years following
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.