* 1763540
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: ECC: Ephemeral Coherence Cohort for I/O Containerization and Disaggregation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Marc Snir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Leadership computing facilities for high-performance computing (HPC) have a huge
investment in the file and storage systems. The reason is that the HPC storage
system often is the Achilles Heel of HPC systems, as it is fraught with numerous
scenarios for contention, congestion and performance variability. This problem
is getting worse due to: (a) the increased importance of data-driven HPC and the
growth in the amount of data generated by large-scale simulation; and (b) the
slower growth of disk speed, as compared to CPU speed. The addition of high-
bandwidth persistent memory devices as burst-buffers brings in new opportunities
for fast caching of application data while still allowing data persistence.
However, the conventional approach of exploiting burst-buffers as yet another
caching layer cannot reduce the lengthy and costly data processing steps in the
deep I/O stack or reconcile occasional contentions inside the complex storage
system. This project, therefore, seeks to exploit burst-buffers as repositories
of persistent application-specific parallel file systems, with a lifetime
commensurate to the lifetime of an application or an application campaign on a
HPC system. This is a collaborative project between University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and Florida State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project formulates a research framework called Ephemeral Coherence Cohort (ECC)
that offers an abstraction to represent the active collection of application
data through containerization, insulate I/O activities across different
applications, and enable storage disaggregation for ephemeral allocation and
dynamic utilization of burst buffers. The proposed ECC framework aims to enhance
a variety of mission-critical applications running on the Department of Energy
and the National Science Foundation leadership computing facilities. The project
strengthens the collaboration between University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
and the Florida State University. The project has plans to organize panels and
birds-of-feather sessions on burst buffer research in the upcoming HPC
conferences and collaborate with leaders of super-computing centers for wider
community penetration with techniques from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.