* 1763380
* Investigation of Boron and Boride Nanoclusters:  Laying the Foundation for New Boron Nanostructures and Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lai-Sheng Wang of Brown
University and his students are using sophisticated laser spectroscopy
techniques to study clusters of boron and metal borides. The clusters being
studied are aggregates of 3-40 atoms. The chemical and physical properties of
these clusters depend on their size. The Wang research group is able to
continuously vary the number of atoms in a cluster, which means that they can
explore in detail how the atoms are bonded to each other. The chemical bonds in
boron clusters are very strong, which might mean that these clusters may make
possible new materials with new and useful properties. Prof. Wang and his
research team are interested in creating and characterizing novel boron cluster
structures including clusters containing a few metal atoms such as bismuth (Bi)
cobalt (Co), rhodium (Rh), and iridium (Ir). In addition to the lasers used in
the experimental work, the Wang research team also do theoretical calculations
that help interpret experimental data and predict new, never before seen
structures (for example, what to clusters containing more than 50 atoms look
like?). The long-term goal of the project is to discover new boron-based
molecules and new forms of boron materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on three sub-topics: 1) structural evolution of large size-selected
boron clusters, 2) neutral boron clusters and borospherenes (cage-like boron
clusters), and 3) metal-doped boron clusters. These clusters are produced by a
laser-vaporization supersonic cluster source and studied by a variety of
experimental and theoretical techniques. Photoelectron spectroscopy is used to
probe the structures and bonding of large negatively-charged boron clusters with
more than 40 atoms. High-resolution photoelectron imaging of negatively-charged
boron clusters is employed to provide vibrational and structural information for
the associated neutral clusters. An infrared and ultraviolet double-resonant
approach is used to directly probe neutral boron clusters, as a complementary
technique to the high-resolution photoelectron imaging experiment. The
structures and bonding of metal-doped boron clusters are studied by both
photoelectron spectroscopy and high-resolution photoelectron imaging. These
experiments provide vibrational and electronic structure fingerprints, which are
combined with computational chemistry to elucidate the structure, stability, and
chemical bonding of boron and metal-doped boron clusters. The broader impact of
this work is to build the foundation and knowledge base to discover new boron-
based nanomaterials, which can have potential technological applications and
societal benefits. This project is integrated to the teaching of physical
chemistry by the PI, as well as providing research-training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.