* 1763970
* AF: Medium: Research in Algorithms and Complexity: Total Functions, Games, and the Brain
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Christos Papadimitriou, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

The ubiquitous information environment around us, which has brought to the world
unprecedented connectivity and availability of information, as well as newfound
opportunities for individual expression, education, work, production and
commerce, entertainment, and interpersonal communication, is the result of
decades of research in all fields of computer science. Furthermore, our best
hope for confronting the many problems this new environment has brought to
humanity (privacy and fairness, to mention only two) also lies in new computer
science research. Research in theoretical computer science in particular over
the past half century has been instrumental in bringing the benefits of Moore's
law to bear through fundamental clever algorithms and has made leaps in
understanding the capabilities and limitations of computers and their software.
In fact, it has articulated one of the most important problems in mathematics
and all of science today: is P equal to NP? i.e, is exponential exhaustive
search for a solution always avoidable? The two investigators on this award have
over the past four decades contributed much to this edifice of mathematical
research in computer science, often in close collaboration. In this project,
these investigators will work together in order to attack a new generation of
problems: complexity questions in the fringe of the P vs. NP problem, a new
genre of algorithms possessing a novel kind of robustness, research at the
interface between computer science and economics related to income inequality
and market efficiency, as well as research aiming at a better understanding of
evolution, and of brain functions as basic as memory and as advanced as
language. The project will train PhD and Masters students and possibly
undergraduates as well on these research topics. The findings of this research
will be disseminated to students and researchers, both in computer science and
in other disciplines, as well as to the general public, through journal and
conference publications, undergraduate and graduate courses, seminars,
colloquia, as well as public talks and general interest
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will work on improving our
understanding of the complexity of total functions in the class TFNP and its
subclasses, in view of recent research progress in that area. On complexity
side, the project will: (1) investigate the complexity of an as yet unexplored,
from this point of view, Tarski-like fixed-point theorem widely used in
economics (2) revisit the approximability of the traveling salesperson problem
and (3) explore a new kind of algorithmic notion of robustness based on dense
nets of algorithms. In algorithmic game theory, the project will: (1) explore a
new variant of the price of anarchy inspired by wealth inequality, as well as
the complexity of market equilibria in markets with production and economies of
scale (2) research a new game theoretic solution concept based on the topology
of dynamical systems (3) pursue the proof of an intriguing new complexity-
theoretic conjecture about the inaccessibility of Nash equilibria. The work will
also explore certain promising directions at the interface of game theory and
learning theory. In the life sciences, the project will explore from the
algorithmic point of view the problem of the true nature of mutations, and will
extend recent research aiming at the computational understanding of how long-
term memory, as well as syntax and language, are achieved in the human
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.