* 1763790
* Expanding the Reach of the REU Experience: The Chemistry REU Leadership Group
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Stefan France, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 253,411.00

This project funded by the Special Projects Program in the Chemistry Division of
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. This work is for the core
support of the Chemistry Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Leadership Group (LG). The intent of the group is to enhance the impact of the
Chemistry REU community. This goal is addressed through three approaches. These
include (1) strengthening communication across the CHEM REU community by
maintaining an informative and resource-laden website (https://chemnsfreu.com)
utilizing social media, and employing a centralized email; (2) broadening
participation in the CHEM REU Program through recruitment and professional
development at national conferences of minority-serving science societies; and
(3) encouraging the exchange of ideas and sharing of best practices between the
LG, current REU principle investigators (PIs), and potential PIs at
symposia/workshops held at the Spring American Chemical Society National
Meetings and the PI meeting, a triannual in-person meeting of the REU community,
organized by the LG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities leverage the previous
success of the LG, while introducing new methods for achieving the defined
objectives. Under this project, the LG meetings and leadership structure allow
for year-round planning, development, and action upon ideas critical to the REU
community. Through improved technology (updated website, social media presence,
and centralized email), expanded educational and tracking initiatives (webinars,
LinkedIn Groups, conference booths), and partnerships with other NSF-wide
leadership groups, the CHEM REU LG strengthens communication with the REU
community, shares best practices, and supports potential PI proposal
preparation. Along those lines, the 2021 Chemistry PI Meeting allows face-to-
face meetings among REU Site PIs, prospective REU PIs, and NSF program directors
to share best practices, increase communication within the community, facilitate
collaboration across disciplines, and increase efficient use of NSF resources.
Broadening participation of underrepresented students at the REU sites is
increased through outreach efforts at regional ACS meetings and national
meetings of minority serving organizations. The diversity of Chemistry REU sites
is increased through outreach to potential PIs at meeting booths, workshops,
symposia and at the triannual PI meetings. This broad-based approach, addressing
students, faculty, and Sites increases participation across the CHEM REU
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.