* 1763134
* GOALI: Coadaptation of Intelligent Office Desks and Human Users to Promote Worker Productivity, Health and Wellness
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Burcin Becerik-Gerber, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2022
* USD 683,942.00

The main objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project is to perform fundamental research that will ultimately allow
the GOALI team to develop and test an intelligent office workstation (a smart
desk) that will optimize the user's wellbeing and productivity through
adjustment of postural, thermal, and lighting settings. The smart desk uses
wearable and workstation-mounted sensors to infer human intent, physiological
condition and current task. The project advances fundamental research addressing
how best to combine sensor data, machine learning approaches and structured
communication between the user and the workstation to bring thermal, visual and
postural conditions closer to proven best practices over time, while
simultaneously improving user satisfaction and willingness to use the system.
The project will generate the experimental data, task-specific models of human
intent and preferences, and adaptive control algorithms needed to develop a
robotic device that will interact physically and intuitively with workers to
enhance their physical comfort and workplace productivity. The project is
significant because the addition of intelligent workstations in offices has
potential to change the way health and wellbeing are promoted and achieved in
the workplace. This project directly serves the NSF mission by promoting science
that explores modes of interaction between human workers and intelligent robotic
systems that advance the health, prosperity and welfare of individual workers,
their employers, and the nation. The project supports education and promotes
diversity through outreach activities aimed at recruiting and retaining under-
represented students in research, as well as by promoting entrepreneurship and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This intelligent workstation will
learn worker preferences and shape worker behavior through an ongoing, bi-
directional, adaptive process of sensing, feedback and manipulation of
environmental parameters that have the potential to directly impact postural,
thermal and visual comfort and to increase worker productivity. Four tasks are
researched. Task 1 evaluates sensing and learning methods for inferring the
worker's existing state of thermal, visual and postural comfort. Sensing
modalities will include: wearable sensors for skin temperature, galvanic skin
response, and heartrate; environmental sensors for temperature, humidity, air
pressure, light intensity and color temperature; a structured light depth sensor
(for postural assessment); and "passive" sensors to record user changes to
desk/chair height, fan/heater speed/set-points, and light intensity and color.
Learning approaches include supervised learning (driven by user adjustments to
the workstation as well as ground truth assessments of user comfort using
Likert-like scales), unsupervised learning, and semi-supervised learning (using
limited user feedback to label data clusters). The system will consider task
context when inferring user preferences. Task 2 examines how the user and the
autonomous workstation might best negotiate control of the local workstation
environment to optimize worker productivity, health and well-being. Two sub-
tasks are researched. The first explores shared control under the extreme
conditions (full user control with machine cueing or full workstation control
with manual overrides). The second sub-task explores approaches for adaptive,
negotiated control of environmental state between the worker and the workstation
when the human and workstation have full access to the sensor data. Task 3 will
use focus group and user experience studies to identify the kinds of
communication and feedback prompts best suited to promote shared-control and
user/workstation interactions that drive environmental conditions toward the
ideal. Task 4 integrates the results from the first three tasks to synthesize a
workstation controller that will facilitate user/workstation co-adaptations
promoting productivity, health and wellness. The team will then test the shared-
autonomy workstation in a 6-month efficacy study examining the extent to which
the co-adaptive human/machine system can bring thermal, visual and postural
conditions closer to proven best practices over time, while also improving user
satisfaction and willingness to use the system. The project outcomes may have
long-term impact by improving individual and societal workplace productivity,
health and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.