* 1763093
* Control of Reconfigurable Battery Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Huazhen Fang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 295,214.00

Rechargeable battery systems represent a key enabler for several technologies
such as electrified transportation, smart grid, renewables, and green buildings.
These systems are increasingly recognized as a driver for moving the world
forward into a sustainable energy era. Despite their ever-growing presence, the
performance and safety of these systems are fundamentally constrained by how the
battery cells are connected inside. Typically, these cells are hardwired. As a
result, there is no flexibility to overcome battery failures caused by defects
in individual cells, whether created during manufacturing or through malfunction
of a cell. This has led to greater interest in reconfigurable battery systems,
which use rapid reconfigurable connections between cells to overcome these
problems. While there is rapid growth of power electronics architecture and
circuit design, the management algorithms to control these devices are not
improving at the same pace. This project aims to develop a new control paradigm,
through which the system's input control and connection topology adjustment are
achieved concurrently. This research, if successful, will significantly improve
the reconfigurable battery systems and accelerate their use across diverse
sectors. The research-integrated education program will engage K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students through curriculum enhancement, community
outreach, and research mentorship. The PI's collaboration with the industry
through this project will lead to practical algorithms and tools. As battery
systems are central to key devices and equipment used in all sectors this
research will not only promote the progress of science in battery technology but
help improve technologies used in national health, prosperity, and national
defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this project is to
develop a foundational mathematical framework for enabling simultaneous control
and topology reconfiguration for reconfigurable battery systems from a network
perspective and build a set of control algorithms that take the best advantage
of reconfigurability. This research specifically includes: 1) creation of an
algebraic graph-theoretic modeling methodology for reconfigurable battery
systems, 2) synthesis of a predictive control framework that can optimize
control input and reconfigure system-wide connections, and 3) application of the
framework to key battery management tasks including optimal
charging/discharging, thermal management and cell balancing. The models and
algorithms will be subjected to principled evaluation through rigorous
theoretical analysis, simulations and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.