* 1763233
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Guiding Exploration of Protein Structure Spaces with Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kenneth De Jong, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,074.00

Decades of scientific enquiry beyond molecular biology have demonstrated just
how fundamental form is to function. All chemical reactions in the living cell
involve molecules bumping and sticking to one another, and molecular form or
structure is a central determinant of complementarity and strength of molecular
interactions. In particular, by assuming specific structures, proteins are able
to regulate diverse processes that maintain and replicate the living cell. With
structure determination in laboratories lagging desperately behind the rapidly-
growing number of protein-encoding gene sequences by high-throughput sequencing
technologies, computational approaches to the problem of protein structure
prediction now have a central role in molecular biology. This project advances
algorithmic research to address the current impasse in form-function related
problems in molecular biology. In particular, the project develops advanced
optimization methods to explore the vast protein structure space and leverages
information-integration techniques under the deep learning framework to
effectively guide the exploration towards biologically-active structures. This
project will benefit researchers of diverse sub-communities in computational and
biological sciences, result in open source, publicly-available software
packages, and provide excellent training and mentoring opportunities for under-
represented students at the interface of computational science and computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances algorithmic
research in information integration and informatics to address the current
impasse in structure-function related problems in computational structural
biology. The main focus is on the de-novo protein structure prediction problem,
which is central to inferring biological activities of a rapidly-growing number
of protein-encoding gene sequences. The proposed research generalizes the
problem of exploring and obtaining a comprehensive view of a protein's structure
space as that of computing a diverse ensemble of constraint-satisfying
structures and then leveraging information-integration techniques to guide the
exploration to regions of the structure space relevant for biological activity.
The research proposes hybrid stochastic optimization algorithms for
comprehensive exploration of protein structure spaces, deep convolutional neural
networks for better assessment of structure nativeness, and combines the two in
an information-integration algorithmic framework to guide the exploration of a
structure space towards native structures. By doing so, the proposed research
investigates a direction complementary to physics-based treatments, proposing to
supplant such treatments with machine-learned models of nativeness. The research
will benefit researchers in machine learning, stochastic optimization, and
information integration with application-driven interests in molecular modeling,
protein structure prediction, and modeling of complex, dynamic systems. The
research will be disseminated via various venues, including an open-source
software package, and will provide training opportunities for under-represented
students of all levels at the interface of optimization, deep learning, and
computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.