* 1763371
* High-Level Coupled-Cluster Energetics by Monte Carlo Sampling and Moment Expansions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Piotr Piecuch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Piotr Piecuch of Michigan State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop a radically new approach to solving the many-particle
Schrodinger equation. This method holds the key to explaining the motion of
electrons in atoms and molecules. By understanding the details of this motion,
Piecuch and his group can precisely determine the amounts of energy needed to
break chemical bonds and transform reactants into products. The ability to do
these calculations accurately will ultimately aid in the design of new
materials, better catalysts, and more efficient energy sources. The new approach
uses repeated random tests of many small energy contributions and retains those
found to be most important. This approach reduces the computational costs of
high-accuracy methods by orders of magnitude. Once fully developed, the methods
will be shared with the community via open-source mechanisms. Findings resulting
from the activities are being used in teaching courses and communicated through
publications, seminars, and conference presentations. These ideas provide
positive training experiences in the forefront of the physical sciences for
members of the Piecuch group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses one
of the key challenges in electronic structure theory, namely the development of
practical and systematically improvable ab initio computational schemes aimed at
an accurate description of molecular energetics. It is widely accepted that size
extensive methods based on the coupled-cluster theory are excellent candidates
for addressing this challenge. However, it has been notoriously difficult to
incorporate higher-than two-body components of the cluster operator, needed to
achieve a quantitative description, without running into prohibitive
computational costs of higher-order coupled-cluster schemes. The proposed
methodology solves the problem, allowing one to obtain accurate energetics
equivalent to high-level coupled-cluster calculations, even when electronic
quasi-degeneracies and higher-than pair excitations become significant, at a
small fraction of the computational cost. It also preserves the black-box
character of conventional single-reference computations, by fusing the
deterministic formalism, abbreviated as CC(P;Q) with the stochastic
configuration interaction and coupled-cluster Monte Carlo approaches. The formal
and algorithmic advances and efficient computer implementations will be
accompanied by calculations of molecular potential energy surfaces relevant to
spectroscopy, chemical reaction mechanisms and dynamics, and catalysis. The work
provides important training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows and
the programs being developed will be widely shared with the broader theoretical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.