* 1763139
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Cancer Cell Mechanics Differentially Drives Mechanosensing and Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Adam Engler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Cancer cells in solid tumors must detach, migrate, and invade surrounding
tissues in order to metastasize. This process is regulated by properties of the
extracellular matrix, including its stiffness and the its adhesion force with
the tumor cells. But tumors are not homogeneous, and these tumor cells can
respond differently to their environment. This project will investigate how
changes in cellular adhesion properties affect the fate of cells and, in
particular, whether they will migrate, proliferate, differentiate, or die -- all
key parts of cellular behavior. This project will enhance fundamental
understanding of how changes in cellular mechanical properties affect a broad
range of cell behaviors. Once this knowledge is expanded, it can be used to
influence cellular behavior at the tissue level, which can have a positive
impact on understanding process that vary from the pathological (such as cancer
growth and metastasis) to the beneficial (such as tissue engineering an
regenerative medicine). In addition to the societal impact of the science, the
collaborative research team seeks to increase the involvement of
underrepresented students in STEM through a 2-pronged approach. First, problem-
based learning will be introduced in high school classrooms to expose
economically disadvantaged students to research projects and, hopefully, excite
them about STEM. Second, leveraging San Diego State University's role as a
minority-serving institution and UCSD's background as a highly ranked research
university, undergraduate students will be trained in cutting edge,
computational and experimental mechanobiology techniques through a multi-
institutional instructional and research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
research objectives have been established to address the hypothesis that
adhesion strength modulates force transduction differently for cells in 2D and
3D environments. First, myosin contractility during directed, 2D migration of
tumor cells will be investigated through labile focal adhesions. Second, the
force-sensing mechanisms of cancer cells in 3D extracellular matrix will be
studied to investigate why there is a difference in tumor cell division and
invasion between strongly and weakly adherent cells. In order to investigate
these aims, a microfluidic system will be used that can separate well-
characterized epithelial cancer cell lines by their adhesive properties. Three
types of endothelial cancer cells will be investigated (lung, prostate, and
mammary) to insure that the force-sensing mechanisms are consistent across the
tumor types. Traction-force microscopy will be employed to study the molecular
and cellular-level mechanics. Cells will also be treated with function-blocking
or function-enhancing antibodies that will weaken or strengthen the adhesion
strength, respectively. The experimental studies will be combined with
computational modeling in order to clearly elucidate the underlying mechanisms
of the observed behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.