* 1763207
* Development of a Wide-Field Transient Absorption Microscope for Applications to Two-Dimensional Perovskite Quantum Wells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Andrew Moran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 774,766.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Experimental Physics Program
(AMO-E) in the Division of Physics, Professor Moran at the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, is developing a microscope capable of imaging electron
movement in perovskite crystals. This work is motivated by the potential for
solar energy harvesting demonstrated by perovksites. The perovskite crystals
targeted in this project have two-dimensional (2D) shapes where the faces of the
crystals have millimeter-scale dimensions. Such 2D perovskites absorb light in
the visible range and are relatively resistant to humidity, which is desirable
for harnessing solar energy. Professor Moran and his team plan to simultaneously
monitor multiple places on the crystal surface to get statistical information on
electron movement in the crystals. The information from these experiments can be
used to guide material synthesis to make better solar energy conversion devices.
Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project become proficient
in chemistry, computer programming, machining, electronics, and optics as the
research group is building most of their own equipment. In addition, Professor
Moran and his students supervise laboratory exercises that illustrate the
principles of optics and solar cells for middle and high-school students in
collaboration with the Morehead Planetarium on the UNC
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Moran at the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill is developing a diffractive optic-based transient
absorption microscope capable of imaging electron diffusion in two-dimensional
(2D) perovskite quantum wells. The quantum wells targeted have garnered
attention for their stabilities under humid conditions and large exciton binding
energies. In addition, the research team is investigating layered systems that
consist of "stacks" of quantum wells in which the band gap decreases with
respect to height in the film. Thus, electronic excitations are funneled from
the bottom to the top of the film in these layered perovskites. The diffractive
optic-based microscope employed in this research acquires transient absorption
data at 41 locations on the sample surface in a single experiment. Signals are
simultaneously detected at two probe wavelengths using a pair of array detectors
(e.g., wavelengths corresponding to energy donor and acceptor quantum wells). In
studies of exfoliated crystals, diffusivities of excitons are being measured at
a number of excitation wavelengths to establish a quantitative relationship
between the carrier diffusivity and excitation energy. Statistical distributions
of diffusion rates are generated by analyzing the dynamics at 41 different spots
on the sample. The information derived from these experiments can be used to
guide materials synthesis and device engineering. Graduate and undergraduate
students becoming proficient in computer programming, machining, electronics,
and optics as the research group is building most of their own
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.