* 1763172
* CSR: Medium: Systems Support for Scalable, Easy-to-Implement, and Multilingual Static Analyses of Modern Software
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Harry Xu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,199,665.00

Static program analysis has been widely used in academia and industry to find
bugs, security vulnerabilities, and performance optimization opportunities.
Supporting sophisticated analysis algorithms on large codebases has been a key
challenge in the program analysis research for decades. This inability is the
major factor that prevents analysis-based techniques from being widely adopted
in industry. This project revisits this problem from a data-driven perspective
and develops novel system solutions that can make static program analyses easy
to implement, support large codebases, and support programs written in multiple
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a transformative
approach with four elements: (1) develop disk-based out-of-core systems to
parallelize and scale constraint-based path-sensitive analysis; (2) develop
system support for flow-sensitive analysis by treating it as evolving graph
processing; (3) develop a distributed system solution to SAT solving --- a
50-year old problem --- to enable SAT-based applications to solve larger
problems with the resources available in modern computing; and (4) analyze the
Android operating system and apps together to find complicated (a) bugs, (b)
security vulnerabilities, and (c) performance problems, which involve
interactions between the system and an app as well as multiple
apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems developed by the project will make
precise static analysis algorithms more efficient and scalable, enabling them to
process modern software programs that existing techniques could not analyze.
Since these programs are used every day by many users and businesses, making
them more robust and secure extends the benefit to a broad community. The
project will develop big data systems for sophisticated code analysis, opening a
new direction to scale program analysis. It will involve several PhD students
and infuse research into the undergraduate and graduate curricula to train
developers of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the system implementations,
experimental data, and documents from the project will be publicly available and
maintained at https://www.ics.uci.edu/~guoqingx/research/projects/analysis.html
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.