* 1763356
* Global Existence and Computer-Assisted Proofs of Singularities in Incompressible Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Alexandru Ionescu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 120,000.00

The dynamics of free surfaces moving with incompressible fluids occurs in many
problems in engineering and science. For short times, the behaviour of solutions
is understood in many cases. However, the theory of existence (or not) of
singularities, and long term behavior of solutions, is far from well-developed.
An example of singularities are the breaking of waves, the formation of a
tornado or the splash of a drop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes two
directions: on the one hand it addresses the fundamental question of whether
there exists breakdown of smooth solutions in finite time, paying particular
attention to the type of breakdown and to the quantity that blows up and on the
other the existence of global solutions that exist for all time. Two equations
are considered: the generalized surface quasi-geostrophic (gSQG) equation- both
in the smooth and the patch case -, a family of models which interpolates
between the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG) equation and the Euler vorticity
equation; and the two dimensional free boundary Euler equations. In order to
carry out the project, a combination of techniques among an interdisciplinary
tool set is required. These include, but are not restricted to, mathematical
analysis, high-performance numerical computing, and rigorous computations
leading to computer-assisted proofs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.