* 1763969
* NeTS: IntraBioNets: Foundational Models of Heterogeneous Intrabody Biomolecular Communication Network Links for the Internet of Bio-NanoThings
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Classical telecommunications solutions fail to meet size, environmental and bio-
compatibility constraints to realize communication networks for the next-
generation nanotechnology and synthetic-biology-enabled electrical and
biological wearable and implantable devices, i.e., the Internet of Bio-Nano
Things. On the other hand, the direct contact of these devices with the human
body, where the cells naturally communicate and interconnect into networks,
suggests a novel way of interconnection exploiting the natural mechanisms of
biological communication. The goal of the IntraBioNets project is to address
fundamental challenges in the development of a self-sustainable and bio-
compatible network infrastructure based on these biological communication
channels. In particular, the IntraBioNets project focuses on the development of
fundamental models of usable communication channels on top of the biological
processes underlying the Microbiome-Gut-Brain Axis (MGBA), composed of the gut
microbial community, the gut tissues, the enteric nervous system, and their
interconnects. The outcome of this proposal will establish the feasibility of a
potentially transformative networking domain paving the way for the next-
generation biomedical systems for pervasive, constant, and remote healthcare.
Novel communication concepts, techniques, and proof-of-concept simulations
developed throughout the project will provide immediate impact in applications
for healthcare (e.g., systems for advanced and constant tele-health monitoring),
and broader impacts in bioinformatics, (e.g., communication-based models for the
interpretation of biological data) and cyber-defense (e.g., biometric parameter
sensing for identification). Scientific results will be disseminated at
international conferences, journals and magazines. PhD students (especially
women and underrepresented minorities) will be supported and mentored through
the project to become experts in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research seeks to develop a completely novel and unexplored area spanning across
diverse fields, including communication theory and networking, biology, and
physiology. Specifically, this project will contribute along the following
directions. First, for the first time in research, physical channel models will
be developed to quantitatively characterize i) electrical communications over
enteric and autonomic nerves and muscle activity; ii) molecular communications
through gut microbial community; iii) the transduction between electrical and
molecular communications through the MGBA. Then, a network simulator will be
developed to validate the aforementioned models for information through
electrical and molecular signals. Finally, the current state-of-the-art for
biosensors and bioelectronics will be investigated for future knowledge transfer
to hardware development to create devices capable of accessing the
aforementioned channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.