* 1763299
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Exploiting Opportunities in Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Salil Vadhan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2022
* USD 564,000.00

This project seeks to exploit new opportunities to advance the theory of pseudo-
randomness, which is the theory of generating objects that "look random" despite
being constructed using little or no randomness. The computational theory of
pseudo-randomness originated in the foundations of cryptography in the early
1980s and has since developed into a rich sub-field of theoretical computer
science in its own right. The notions and constructs studied in the theory of
pseudo-randomness have implications for many different areas of research in
computer science, communications, and mathematics, including cryptography,
computational complexity, coding theory, additive number theory, metric
embeddings, streaming and sketching algorithms, and graph theory. The project
puts high value on education, service to the research community, and wide
dissemination of knowledge. The research activities will be accompanied by and
integrated with curriculum development, research advising, service, and
outreach. In addition, the research also relates to national priorities of
importance to society, such as security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project seeks to exploit new
opportunities for progress on several fundamental questions, including: 1) The
RL vs. L problem: trying to prove, unconditionally, that every randomized
algorithm can be made deterministic with only a constant-factor loss in space
efficiency; 2) Explicit constructions: seeking explicit load-balancing hash
functions, batch codes, and depth-robust graphs that achieve substantial
parameter improvements and have qualitative significance for applications, and
3) Applications: improving and extending the applications of pseudo-randomness
to cryptography and data structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.