* 1763639
* Collaborative Research: The Tumalo Volcanic Center - Probing the Origin of Explosive Pleistocene Silicic Volcanism in Central Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,116.00

Why was there a burst of explosive volcanism between 100,000 and 800,000 years
ago in the middle of the central Oregon Cascades, a location that over the last
100,000 years has been dominated by basaltic volcanoes like Belknap Crater and
stratovolcanoes like South Sister? This is the fundamental question behind this
study to examine the Tumalo Volcanic Center (TVC) in central Oregon, where at
least three major explosive eruptions that disgorged each at least 1 to 10 cubic
kilometers mantle the landscape between the modern Three Sisters volcanoes and
the city of Bend. What is the source of the magma that fed these massive
eruptions and what is it most closely related to: the volcanism of modern
Cascades caused by the collision of North America with the Juan de Fuca plate or
ongoing stretching of North America in Oregon High Cascades and the Basin and
Range? Without knowing the precise ages of the eruptions themselves and the
crystals found in the materials ejected, the TVC can't be placed into the
evolution of the Cascade Range or assessed for the likelihood of renewed
explosive volcanism in central Oregon. By adding chemical compositional data to
the mix, the processes that formed these eruptions can be understood, along with
how similar the TVC is to other silicic explosive eruptions around the
world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This will be a detailed study of this major
volcanic region in the central Oregon Cascades. Although the TVC has been
previous mapped, it is poorly known in almost all other respects: the chronology
of eruptions; the volumes of individual eruptive units; high quality geochemical
or petrochronologic data; and petrological constraints on the
processes/conditions of magma genesis. This detailed chronological, petrological
and geochemical study will provide a basis for testing models for the formation
of these magmas, assist in assessing the future likelihood for major explosive
TVC eruptions, and provide important insight into the processes that produce
silicic magmas in the Cascades and in other subduction systems. This study will
address these points through: field documentation and GIS-based volume
estimates; 40Ar/39Ar geochronology; zircon U-Pb (and U-Th) dating and trace
element systematics; geochemistry of bulk rocks, glasses, minerals and melt
inclusions; and phase equilibria-based estimates of intensive parameters of
magma formation and storage. There are also four main Broader Impacts to this
study: (1) mutual mentoring and training of graduate and undergraduate students
shared across Research 1 and Liberal Arts institutions; (2) increased
understanding of volcanic hazards as the population of Deschutes County is over
140,000 and the hazard related to renewed eruption in the TVC is currently
unclear; (3) extensive outreach, including blog posts, Twitter, talks, new TVC
website and signs in the field that will provide an important opportunity to
increase awareness of volcanic hazards in Central Oregon; (4) this research will
support a Ph.D. student, a Latino researcher and undergraduate research
students, many of which will be recruited from groups underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.