* 1763627
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Passive Network of Tags for Smart Spaces
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Zygmunt Haas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

We envision a future where all objects in spaces around us will be tagged with
miniature battery-less radio frequency-powered tags. Such tags will be able to
autonomously interact among themselves and the surrounding environment. They
will be able to communicate over low-power wireless links without the need for
an active on-board radio or any centralized control. These interactions will
enable "Smart Spaces" wherein objects can collaboratively perceive the
surrounding spaces and recognize other objects, their relationships and dynamic
activities involving them. Due to their exceptionally low-power design the tags
communicate via intelligent reflection or backscattering of the same radio
frequency signal that powers them. The proposed project envisions the "Passive
Network of Tags" (PNET) paradigm, where tags are able to network among
themselves and are able to operate in varying degrees of radio frequency power
availability. PNET will form the foundational technology for smart spaces
enabling object identification and tracking, understanding inter-object
interactions and associations, sensing and distributed processing of information
to support futuristic higher level applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves innovative research across various sub-disciplines in order to
make the proposed PNET for smart spaces a reality. The proposed project will
develop: 1) An adaptive energy-aware tag architecture that will allow for high
efficiency of energy harvesting along with increased sensitivity and robustness
of the tag- to-tag link; 2) Techniques for measurement of channel amplitude and
phase in passive receiver tags which will empower the PNET with the ability to
detect dynamic interactions between tags as well as events around the tags; 3)
Scalable and adaptable distributed multi-hop routing for diverse PNET-specific
topologies and novel solutions for making inference under stressful network,
system and signal conditions; and 4) A set of tags implemented on a custom
hardware platform that will embody the research results and will allow for
experiments and demonstrations in a real-world smart home
setup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project will include the
following: 1) The investigators will develop educational and training materials
for the broader research community. 2) The researchers will work with programs
at their respective universities to encourage women's participation in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) programs, specifically
contributing to their curriculum and encouraging K-12 students to pursue careers
in STEM. 3) The project will contribute to curriculum development and
undergraduate research in both universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.