* 1763357
* Research:  Engineering Students' Beliefs about Decision-Making
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Emily Dringenberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2023
* USD 412,322.00

Engineers' decisions drive the design of our ever-changing world and influence
our quality of life. When making decisions, everyone, including engineers, uses
at least three distinct forms of reasoning: rational, intuitive and emotive.
Each reasoning pattern plays a valuable role in decision-making, and people's
underlying beliefs about different forms of reasoning informs their approach to
decision-making. Since our society relies on engineers to make robust decisions,
a critical part of the professional formation of engineers is development of
beliefs about different reasoning strategies. However, we do not know much about
engineering students' beliefs in this area. What we do know is that
undergraduate engineering students typically receive little formal instruction
on how to make complex decisions. What instruction they do receive is often
limited to analysis in contexts of abundant information or the introduction of
rational decision-making tools. Typical engineering instruction may convey to
students, who make decisions rationally, intuitively, and emotionally, that
rational approaches alone are valuable. The sole focus on rational forms of
reasoning may discourage some students from continuing in engineering. This
project will investigate the beliefs that engineering students hold about
decision-making and how these beliefs are influenced by their experiences with
the engineering curricula. Findings from this project will be leveraged to
change how decision-making is taught so engineering curricula will be more
inclusive and realistic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize engineering
students' beliefs about different forms of reasoning for decision-making near
the end of undergraduate engineering formation, this qualitative, exploratory
study will: (i) develop and validate interview and reflection protocols, (ii)
collect and analyze data using these protocols through semi-structured, one-on-
one interviews and written reflections both during a capstone design experience
and one year later, and (iii) engage capstone design instructors in translating
the findings to recommendations for practice. The research team will utilize a
framework for decision-making that values at least three different forms of
reasoning: rational, intuitive, and emotive to guide their investigation. The
pilot study in Year 1 will validate the data collection protocols before
performing a larger study in Year 2. In both studies, written reflections will
be submitted by participants at regular intervals to capture their beliefs about
decision-making in the context of a capstone design experience. Also, interviews
will be conducted both before and after participants receive formal instruction
on decision-making in their capstone design courses. After written reflections
and interview data have been analyzed, findings from the study are expected to
shed light on students' beliefs. The findings will then be translated to
concrete recommendations for the teaching and learning of decision-making in
engineering through the engagement of capstone design practitioners with
backgrounds; including industrial design, engineering industry, and
entrepreneurship. The purpose is to change how engineering decision-making is
taught and to hopefully change students' beliefs about engineering decision-
making and their commitment to engineering. This work could be instrumental in
transforming engineering education to be more inclusive though improving the
ways in which undergraduates develop their beliefs about different forms of
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.