* 1763257
* Creating Standards for Evaluating Ground Magnetometer Arrays
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 17,967.00

The 2016 Geospace Portfolio Review of the Geospace Section of NSF's Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Science recommended changes to the way NSF supports
ground magnetometer and other arrays for research in Aeronomy and Magnetospheric
Physics. The Portfolio Review recommended the creation of a class system for
facilities. Class 1 contains the large, single location ionospheric radars that
the program was initially developed to support. Class 2 contains networks of
instruments distributed across broad geographical locations. In response, the
AGS Division funded a two-day workshop led by Mark Engebretson and Eftyhia Zesta
on May 5-6, 2016 in Greenbelt, Maryland. Workshop participants accepted the
Portfolio Review's recommendation that within 3-5 years these arrays should
transition from being projects that are separately funded and managed within the
science programs to being collectively supported as a Geospace Sciences
Facility. Workshop participants discussed possible pathways for optimal, robust,
and effective organization and scientific use of these ground arrays. The
outcome was a set of recommendations for the ground magnetometer community to
carry out which was published in "Ground Magnetometer Array Planning: Report of
a Workshop" (Engebretson and Zesta, 2017). This award supports the initial
implementation of these recommendations, namely to gather detailed information
about operations and products of all magnetometer arrays supported by NSF-AGS,
and to use this information to create a set of standards that can be used to
prepare for transitioning these arrays to a Class 2 Facility.

Ground-based magnetometers are one of the oldest and most effective types of
observational tools used to study Earth's space environment. They continue to
provide essential data for a variety of studies of Earth's ionosphere, upper
atmosphere, and magnetosphere. Magnetometer arrays are supported and maintained
by countries all over the world. The US arrays contribute valuable information
for synthesizing an understanding of the global dynamics in Earth-space. They
remotely measure currents that define the dynamics of the ionosphere and
magnetosphere, including those associated with geomagnetic storms and substorms
and those associated with global compressions of the magnetosphere from
interplanetary shocks and bow shock-related instabilities. They also make it
possible to track Alfven wave - borne energy propagation throughout the
magnetosphere and wave-particle interactions that variously can intensify or
deplete the fluxes of energetic particles, including ultrarelativistic electrons
in the Van Allen radiation belts. This award will be used to fully document the
current state of all NSF-AGS funded arrays and will lay the groundwork for
moving toward management and support of this valuable national observing
capability in a more cost-effective and scientifically productive manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.