* 1763035
* Equitable and Efficient Resource Allocation using Stochastic Fractional Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 378,132.00

This award contributes to the advancement of national health, prosperity, and
welfare by studying the equitable distribution of limited resources among
participating entities. In this setting, equity is measured by considering the
ratio of each entity's need to the supply it receives. These problems, known as
fractional programs, arise in a number of settings, and are difficult to solve
because the objective functions are highly non-convex. This project will address
the efficient solution of stochastic fractional programs. The methodology will
be applied to improve equity in liver transplantation, where a large dataset of
supply and demand data are available, and to stochastic Data Envelopment
Analysis (DEA), a widely used method for evaluating relative productivity of
decision making units. The project will support graduate and undergraduate
education and provide opportunities for students to develop operational methods
to tackle societally important problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will develop solution methods for novel stochastic fractional programs
(SFP). These problems are challenging to solve, and obtaining an optimal or near
optimal solution requires development of efficient algorithms. SFP problems have
limited structure when compared to a general nonlinear optimization model. The
research will exploit this structure in algorithm development and will
investigate technique to generate the scenarios to approximate the original
model. Computationally efficient algorithms will be developed to solve the
approximated problem for the linear, convex-concave, and convex-convex cases.
Building on this, distributionaly robust generalizations will be used to
facilitate sensitivity analysis, and a chance constraint model will be explored.
The performance of the developed methods will be compared against general
purpose nonlinear, and global optimization solvers NITRO and
BARON.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.