* 1763499
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the interplay between creeping and seismogenic fault sections using large-scale laboratory experiments and high-resolution numerical models
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Gregory McLaskey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2022
* USD 389,001.00

Frictional and material properties vary along tectonic faults and directly
affect the nucleation, propagation and arrest of earthquakes. This heterogeneous
character of natural faults is what makes earthquakes complex and difficult to
predict. Some fault sections are mostly locked but recurrently host earthquakes.
Other sections are creeping and generally stable. However, under poorly
understood circumstances, earthquakes that nucleated in an unstable section can
propagate far into stable fault sections and result in particularly large and
destructive events. This project investigates the causes that lead to activation
of the creeping fault sections by combining large-scale laboratory earthquake
experiments with physics-based numerical simulations. The modeled fault consists
of stable and unstable parts which realistically reproduce the mechanics of
earthquakes at heterogeneous faults. A better understanding of the interaction
between stable and unstable fault sections will help us evaluate the potential
for extremely large earthquakes that will likely enhance existing seismic hazard
assessment tools. This project is a benefit to society because it will help us
to better understand earthquakes and develop tools to assess these hazards, and
it will add to STEM education of students while supporting new researchers in
earthquake studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a collaborative effort
to investigate the mechanics of earthquake rupture arrest with focus on
heterogeneous fault properties. It combines multiscale laboratory experiments
and numerical modeling. The experiments provide physical constraints for the
numerical models, while the modeling improves understanding, generalizing, and
scaling up the experimental results. Large-scale laboratory earthquake
experiments are conducted on a biaxial machine that generates repeatable
sequences of dynamic rupture events contained within a 3-m long granite sample.
The fault surfaces are coated with gouge to generate patches of velocity-
weakening and velocity-strengthening materials. To explore scaling effects,
additional experiments are conducted on a 0.76 m tabletop biaxial machine using
plastic samples as forcing blocks. Smaller-scale double-direct shear experiments
will benchmark the frictional constitutive parameters of the gouge materials, an
essential step for the interpretation of the larger-scale laboratory earthquake
observations and the development of realistic, high-resolution numerical models
of dynamic rupture and arrest. The simulations include sequences of slip events
that quantitatively reproduce the relevant scales of the experiments including
the actual size of the apparatus and the rupture process
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.