* 1763025
* Nanomanufacturing by Heterogeneous Aggregation and Magnetic Alignment of Multi-Functional Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Joseph Tracy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2022
* USD 506,715.00

Multifunctional nanoparticles are of great interest because of their ability to
simultaneously respond to multiple stimuli and exhibit connection between
components. This award supports fundamental theoretical and experimental
research on heterogeneous aggregation, or heteroaggregation, as a method for
nanomanufacturing of core/satellite nanoparticles consisting of a core nanorod
covered by a shell of many smaller satellite nanoparticles of a different
composition. Heteroaggregation is a simple approach, based on mixing solvents
with different properties to drive the assembly of pre-synthesized
nanoparticles. This method is readily scalable to large volumes. Use of
externally applied magnetic fields to align nanorod cores coated with magnetic
satellite nanoparticles has potential applications in advanced pigments,
mechanical strengthening of composite materials, and biomedical imaging.
Advances in these applications impact national prosperity and security. This
research enables new capabilities for nanomanufacturing by developing methods
and strategies for conducting, modeling, and characterizing heteroaggregation
processes and magnetic alignment that can be applied to other systems spanning a
wide range of material compositions and length scales. Education and outreach
activities are planned to educate students and teachers in nanoscience and
nanotechnology and engage women and under-represented minority students in
research and nanomanufacturing training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomanufacturing
of multifunctional nanoparticles remains challenging due to limitations in
seeded growth and self-assembly processes. This research aims to overcome these
challenges by creating a theoretical and experimental framework for
heteroaggregation. Controlling the solvent conditions and the compositions,
sizes, and concentrations of the core and satellite nanoparticles drives
heteroaggregation in forming uniform core/satellite nanoparticles, while
avoiding homoaggregation of either the core or the satellite nanoparticles.
Molecular dynamics simulations are performed to predict the conditions for
heteroaggregation of core/satellite nanoparticles, which comprehensively guide
experiments and interpret results. For selected systems, the scalability of
heteroaggregation for nanomanufacturing is investigated in both batch processes
and continuous microfluidics. The understanding of magnetic alignment of
core/satellite nanorods is achieved through molecular dynamics simulations and
experimental verification. Dipolar interactions among magnetic satellite
nanoparticles are predicted to provide torque for magnetic alignment, and it is
important to establish the conditions under which sufficient torque is generated
to drive magnetic alignment. Magnetic alignment imparts new properties for the
heteroaggregates such as magneto-optical, polarization and microrheology, and
elastic modulus for nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.