* 1763256
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: GPL: General-Purpose Lambda Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Keith Winstein, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

The project will design ways for computer programs to do things in a few seconds
that would ordinarily take hours, by borrowing thousands of computers at once.
Until recently, this was not possible or economical: the companies that rent
computers required minutes of advance notice, with a minimum bill of at least
ten minutes. Recently, new technology called "function-as-a-service computing"
allows people to rent thousands of unreliable computers at the same time with no
advance notice, for fractions of a second. This project will design software,
storage systems, and programming languages to use this technology robustly for
large calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to deliver a new
model of "burst parallel" applications and systems. This model takes advantage
of new function-as-a-service offerings by cloud-computing providers such as
Amazon, Microsoft, and Google. In this model, fine-grained "ephemeral lambdas"
enable large-scale parallel computations at low cost. With careful attention to
algorithm parallelization, we argue that many both old and new data processing
tasks can be adapted into a model of functions that operate on small pieces of
data, executed in a burst-parallel manner to achieve interactive performance
demands, in a way that can be debugged, traced, and
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to provide the application
blueprint and systems foundation to enable end-users and developers to access
massive amounts of parallelism on demand, while only paying for those resources
actually consumed by an application. The researchers will engage with the
developer community to ensure that others are able to use and build upon the
work. In addition to integrating this research into course curricula, the
researchers have a formalized program for embedding under-represented minority
undergraduate students into their research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software
will be released under open-source software licenses pursuant to the policies of
the University of California and Stanford University, and distributed through
the project website and through traditional means of distribution of open-source
software (e.g., GNU/Linux distributions, ports collections, app stores, etc.).
Data, code, and evaluation results will continue to be hosted for at least three
years after project completion at
https://gplambda.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.