* 1763189
* CSEDI: Alkaline-Earth Carbonate Melts at Deep Earth Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 03/31/2024
* USD 703,298.00

Carbonates are common rock-forming minerals that contain significant carbon in
their crystal structures, and thus represent a dominant reservoir for carbon in
the Earth System. Despite their primary role in the long-term carbon cycle, we
currently have a very limited understanding of their melting behavior at the
relevant conditions deep inside the Earth. The carbon hosted in carbonate-
bearing rocks is carried into the Earth by subducting oceanic plates, where it
is either returned to the surface through volcanism or dragged further down into
the deep mantle, depending on the depth of carbonate melting. The melting
properties of carbonates thus directly control the long-term component of
Earth's carbon cycle. This project is focused on better understanding the
details of carbonate melting at extreme pressures and temperatures by combining
diverse research techniques using experiments, simulations, and statistical
modeling. In addition to improving our fundamental understanding of the deep
carbon cycle, this project supports developing both technical and leadership
expertise; the project is being led by an early career research scientist who
will join the co-investigators in the training of two graduate students in a
variety of cutting edge research techniques that are also broadly applicable to
future material properties research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thermodynamic
melting properties of carbonates directly control the long-term component of
Earth's carbon cycle, and yet this key area has remained poorly understood as a
result of practical challenges forÂ carbonate melting experiments. These
difficulties include decomposition prior to melting at pressures below ~3 GPa,
as well as extreme sensitivities of the melting behavior to pressure,
temperature, and composition (including water content), which severely
complicate analysis of such experiments. The goal of this proposal is to combine
multiple experimental and theoretical methods to characterize the thermodynamics
of solid and molten alkaline earth carbonates, in the (Ca,Mg,Sr,Ba)CO3 system,
which encompasses the dominant Mg-Ca bearing components most relevant to the
deep Earth. The team's experimental objectives are to: (1) carry out
conductivity-based in situ melt detection experiments up to 25 GPa for each
endmember, (2) conduct liquid one-bar density and sound speed measurements to
determine how each component affects melt density and compressibility, and (3)
perform laser-heated diamond anvil cell measurements to constrain the high
pressure-temperature (PT) equations of state of the solidus phases. These are
combined with theoretical objectives to: (1) simulate the alkaline earth
carbonate system using empirical molecular dynamics to predict high PT
properties for both melt and mineral phases and (2) employ Bayesian statistical
analysis to obtain a global self-consistent thermodynamic model of the
(Ca,Mg,Sr,Ba)CO3 system. The final thermodynamic picture provided by this work
represents a major stepping-stone on the path to incorporating carbonate melting
into a variety of widely-used thermodynamic databases that underpin our
understanding of geologic processes at extreme planetary conditions. Together
the five techniques employed in this work, which rely on the cooperation and
distinct expertise of the three principal investigators, will provide a
comprehensive thermodynamic view of carbonate melting at deep mantle
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.