* 1763281
* CAREER: Effect of Inflammation on Biomechanical Properties of Intervertebral Disc Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/08/2017,03/31/2018
* Nadeen Chahine, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2018
* USD 53,364.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to understand how inflammation directly alters the biomechanical properties
and deformational behavior of cells in the intervertebral disc, independently of
changes to the tissue integrity. Our aims address a critical gap in knowledge by
utilizing tools of biomechanics, cell and molecular biology. Our approach will
identify the effects of inflammation on the cytoskeleton and single cell
mechanical and swelling properties of nucleus pulposus cells. Multi-scale
cellular deformation will also be measured in-situ. Our approach will
investigate the responses of nucleus pulposus cells to inflammation triggered by
a single or multiple inflammatory mediators, and compared to responses of cells
treated with anti-inflammatory agents.

If successful, these studies would add significantly to the field's
understanding of the direct effects of inflammation on cell mechanics and
function. Our findings may identify biomechanical mediators of inflammatory
changes, advancing our understanding of how inflammation propagates the positive
feedback cascade during degeneration, independently of changes to disc tissue
integrity. Our studies on cellular behavior can advance the diagnostic or
treatment of disc degeneration by identifying criteria for mitigating
biomechanical alterations due to inflammation. The educational plan focuses on
the introduction of mechanobiology into our graduate curriculum to strengthen a
program that is grounded in molecular studies. In addition, two educational
programs are proposed to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
science. A basic science curriculum is proposed for the Medical Scholars
Pipeline Program, a 5-year longitudinal outreach program for preparing high
school students from underrepresented groups for careers in healthcare,
biomedical science and engineering. A new mentoring organization is also
proposed for leadership development and career advancement of female students
and faculty in biomedical science and engineering.