* 1763317
* Extremal Questions for Hypergraphs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Dhruv Mubayi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 327,808.00

The PI will develop the theory of hypergraphs, or families of finite sets,
focusing on the relationship between local and global properties. Questions
about the local/global relationships in large structures impact several areas of
mathematics (number theory, combinatorics, logic) as well as other fields like
information theory, coding theory, theoretical computer science, and the social
sciences. The study of these objects has gained particular importance in recent
years due to the many large real world networks that have emerged and are being
studied. Developing new techniques to study these complex systems will be a
major task for future researchers and the PI plans to contribute to this through
his theoretical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on two particular
areas: Ramsey theory and Extremal problems for hypergraphs. Within Ramsey
theory, he plans to work on fundamental problems in the area posed by Erdos,
Hajnal, and Rado starting the 1950's about the tower growth rate of classical
hypergraph Ramsey numbers. Several other related problems posed by Erdos-
Gyarfas-Shelah, Erdos-Rogers, and Erdos-Hajnal will also be explored. His
planned projects in extremal hypergraph theory include the following: solving an
old conjecture of Kalai on the extremal number of hypergraph trees that
generalizes the well-known Erdos-Sos conjecture for graphs; studying the
relationship between problems in convex geometry and abstract extremal
hypergraph problems; developing an approach towards improving the longstanding
bound of Kostochka on the sunflower problem; improving the known supersaturation
results for cycles in linear hypergraphs, which has applications to a problem in
additive number theory studied by Bourgain and Katz-Tao; and studying a question
posed in various forms by Razborov and Lovasz-Szegedy about whether a large
class of problems in extremal combinatorics can be solved using methods stemming
from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.