* 1763922
* SHF: MEDIUM: Performant Sound Gradual Typing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jeremy Siek, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,200,054.00

Over the past two decades, software developers have switched to a new breed of
computer languages. While these languages increase the developers' productivity
and allow them to create software for novel devices, they also have the distinct
disadvantage of not checking enough safety properties upfront. Failures show up
once the software is deployed and may hurt customers. Researchers have recently
addressed this problem with the creation of hybrid languages, which embrace
rapid production and a way to add safety checks gradually, while industrial
developers have developed hybrid languages that omit safety entirely. The
project's novelties are about the performance of these hybrid languages, which,
as recently discovered, prevent their adoption. If successful, the project's
impacts are likely to change the landscape of modern software development on a
large scale, adding safety to the most common modern approach to rapid software
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project addresses the specific
problem of improving the performance of these hybrid languages. While prior
research demonstrates that hybrid programming languages are indeed the flexible
medium that software developers may want, it also reveals significant
performance problems with these languages. The project therefore explores four
different ideas of how to eliminate these performance bottlenecks: (1)
principled relaxation of the safety guarantees; (2) compiler technology
specifically tuned to the additional safety checks; (3) reduction of memory
needed for these checks; and (4) application of software verification
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.