* 1763255
* Collaborative Research: Carbon-Helium-Argon Isotope Relations at High-3He/4He Hotspots and Implications for Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 297,623.00

Carbon isotope ratios are a primary source of information for understanding the
global carbon cycle, which has a role in the generation of greenhouse gases; the
movement of carbon from Earth's surface back into its interior; and the escape
to Earth's surface of primordial carbon that has been trapped deep in the planet
since it formed 4.5 billion years ago. These isotope ratios, however, are
impacted by a variety of geologic processes, such as the degassing of magma
during volcanic eruptions. This causes fractionation that changes the original
ratio of the isotopes, making them difficult to interpret fully. Without some
means of recognizing these changes, it is not possible to fully understand the
cycle of carbon on Earth and the story it tells. One way to overcome the carbon
isotope fractionation problem and get a handle on the amount and composition of
carbon in the deep Earth is to look at the isotopes of noble gases that are
erupted along with carbon dioxide (CO2) that comes out of volcanoes. Although we
know a lot about carbon in shallow Earth reservoirs, its concentration, isotopic
composition, and behavior in the deep mantle is not well understood. This
research uses the content and isotopic composition of two noble gases: Helium
(He) and Argon (Ar) from volcanic rocks at two locations in the Pacific (Hawaii
and the Lau Spreading Center in the western Pacific), to unravel the story of
carbon in the deep mantle and improve our knowledge of the carbon cycle, carbon
fluxes, and carbon sources emanating from the Earth. Broader impacts of the
research include laboratory and research training of a graduate student whose
gender is underrepresented in the sciences; the training of undergraduates at an
institution in Oklahoma, an institution in an EPSCoR (Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research) state; support of an NSF-funded state-of-the-art
noble gas analytical facility in the state of Oregon; and incorporation of
research results into courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes
coupled measurements of He, Ar and CO2 abundances in both the vesicles and
glasses of submarine basalts erupted at two different locations in the Pacific
Ocean. One is Loihi seamount off the island of Hawaii and the other is the Lau
Spreading Center, both of which have been influenced by the presence of mantle
plumes that tap deep mantle regions. Measurements will include the concentration
and isotopic positions of CO2, He, Ar, and H2O trapped in volcanic glasses and
vessicles. Release of the gases takes place in a state-of-the-art noble gas
laboratory at Oregon State University. Gases in vesicles in the lavas will be
released via crushing the lava in a vacuum. He and Ar concentrations and
isotopic compositions in the glass will be released via step heating/fusion.
Dissolved CO2 and H2O in the glasses will be determined by FTIR (Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy). These data will be used to deconvolute changes
in the carbon isotopic composition resulting from magma degassing so the
primordial and recycled components of the carbon in the samples can be
determined. Key research questions being addressed include: (1) What are the
values of CO2/3He and the carbon isotopic ratio in the source region of mantle
plumes; (2) is primordial carbon preserved in the deep source of mantle plumes;
and (3) what is the CO2 flux at mantle plume localities. Results of the work
will be integrated into geodynamic models addressing the cycling of carbon and
noble gases between Earth's surface and deep
reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.