* 1763325
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: An Extensible Heterogeneous Network Embedding Framework with Application Specific Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

Network data is ubiquitous in the real-world, and many online websites providing
various kinds services can all be represented as networks, e.g., online social
networks, e-commerce networks, and academic networks. Learning and mining of
network structured data have been one of the most popular yet challenging
research problems studied in recent years. This project will study the problem
of how to find a simple, yet effective representation for each network node,
which can capture its characteristics or role in the network based on its
connections. This is referred to as the network embedding problem. As an
effective tool to transform network data into classic feature-vector
representations, network embedding aims at mapping the network data into a low-
dimensional feature space, i.e., with a small number of features for each
network node. With the embedding results, all these aforementioned networks will
be benefited to improve their services provided for the public. This project
focuses on developing a general network embedding framework, and investigating
its extension to application-oriented, multi-network and dynamic-network
scenarios. This project will help support female and minority students to
participate in academic research about network embedding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network embedding studied in this project is a challenging
learning task due to many reasons. (1) Data perspective, the heterogeneity of
real-world social network data renders existing homogeneous-network oriented
embedding models failing to work; (2) Structure preserving perspective, many
first-order proximity based embedding methods can hardly preserve the complex
social network structure with heterogeneous node types; and (3) Task
perspective, the detachment of embedding process with external tasks makes the
learnt results ineffective for application tasks with specific objectives. This
project aims at tackling these challenges by proposing a novel extensible
heterogeneous social network embedding model, which can effectively incorporate
the objectives of external tasks in the learning process. This project covers
five main themes: (1) extensible heterogeneous network embedding foundation; (2)
application oriented embedding of single heterogeneous network; (3) embedding
over multiple heterogeneous network for network alignment; (4) dynamic
heterogeneous network embedding for friend recommendation; and (5) advanced
scalable heterogeneous network embedding technique exploration. This project
will greatly enrich the fundamental principles and technologies of social
network mining and data mining. In terms of the broader impact, advances in
network embedding analysis have transformative potential for fundamental
advances in understanding the behavior and activities of the social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.