* 1763705
* RI: Medium: Robots That Learn From Description Through Synthesis and Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Yuille, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,213,449.00

Many types of physical work are performed most efficiently in collaboration. For
example, garage mechanics, electricians, surgeons, and carpenters often employ
an assistant or an apprentice to help them perform their jobs. The goal of the
proposed project is to develop the underlying principles that would allow an
intelligent robotic system to naturally collaborate with a human partner in such
tasks. In particular, the proposed research studies the problem of performing an
action in response to a complex command; for example, "When I hold these two
pieces together with the holes aligned, place a 3 inch screw through the hole."
The results of this research will be demonstrated in a system that is able to
assist in typical assembly or cooking tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
explores the development of perception-based classifiers that are composed, on
demand, from the structure of the command itself. This classifier is constructed
from pre-trained generic components and is then fine-tuned using simulation-
generated data also derived from the structure of the command. This poses
several challenging technical problems. The first problem is to create general-
purpose perceptual components that correspond to the language units of the
query's objects, actions, relationships, and activities. The second problem is
to compose these units to form a classifier and to create methods for on-demand
fine-tuning of the classifier from simulation data. The system must then be able
to command a robot to perform the correct action in response to the command.
Measures of success of this research will be 1) the breadth of capabilities the
system is able to provide; 2) the specificity it is able to achieve when applied
to representative video data; and 3) its ability to naturally interact with a
human user to perform a collaborative manipulation
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.