* 1763793
* SHF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Fine-Grain Multithreading through Hardware/Software Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 522,478.00

The supercomputing landscape has fundamentally changed in the past fifteen
years. Chips have evolved from single-thread, single-core to multi-threaded,
many-core chips. Even mainstream high-performance chips offer close to 100
hardware threads. At the same time, accelerators, featuring hundreds or even
thousands of hardware threads, have allowed scientists to obtain major
performance speedups for certain classes of scientific kernels, thanks to their
inherent massively parallel nature. From the software side, programming
languages can provide a way to create various types of parallelism, from
traditional data-parallel constructs to fine-grain, data-driven ones: directives
have been added to leverage instruction-level parallelism (ILP), thus allowing
the programmer to identify when the code is vectorizable; accelerator-friendly
directives allow code to execute on GPUs or the Intel Xeon Phi; finally, new
keywords enable the programmer to express task-dependent parallelism. In order
to evaluate the hardware-software trade-offs, the investigators plan to design
and develop an abstract machine model for scalable parallel and distributed
computing, designing and implementing hardware-assisted mechanisms to realize
it. Through a broad dissemination of the research findings and tools to the
community via conferences and publications, seminars, and a dedicated website,
this research has the potential to foster new directions in holistic and
comprehensive solutions important to humanity. In addition, the investigators
have recently co-founded a Special Technical Community (Parallel Models &amp;
Systems) of the IEEE Computer Society with the specific purpose of fostering
research and education in the domain across US and the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop an asynchronous fine-
grain event-driven program execution model, Codelet Abstract Machine model
(CAM), for thread management in parallel and distributed systems. The research
tasks include three major extensions to a dataflow codelet model, implementing
CAM by a hardware/software co-design approach and evaluating it using a set of
benchmarks and applications. The proposed FPGA-based prototype is built in
combination with general-purpose multicore chips and compiler and runtime system
currently under development are designed be part of the system to allow high-
level programmers to exploit the resulting system targeted to applications
ranging from traditional HPC, parallel graph processing, as well as big data
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.