* 1763169
* RAPID: ANDESITE Cubesat
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Brian Walsh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 10/31/2018
* USD 124,478.00

This grant supports the completion and launch of the ANDESITE CubeSat
constellation mission consisting of 9 spacecraft. These CubeSat will make
spatially-resolved measurements of electric currents in the ionosphere, which
are a critical pathway of energy flow from the magnetosphere into the
ionosphere. The research effort will demonstrate that critical scientific
measurements can made using CubeSat constellations for use in space weather
monitoring. The grant will support a junior scientist in the community and
provide education and training for graduate and undergraduate students.

The ANDESITE CubeSats will fly through the auroral zones with small inter-
spacecraft separations (<10km) to study the small-scale spatial structure of
Magnetosphere- Ionosphere coupling. The ANDESITE mission is manifested on the
Rocket Labs Electron rocket for a launch into a near polar orbit. Once in space,
the 6U bus will deploy 8 pico-satellites to fly in a constellation communicating
over a mesh network. Each element in the constellation will make a 3-axis
magnetic field measurement which will be used to identify the local current
density. The mission serves as a pathfinder to demonstrate the use of small
spacecraft constellations with small separations for use in space weather
monitoring. This research will test, launch, and operate the spacecraft
constellation on orbit, and perform data analysis.