* 1763064
* Optimal Field Sensing Strategies for Time-Critical Estimation and Prediction of Dynamic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Bassam Bamieh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 355,000.00

This project aims to develop a systematic framework and scalable computational
techniques for sensor placement and time-critical sensor motion strategies for
dynamically evolving, spatially-distributed field quantities. Such fields
describe environmental variables such as plume concentrations, pressures, wind
velocity, or ocean salinity and temperature as is common in techniques of data
assimilation. The increasing ubiquity of mobile sensing platforms presents an
opportunity to improve upon traditional estimation and prediction techniques in
data assimilation. A major goal of this project is to discover how a limited
number of sensors should be placed or maneuvered to optimize estimation and
prediction fidelity in a time-critical manner. The results of this project will
enable new design techniques that can ultimately aid in natural disaster
prediction and response management. From forest fire fronts, to floods and other
severe weather events, data assimilation techniques are currently indispensable
for prediction. They are however typically constrained by the use of only the
momentarily available environmental measurements. This research would produce a
systematic methodology for proactive, optimal dispatching and trajectory
planning of mobile sensors whose measurements can then reduce prediction
uncertainty for critical regions and quantities. This would be a significant aid
to natural disaster response preparation and management. The success of this
project will not only promote the fundamental science in estimation and
predictive technologies but also help advance the nation?s disaster prediction
and response capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model-based estimation and
prediction approach is adopted, where the use of underlying physical laws enable
high resolution estimation and prediction of spatio-temporally varying physical
fields from sparse and limited measurements. The main thrust of the project is
the development of a new framework of dynamic exploration, in which sensors'
motion and/or location is designed using optimal and feedback control techniques
with the objective of maximizing information gain metrics. While heuristics can
be easily developed in individual settings, there is a need for a systematic
theory of motion control design for the purpose of estimator optimization,
especially in dynamic environments. Thus the sensor motion problem in an unknown
environment is reformulated as an optimal control problem with the objective
being the maximization of information reward metrics, or minimization of error
covariances. New techniques will need to be developed to address these non-
traditional optimal and feedback control problems. Large-scale computational
issues such as low-rank approximations of error covariances will be explored and
utilized. The project will address specific research questions that arise due to
differences between sensing modalities such as point-wise versus tomographic or
aggregates sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.