* 1763284
* Local and nonlocal topographic controls on landscape ecohydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Amilcare Porporato, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 07/31/2018
* USD 127,665.00

The overarching goal of this research is the statistical quantification of the
relative importance of local vs. nonlocal geomorphologic controls on landscape
metabolism in complex topographies differing in hydroclimatic forcing and
geologic age, and the quantification of their degree of nonlinearity and
threshold effects. The research is guided by the hypothesis that the relative
importance of local and nonlocal topographic effects on landscape metabolism
shifts according to hydroclimatic conditions. Moreover, the conditions for such
shifts change with the landscape age and the related surface smoothing
processes, which modify the relative importance of tails vs. mode of the
distributions of topographic properties (aspect, slope, contributing area,
etc.). The research will provide a theoretical description of landscapes using
statistical field theories, and analyze local and nonlocal controls on CN cycles
(radiation, soil features, vegetation cover, and soil moisture dynamics).
Finally it will couple local and nonlocal controls to biogeochemical dynamics,
extending previous stochastic soil moisture and biogeochemistry models to
include spatially random components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
environmental processes controlling vegetation and soil nutrient dynamics and
the related carbon and nitrogen fluxes (also called landscape metabolism) are
related to the land energy and water budgets. This research analyzes such
processes and quantifies how they differ in space and time, as a function of the
local and nonlocal landscape features, such as slope, orientation and drainage
area. This proposal will pave the way to a more fundamental understanding of the
laws for carbon, nitrogen, and water fluxes at different spatial scales over
complex landscapes such as river basins and mountain regions. The project will
be instrumental for the quantification of the land surface conditions for global
climate models, especially in the contexts of variation in climatic and land-use
scenarios.