* 1763167
* RAPID: The impact of Hurricane Harvey on water column and sediment biogeochemistry of the Mission-Aransas Estuary in south Texas
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Zhanfei Liu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 157,063.00

This project involves rapid-response research into the effects of Hurricane
Harvey on the Mission-Aransas estuary system in south Texas. Hurricane Harvey
passed directly over this region on August 25-26, 2017. Because these waters are
the site of the Mission-Aransas National Estuarine Research Reserve (MANERR),
the investigators have a history of data from before the storm with which to
compare the data they will collect. They proposed to investigate the effect of
the passage of the storm on carbon and nitrogen cycling, and thus the ecosystem,
in the waters and sediments of Copano Bay and Aransas Bay. Their results will be
important to understanding coastal processes both in general and in response to
extreme events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators pose two hypotheses,
which can be summarized broadly as 1) inputs of nutrients from river flooding
will stimulate algal blooms in the estuary and 2) changes in sediment grain size
distribution will affect sediment nitrogen cycling. They will collect water
samples for nutrients, pigments, lipids, bulk carbon, and carbon isotope
analyses, together with standard water quality parameters using a YSI Sonde
(salinity, temperature, pH, chlorophyll a, dissolved oxygen and turbidity) at
the five System Wide Monitoring Program sites of the MANERR on a biweekly to
monthly basis. Sediment samples will be collected at all sites in the fall of
2017 and examined for grain size, pigments, carbon and nitrogen content, carbon
isotopes, pigments, and lipids. The results will be used, in combination from
data collected earlier this year, to examine physical, chemical, and biological
responses to this major event. The project will support a graduate student
research assistant and three undergraduate student researchers. Communication
with the public will occur through well-established and effective programs at
the Mission-Aransas NERR and the University of Texas Marine Science Institute.