* 1763429
* Metal-Arylisocyanide Chromophores for Photoredox Chemistry and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Jay Winkler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2023
* USD 632,946.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professors Harry B. Gray and Jay R.
Winkler of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the California
Institute of Technology (Caltech) are developing a class of luminescent
transition metal complexes with exceptional properties for applications in
organic synthesis and biological imaging. Both organic synthesis and biological
imaging are important in developing cures for diseases. A strong STEM outreach
program, the solar energy activity labs, was developed under prior NSF support.
In this grant period, Professors Gray and Winkler, their postdoctoral scholars,
graduate students, and undergraduates will continue their participation in this
effort to translate and transfer the essence of Caltech research for the purpose
of increasing public awareness and understanding of basic science and
engineering principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research has revealed
that homoleptic tungsten arylisocyanide complexes display remarkable
spectroscopic and photophysical properties. These molecules have high 1-photon
absorption extinction coefficients (ten to the power of 5), luminesce with
quantum efficiencies as high as 25%, and have excited-state lifetimes longer
than 1 microsecond. Of particular note are their two-photon absorption cross
sections at 811 nm, a property of great importance in biological imaging. These
cross sections are 10-100 times greater than many commercial 2-photon dyes.
Several new groups of transition metal arylisocyanides are designed to enhance
the spectroscopic and photophysical properties of this class of luminescent
molecules. Four types of fused-ring arylisocyanide ligands will be prepared
based on naphthyl-, phenanthryl-, biphenylene and triphenylene ring systems. The
new arylisocyanide ligands will be coordinated to transition metals from groups
6, 7 and 8. New molecules will be structurally characterized by X-ray
crystallography whenever feasible. The 1- and 2-photon absorption properties of
the molecules will be evaluated and the excited-state lifetimes and quantum
yields of all luminescent molecules will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.