* 1763477
* Research: Examining the impact of mechanical objects in students learning of thermodynamics-related engineering problems
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Scott Huxtable, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2024
* USD 405,982.00

As technology quickly advances in modern society, it is important that the
engineers of tomorrow fully learn the basic concepts of engineering so that they
can apply these concepts throughout their careers to a range of new
applications. Many engineering courses in college involve teaching abstract
concepts that are often difficult for students to understand. For example,
"Thermodynamics" is an important course that involves learning about
relationships between heat, energy, and mechanical work. Thermodynamics is known
to be a difficult course for many students since some of the concepts in the
class, such as heat and energy, are abstract. One method for teaching difficult
engineering subjects is to use physical or mechanical objects that a student can
touch and manipulate in order to demonstrate important concepts. This project
examines new approaches for the use and evaluation of mechanical objects as
teaching tools in a thermodynamics course with the idea that results from this
work can then be applied to additional engineering courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines person-object interactions, a
significant and critical aspect of engineering, to examine how these
interactions affect comprehension of challenging concepts. The primary question
to be addressed in the project is fundamental to engineering education and
practice: What is the value of mechanical objects in learning engineering
related concepts? This study uses quasi-experiments in a mixed methods design
where different mechanical objects are used in several problem-solving
activities in Thermodynamics classes. Physically demonstrating key
thermodynamics concepts, involved in traditional problems, such as the
conversion of heat to work, ideal gas behavior, or liquid-vapor phase change
processes can be augmented with the use of mechanical objects. For example, a
typical "piston-cylinder" arrangement in an automobile engine can be modeled
with a simple mechanical object that consists of a plunger in a syringe with an
integrated temperature sensor to physically illustrate relationships between
compression, expansion, work, heat, temperature, and pressure. The study results
will be analyzed in order to provide a clear picture of how the use of
mechanical objects supports engineering activities and how individual
differences affect the learning process. At the end of the project, the
researchers will develop typologies of object use and mental models describing
the cognitive processes involved in solving engineering related problems.
Finally, the results from this work will provide guidance as to how mechanical
objects can be used as educational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.