* 1763701
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Cache Network Operations for Content Delivery
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Mor Harchol-Balter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 02/28/2023
* USD 598,000.00

When a user goes online to read the news, watch videos, buy products, play
games, or use a social network, the content accessed by the user is delivered to
his/her device by a large Internet-scale network called a content delivery
network (or, CDN for short). A CDN may consist of hundreds of thousands of
servers located in thousands of data centers around the world. Operating a large
CDN is challenging due to the sheer scale and diversity of the traffic and due
to the vastness of their distributed server infrastructure. This research
focuses on enabling highly efficient CDN operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key goals of this project are minimizing the operating cost and maximizing the
robustness of the network. This project develops techniques for mapping
different traffic classes to servers, so as to optimize resource usage, increase
hit rates, and lower bandwidth costs. This project also develops adaptive and
self-tuning systems that are robust to common sources of CDN variability,
including object popularity/size, load, latency, and availability. Since CDNs
are the key infrastructure enabling web, video, and other online applications,
this project has a significant positive impact on the quality-of-experience of
Internet users, while lowering the cost of Internet
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will broaden participation by
involving undergraduates in the research. Further, the project will help attract
women to STEM through outreach activities, including "Tech Nights" and
"Roadshows" for Middle-School girls, and including semi-annual "Career Advice
talks" to students from high school through grad school. The project will also
incorporate topics in large-scale network operations in the curriculum. Finally,
the project will invest significantly in outreach and tech transfer to the CDN
industry by incorporating our research in production systems and enabling
students to gain real-world experience in the CDN industry through
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All products of the project, including
research papers, software, and data, will be made available to the public. In
particular, the software and data produced by the project will be archived for
at least five years, and even longer when feasible. There will be two software
and data repositories: one at UMass Amherst
(https://www.cs.umass.edu/~ramesh/Site/CODE_DATA.html) and the other at CMU (htt
p://www.cs.cmu.edu/~harchol/SoftwareDataRepository.html).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T
his award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.