* 1763512
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Automatic Network Repair
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Aaron Gember-Jacobson, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 169,909.00

Part 1: Modern computer networks must satisfy increasingly complex security,
availability, and performance objectives to meet the diverse needs of users and
applications. Consequently, programming a network to satisfy these requirements
has become extremely challenging, even for highly skilled network operators.
While previous work has helped operators generate policy-compliant network
configurations, networks can still experience unexpected behaviors such as link
failures or traffic surges, which can lead to policy violations that require a
repair of the network. Today, repairs are often done manually and are error-
prone. This project will develop a ground-up framework for automatically and
efficiently repairing networks that do not satisfy given requirements. Building
on previous work, this research lays the foundation for "zero touch networking",
where a network's behavior is automatically managed based on high-level
objectives provided by human operators. The results of this research will enable
individuals without extensive training to repair network data and control
planes, thus paving the way for increased stability and security in the networks
on which businesses, governments, and individuals so heavily
depend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: This project proposes to develop a formal
framework for automatically creating optimal network repairs and for providing
formal guarantees on the quality of the generated repairs. Concretely, the
project will pursue research on three fronts: 1) Design formal abstractions for
distributed control planes that compute high-quality repairs for a wide range of
policies. 2) Design formal abstractions for centralized control planes that
compute high-quality repairs for a wide range of policies. 3) Design and
implement algorithms for repairing control planes in the presence of
probabilistic events (e.g., to conform to traffic engineering
policies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.