* 1763337
* High-Resolution Nanoelectrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2021
* USD 492,559.00

Chemical reactions that involve the transfer of an electron from a metal to a
molecule adsorbed to its surface are some of the most important in chemistry, as
they form the basis for applications ranging from catalysis to sensing. The
study of these electrochemical reactions is challenging, however. Catalytic
reactions for example can involve the transfer of multiple electrons, and
reaction efficiency can be highly dependent on the local arrangement of metal
atoms near the molecular adsorbate. Traditional electrochemistry techniques
sample the entire metal electrode, which can contain a vast number of nanoscale
metallic features, making it difficult to draw clear connections between the
local metal structure and the chemical activity. In this project funded by the
Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael Mirkin of the City University of New York, Queens
College is advancing nanoelectrochemical methods and using them to study
catalytic reactions taking place on the surfaces of metallic nanoparticles and
nanorods. Unlike traditional electrochemistry techniques, the scanning
electrochemical microscopy (SECM) method used by Professor Mirkin and his
students can monitor a region of the surface that is only 10 nm across, or about
the equivalent of 30 gold atoms. This high spatial resolution enables the team
to characterize not just individual particles, but different sections of the
same particle. Their results could have broad implications for fields ranging
from the development of ultrasensitive detectors, to catalysis for energy
conversion and storage. The project is also providing training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, who are getting multidisciplinary research
experience in interfacial electrochemistry, bioanalytical chemistry and
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoelectrochemical techniques, such as
steady-state voltammetry, SECM, and nanoparticle collisions, are combined with
high-resolution tunneling electron microscopy and finite-element simulations to
study the fundamental processes that impact the detection of electrochemical
events on nanometer length scales. The project is investigating electrochemical
processes in microscopic carbon cavities, long-distance transfer of electrons
between metal nanoparticles and electrodes, and spatial variations in surface
reactivity around catalytically active metallic nanorods. The interactions
between single nanoparticles and nanoelectrodes are investigated by two
approaches. In the first, the SECM nanotip is brought to within the tunneling
distance of a single nanoparticle, and the tunneling current is detected, while
the second approach monitors electron tunneling as nanoparticles collide with
the electrode. The main objective is to develop the experimental and theoretical
framework for mechanistic studies and visualization of complex
nanoelectrochemical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.