* 1763620
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: KMELIN: Knowledge Mining and Embedding Learning for Complex Dynamic Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Xindong Wu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 616,000.00

Complex dynamic information networks (CDINs) consist of data objects that are
highly correlated with a variety of dependency relationships, such as patient-
physician interactions or patient-medication-insurance claims. Each data object
as a CDIN node has rich contents, such as biometric information of a patient,
disease symptoms, or hospital logistics. Data objects and their relationships
also continuously evolve and change. Many health, social, physical, and
biological systems share the CDIN essence that the multifaceted and dynamic
nature of individual nodes imposes significant challenges for modeling a complex
and evolving network as a whole. Although data relationships are becoming rich
and comprehensive than ever, existing systems are mostly relational-database
driven, and cannot integrate complex relationships of networked data for Big
Data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design a knowledge
mining and embedding learning platform for CDINs that will (1) extract and
represent complex structure and rich-content information in the health domain as
a CDIN; (2) perform knowledge mining, including clustering and classification,
on CDIN networks; (3) enable feature embedding learning with CDINs, so the users
can interact with CDINs for content access, and (4) provide a prototype system
for hospital re-admission decision support. The spectrum of the methods from the
project will not only enrich algorithms and solutions for mining complex
structure and rich content networks, as opposed to static networks, but also
shift existing health information systems from traditional databases towards
becoming network centered systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.