* 1763219
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Wearable Sound Sensing and Feedback Techniques for Persons who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Raja Kushalnagar, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 116,000.00

The goal of this research is to advance wearable sound sensing and feedback
technology for users who are deaf or hard of hearing, along with appropriate
techniques for human-computer interaction. A wearable device with multiple
microphones and audio processing algorithms to automatically sense, localize,
and identify sounds will be developed. Means to discreetly provide this
information to the user via emerging wearable technologies such as head-mounted
displays and smartwatches will also be implemented. Evaluations will include lab
and field studies, everyday tasks such as noticing sounds and participating in
oral conversations, and objective and subjective measures. Project outcomes will
have broad impact by enabling new sound awareness options for users who are deaf
or hard of hearing, thereby augmenting the wearer's existing strategies with
additional, unobtrusive information. The new assistive technologies will have
the potential to improve the lives of a large portion of the population, in
particular the growing number of older adults with hearing loss in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, major subgoals will include:
understanding user needs for wearable sound sensing and feedback, including
prioritizing the importance of different sounds across a variety of contexts and
based on an individual user's level of hearing loss; developing and evaluating a
lightweight wearable sound sensing platform and accompanying algorithms,
including both new sound scene analysis algorithms for a microphone array
conformal on, or in proximity to, a complex-shaped baffle (the wearer's head)
and that take into account how sound scatters off the wearer's body, along with
adaptive state-of-the-art sound classification and speech recognition approaches
to work with this processed audio; and developing and evaluating visual and
haptic or vibrational feedback of the sensed sound via wearable
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.