* 1763558
* Early College Career Exploration Through STEM Courses and Apprenticeships in Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Terrence Robinson, Manufacturing Advocacy & Growth Network Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 03/31/2021
* USD 399,660.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by examining an
innovative approach to work-based learning for high school students. This
project will expand upon an existing program to provide students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields with dynamic career and technical training
experiences through partnerships with advanced manufacturing companies and
community colleges in the local region. The project extends research on work-
based learning by examining a model that includes six important components:
career awareness, soft skills development, mentoring, employer engagement,
provision of industry recognized credentials, and college credit. The project
weaves together paid internships, culturally-responsive mentoring, career
awareness, college credit, soft skills development, and industry-recognized
certifications into one career pathway program for urban and rural high school
students. The program focuses on girls and minority participants, and in grades
11 and 12, participants devote 10 hours per week to a paid internship at a local
manufacturing company. Participants can also earn up to 12 college credits while
completing the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on a
career-awareness program model that begins with all students in grade 9 at five
schools attending awareness-building seminars, watching online videos, hearing
guest speakers, and taking factory tours to gain broad awareness of possible
STEM career pathwayss in manufacturing. At grade 10, through a combination of
self-selection, teacher nominations, and parent involvement, up to 12 students
per school join the project cohort and begin learning job-related skills,
training on equipment, and earning college credit at their local community
college. This project extends the existing model by engaging 240 urban and rural
high school juniors and seniors from the five schools in the pilot of an on-the-
job STEM skill development program with direct linkages to the manufacturing
sector. Participants in the program will be able to utilize the knowledge and
skills acquired during the apprenticeship in pursuing advanced studies in higher
education or proceeding directly to a career. The model is based on the
hypothesis that utilizing a comprehensive approach of mentoring, soft skills
development, credential attainment, college coursework, and paid work-based
internships; the program will increase the success of participants and motivate
them to pursue a STEM-focused career. The research associated with testing this
hypothesis and model will be guided by five questions: 1) How do partnerships
and business/industry professionals serve to engage and motivate participants to
become interested in STEM careers? 2) To what extent does each of the
interventions (mentoring, soft skills, development, credential attainment,
college coursework, and paid work-based internship) motivate, engage, prepare,
and support participants to pursue STEM education and careers? 3) What design
factors play a role to engage participants in experiential learning in STEM
using advanced IT? 4) How does the program model further anticipated outcomes
for the participants, including but not limited to STEM career competencies
related to interdisciplinary-based knowledge and hands-on experience and
practices, competency with advanced technologies, and 21st century/soft skills
development? And 5) What external factors further anticipated outcomes for the
interventions, including (a) partnerships and business &amp; industry
professionals, (b) mentors including other interventions central to the program,
and (c) experiential learning in STEM, advanced manufacturing and emerging
technologies? A mixed methods research approach using commonly used instruments
to the extent possible will be used to pursue answers to the research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.