* 1763689
* RI: Medium: Light Responsive Polymer Magnetic Microrobots with Dual Mode Sensing for Biomedical and Advanced Manufacturing Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Song Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,008,000.00

Microrobots have many potential applications in applications as diverse as
biomedical and advanced manufacturing. While current microrobots can navigate
using externally applied magnetic fields, their lack of sensing and manipulation
limit their capabilities. In particular, micro-force information is essential
for safe biomanipulation, sensing biological processes, and performing
microassembly tasks in advanced manufacturing applications. In addition, mobile
microrobots that can sense electrical potentials and connections of cells will
enable the characterization and study of therapeutic strategies, assisting in
the treatment of various cancers. As part of the planned outreach activities,
researchers will develop STEM outreach programs with Deaf Kids CODE to help
empower deaf/hard of hearing K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end,
the project will create a new class of light responsive polymer magnetic
microrobots (LRPMMs) with active end-effectors and dual-mode sensing
capabilities. An embedded magnetic body will enable the use of external magnetic
fields to control microrobots to navigate in the workspace. The active end-
effectors will be made from responsive polymers and actuated by structured light
patterns. The polymer structures will be calibrated so vision-based force-
sensing techniques can be applied. Additionally, electrochromic properties will
be embedded into the polymers to enable detection of electrical potential levels
in the environment through their change in color. The proposed research tasks
include the design and fabrication of the LRPMMs; optical system development for
structured light actuation, sensing, and tracking; and control and experimental
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.