* 1763917
* Research: Examining the Influence of Youth-led, Museum-based Engineering Experiences on Participating Youth and the Visiting Public
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2021
* USD 396,008.00

One way to motivate young people from diverse backgrounds to pursue engineering
careers is to enlist them as educators who can help the general public
understand how engineers help respond to the challenges of everyday life. The
New York Hall of Science, which serves a large and diverse audience, is an ideal
setting for testing the promise of this strategy. Youth educators and curators
of public programs at the Hall of Science will mentor two groups of high school-
and early college-aged youth, who will contribute to the design and facilitation
of engineering-focused events and activities for museum visitors. They will work
together to develop engineering programming for the public that emphasizes the
cultural and interpersonal dimensions of engineering practices. This group of
young people will be recruited from the Hall of Science's more than 100
Explainers, a very diverse group of young people who work part-time at the Hall
of Science and engage with visitors as they explore the museum. Researchers will
track participants' experiences and document their impact on museum visitors'
perceptions of engineering. The expectation is that creating and delivering
these experiences for visitors will have a positive impact on the youth
participants' understanding of the engineering disciplines, and on visitors'
perceptions of engineering and its relationship to everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use observations, interviews,
journaling and the Engineering Professional Skills Assessment to explore youth
experience, and visitor exit surveys and interviews to probe visitor
perceptions. Both the skills assessment and visitor surveys are NSF-funded
instruments. Data coding will be grounded in the engineering habits of mind
defined by the National Research Council's Committee on Understanding and
Improving K-12 Engineering Education in the United States (2009). The project
will capture evidence regarding which habits of mind the Fellows are most
frequently engaged with. The effort will also explore how interactions with
peers (as colleagues), with experts (as learners, such as with Designers in
Residence) and with visitors (as teachers and leaders) may be associated with
different combinations of the habits of mind over the course of the project.
Visitor data and assessment data will allow the project to begin to make
analytic connections between participating young people's increased
understanding of culturally-situated engineering challenges, and their impact on
the experiences of museum visitors who engage with engineering programming at
the Hall of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.