* 1763147
* GOALI: Characterization of Material Transfer in Friction Stir Processing With a Consumable Tool
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Scott Miller, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2022
* USD 428,893.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
address the fundamental issue of material transfer from one metal to another at
high force and temperature, called friction surfacing. This is based on friction
stir welding technology in which a rotating tool is forced into a material to
simultaneously deform, heat, and mix material. There is an increasing need for
dissimilar material surfacing and coating applications. The major advantage of
this technique is material adheres by mechanical bonding at relatively low
temperature, resulting in high bonding strength, high tolerance to
contamination, low environmental impact, and at low cost. The technical
challenge centers on the nature of material transfer, adhesion and deposited
material properties. This is collaborative research between the University of
Hawaii at Manoa and General Motors. Two target applications have been identified
for this research 1) Automotive - Conventional coating processes have not proven
particularly suitable for steel and lightweight materials and have had limited
success. What is therefore needed is an efficient and easily-operated technique
to modify the surface composition of metal parts to make them more corrosion
resistant. 2) Naval - the seals in ships are susceptible to corrosion and the
current electroplating protection method is not adequate for coating nickel
alloys onto the corroded, unclean steel hull. These industries are central to
American national security and economic welfare. This research will also impact
remanufacturing applications as an alternative method of coating/cladding by
mechanical transfer of material. The PIs will work with native Hawaiian students
on this research through the Native Hawaiian Science &amp; Engineering
Mentorship Program at the University of Hawaii at
Manoa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to characterize material
transfer in friction surfacing with a consumable tool. The research will
generate knowledge about parameters and conditions for transfer of material from
one surface to another, which is important for all friction stir processes. The
properties of tool and substrate for which material is being transferred will be
characterized. The nature of adhesion between transferred material and substrate
will be studied through a series of fundamental experimental measurements,
metallurgy, and modeling to establish the relationship among the process
parameters, process conditions, material transfer, and adhesion to the work
material. The plan is to 1) experimentally measure the effects of process
parameters and conditions on amount and quality of transferred material from the
consumable tool to the rigid surface 2) establish metallurgy of the transferred
material and adhesion 3) model the process for knowledge about distribution of
stress, strain, and temperature throughout the material and 4) quantify the
comparative performance and properties of the new coatings. This is a new
direction for friction stir processing. General Motors is contributing much
expertise and guidance to this project, which will enhance its technical
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.