* 1763742
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Internet at the Speed of Light
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Bruce Maggs, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 374,998.00

This project introduces a grand challenge for the networking community and
industry: reducing Internet latencies to close to the limiting physical
constraint, the speed of light in free space. Achieving this vision of a 'speed-
of-light Internet' could translate into significant value for today's
applications; for example, shaving even a few hundred milliseconds from a Web
transaction may translate into millions of dollars of revenue for a Web
provider, or significantly impact emergency or defense response. The human
visual system cannot correctly order visual events separated by less than about
30 millisecond; thus, a response received over the Internet within thirty
milliseconds would achieve the illusion of an "instant response", potentially
enabling the full potential of certain applications, e.g., tele-immersion, that
have so far been limited to the laboratory. For some applications, such as
massive multi-player online games, (or any online interactive community),
reducing the latency of the Internet will push applications to reach a critical
mass of users. A speed-of-light Internet can also be expected to spur the
development of new and creative applications. This proposal aims at developing a
playbook for realizing a speed-of-light Internet, by identifying the factors
that contribute to latency, the applications that would benefit most, and
developing an architecture, protocols and methodologies for achieving
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four main goals of this project are to
(1) determine the impact of latency on end users, (2) design a speed-of-light
Internet, (3) explore "end-point agnostic" mechanisms for reducing latency, and
(4) determine how to operate, maintain, and make use of a bandwidth-constrained
low-latency network. The project will investigate these questions in the context
of candidate applications including electronic commerce, games, and virtual and
augmented reality. The proposed work includes new algorithms and design for the
wide-area network infrastructure, and new protocols and network management to
deal with the dynamic partitioning of application traffic across the two
infrastructures. The project will explore how to leverage low-latency networking
technologies, i.e., microwave and millimeter wave radios, which have thus far
been deployed as point-to-point links over long distances primarily for the
financial industry; specifically, how they can be incorporated into the Internet
at large. The work will be carried out in collaboration with McKay Brothers, the
operators of an ultra-low-latency network linking financial markets in New York
and Chicago, Akamai Technologies, a major provider of content delivery services,
and Exablaze, a manufacturer of the ultra-low-latency network interface cards.
This will inform the design of a cSpeed mesh network, and its interaction and
interoperability with the standard Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.