* 1763024
* Collaborative Research: Three-dimensional Continuously Scanning  Laser Vibrometry with Application to Structural Damage Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Weidong Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,326.00

The laser vibrometer is a state-of-art-art instrument used to characterize
vibration of a structure. This information is important to evaluate the
correctness of design of structures that routinely experience vibration; to
identify areas of concern for maintenance and repairs of those structures before
failure occurs; and to pinpoint the location and mode of failure of the
structures, if pre-failure remediation is not undertaken or is insufficient.
This technique, however, is very tedious and time-consuming for measurement of
structures with complex configurations. These may include large structures
subject, for example, to ongoing loading from wind, or flowing water, or the
steady flow of traffic. This project aims to develop a continuously scanning
laser vibrometry method for accurate and rapid characterization of vibrations of
structures with complex configurations. The ultimate application of this
research will advance the national prosperity and defense by providing early
warnings of the need for maintenance and repair of structures, or of the onset
of failures of critical structures. This can reduce potential economic and human
losses, in addition to advancing knowledge in the field of measurement science.
Outcomes of this project will also be demonstrated to underserved high school
students in a summer educational program to spark their interest in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overarching objectives of this project are to
investigate full-field three-dimensional continuously scanning laser vibrometry
and apply it to non-model-based structural damage detection. Laser vibrometry
can measure three-dimensional vibrations of structures with curved surfaces and
time-varying positions and orientations, and estimate their vibration shapes
that can be used for damage detection when structures are under ambient
excitation. Scan trajectories of three laser spots need to be synchronized,
which requires derivation of kinematic relations between a prescribed scan
trajectory and each laser spot. Non-image-based and image-based methods will be
developed to obtain them. New output-only vibration shape measurement methods
will be developed for structures under ambient excitation. A robust and
efficient non-model-based damage detection method that uses different types of
vibration shapes measured by laser vibrometry will be developed. The damage
detection method is robust, practical and versatile, and does not require any
baseline information of structures, such as their dimensions and boundary
conditions, and vibration shapes of corresponding undamaged
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.