* 1763814
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Program Analytics: Using Trace Data for Localization, Explanation and Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Kamalika Chaudhuri, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Formal program analyses have long held out the promise of lowering the cost
of&lt;br/&gt;creating, maintaining and evolving programs. However, many crucial
analysis&lt;br/&gt;tasks, such as localizing the sources of errors or suggesting
code repairs, are&lt;br/&gt;inherently ambiguous: there is no unique right
answer. This ambiguity&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally restricts the wider adoption of
formal tools by limiting users to&lt;br/&gt;those with enough expertise to
effectively use such ambiguous results. The key&lt;br/&gt;insight is that data-
driven machine-learning approaches, which have proved&lt;br/&gt;successful in
other domains, can be applied to the data traces generated
by&lt;br/&gt;programmers as they carry out development tasks. This research
addresses the&lt;br/&gt;challenge of ambiguity by extending classical program
analysis into modern&lt;br/&gt;program analytics. This extension enhances
classical symbolic methods with&lt;br/&gt;modern data-driven approaches to
collectively learn from fine-grained traces of&lt;br/&gt;programmers interacting
with compilers or analysis tools to iteratively modify&lt;br/&gt;and fix
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research systematically develops program
analytics by pursuing research&lt;br/&gt;along two dimensions: language domains
and programming tasks. First, it studies&lt;br/&gt;different language domains,
from dynamically typed languages (Python), to&lt;br/&gt;statically typed
functional languages with contract systems (Haskell), to&lt;br/&gt;interactive
proof assistants (Coq). Second, it targets different
programming&lt;br/&gt;tasks, from localizing errors like null-dereferences,
assertions or other&lt;br/&gt;dynamic type failures, to static type errors, to
completing or fixing code to&lt;br/&gt;eliminate an error or to obtain some
desired functionality. This approach takes&lt;br/&gt;advantage of a suite of new
approaches that harness recent advances in&lt;br/&gt;statistical machine
learning and fine-grained, domain specific programmer&lt;br/&gt;interactions.
These advantages allow the research to address the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;problem
of ambiguity in classical program analysis. This has potential
to&lt;br/&gt;transform software development by yielding a new generation of
program analysis&lt;br/&gt;tools that are efficient, applicable, and
automatically customizable (e.g., to a&lt;br/&gt;particular company, project,
group or even individual).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.