* 1763673
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Coded Computing for Large-Scale Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Amir Avestimehr, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Deep learning models are breaking new ground in data science tasks including
image recognition, automatic translation and autonomous driving. This is
achieved by neural networks that can be hundreds of layers deep and involve
hundreds of millions of parameters. Training such large models requires
distributed computations, very long training times and expensive hardware. This
project studies coding theoretic techniques that can accelerate distributed
machine learning and allow training with cheaper commodity hardware. Beyond the
development of theoretical foundations, this project develops new algorithms for
providing fault tolerance over unreliable cloud infrastructure that can
significantly reduce the cost of large-scale machine learning. The research
outcomes of the project will be broadly disseminated and integrated into
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this research program is
on mitigating the bottlenecks of distributed machine learning. Currently,
scaling benefits are limited because of two reasons: first, communication is
typically the bottleneck and second, straggler effects limit performance. Both
problems can be mitigated using coding theoretic methods. This work proposes
"coded computing", a transformative framework that combines coding theory with
distributed computing to inject computational redundancy in a novel coded form.
This framework is then used to develop three research thrusts: a) Coding for
Linear Algebraic Computations b) Coding for Iterative Computations and c) Coding
for General Distributed Computations. Each of the thrusts operates on a
different layer of a machine learning pipeline but all rely on coding theoretic
tools and distributed information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.