* 1763658
* CSR: Medium: Effective Control to Maximize Resource Efficiency in Large Clusters;  Hardware, Runtime, and Compiler Perspectives
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* David Padua, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

Current computer systems use energy and other resources inefficiently. To
improve efficiency, this proposal rethinks the way computer systems are
controlled. This proposal uses formal methodologies based on control theory, and
an analysis that cuts across software and hardware, to obtain orders of
magnitude gains in resource efficiency. The proposal designs controllers in the
hardware, in the runtime system, and in the compiler. The expected result is
that large clusters can deliver higher performance for the same energy
consumption, or consume lower energy for the same
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work involves building a prototype
running an experimental runtime system and a compiler. It develops a set of
technologies that will improve the resource efficiency of general-purpose
computers by one or more orders of magnitude. The work will enable current
technology computers to continue delivering increased capabilities, providing
economic benefits to our society. The research has four thrusts: adapting
control theory to computer architecture, developing hardware controllers,
extending runtime systems to actuate on the hardware, and compiler-driven
control. This research will be performed in collaboration with AMD Corporation
Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort enhances multidisciplinary research
and education on cluster and datacenter technologies at the University of
Illinois. The material in this work will enhance the courses on computer
architecture, runtime systems, compilation, and parallel programming that the
investigators are teaching. This work will place undergraduates and under-
represented students in research groups. The research will also have a major
impact on industry, since it addresses a real, very timely technical problem:
that of making our cluster and datacenter infrastructure more energy
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce various deliverables
that will be placed in a website for the community to access. The project
repository will include data, code, results, a hardware emulator, a runtime
system, and a compiler. These materials will be made available for at least two
years beyond the project's lifetime. They will be accessible from
http://iacoma.cs.uiuc.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.