* 1763699
* SHF: Medium: Quantifying and Designing Around Architectural Risk
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2024
* Timothy Sherwood, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,702,609.00

Computer applications and technologies are changing at an ever-increasing rate.
This change comes with uncertainty and that uncertainty makes it difficult to
make good decisions about how to build systems that are maximally useful in the
future. While developing new computer systems has always involved risk, the new
magnitude of these uncertainties may now lead to either overly conservative
design practices at one end, or designs that have 'fragile' performance at the
other end. While risk assessment and management are expected in both business
and investment, these aspects are typically treated as independent to questions
of performance and efficiency in computer design when in fact they are not. As
hardware and software characteristics become uncertain (i.e. samples from a
distribution), the resulting performance distributions quickly grow beyond our
ability to reason about them with intuition alone. Through the collaboration of
computer system designers and experts in the impacts of technology uncertainty,
this project is developing new and fundamental techniques for both quantifying
risk and optimizing designs in risk-aware ways. This project is working to
transform the way in which architectures and systems, from micro to data-center
scale, are designed and analyzed. The investigators are creating new
technologies, but also making those technologies available and accessible
through open repositories, involving undergraduates at all levels in his
research, and integrating basic concepts from these statistical design methods
into outreach through "I love STEM" and other efforts. This interdisciplinary
project is targeted at advancing the frontiers of computer architecture,
electronic design automation, and uncertainty quantification. The developed
methodologies can also find application far outside the original area of inquiry
e.g., impact risk analysis and management across many other engineering systems
including renewable energy, robotic systems, and autonomous
driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is demonstrating, for the first time,
that it is possible to define, model, quantify, and mitigate computer
architectural risk. By bridging ideas of risk and risk-management from economics
and fast stochastic algorithms from uncertainty quantification, a new framework
for high-level risk-aware computer architecture analysis is being created.
Efficient techniques, using fewer than 50 data points, can effectively estimate
architectural uncertainty to enable the rigorous quantification and management
of risk during computer architecture design. This framework is embodied in a
symbolic / statistical analysis system that eases the exploration of these
surprisingly complex design spaces. A declarative language abstracts away the
complexity of new probability-constrained optimization and intelligent sampling
methods, while risk-aware micro and macro architectural improvements demonstrate
the value of these methods in practice. The methods transform the way one can
extract useful models of uncertainty from a limited selections of data points
available to each manufacturer, propagate those uncertainties correctly through
complex compositions of systems and the interactions of resources, efficiently
quantify the impact of those propagated uncertainties on the end figures of
merit for the system, encapsulate those methods in a language and solver
framework, and develop exemplars of how such uncertainty can be more actively
mitigated and controlled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.