* 1763215
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: C-O-H Volatile Metasomatism in the Cratonic Mantle - Implications for Mid-Lithospheric Discontinuities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Mainak Mookherjee, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 04/30/2023
* USD 187,306.00

Earth is the only planet in the Solar System whose surface is divided into
oceans and continents. Hence understanding the origin of continents and how
portions of them remain stable for billions of years is central to understanding
the evolution of the Earth. The old, stable cores of continents (cratons) are
underlain by thick layers of mantle (the silicate layer of the Earth that lies
below the crust), and these mantle roots are thought to contribute to
continental stability. Yet, it remains debated how the continental mantle formed
and evolved. In particular, the roles of magma or fluid interaction with the
mantle, either during or after the continent formation, are unclear, although
widespread layering observed in the cratonic mantle by seismic imaging may have
been created by magma and fluid related processes. This research will constrain
the formation and evolution of cratons by bracketing scenarios of melt/fluid and
mantle reactions that are consistent with geophysical observations at mid-
lithospheric depths. The research findings - disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, conference presentations and colloquia, and class room lectures
and activities - will impact a wide range of Earth science sub-disciplines
including petrology-geochemistry, mineral physics, geodynamics, and seismology.
The proposal will support female PhD students in high P-T experimental
petrology, mineral physics, and seismology, and support the research activities
of several undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups. In addition to their own research, all the students will participate in
discussions and write research articles together with all 3 PIs, learning how to
combine concepts and methods from three different yet related sub-disciplines of
solid Earth science. The proposal will thus directly further the educational
experience and professional development of several students at various stages of
their careers. The proposed research will also support an early career PI in the
field of mineral physics and will aid the investigators in engaging K-12
students in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of the continental
interiors for 2-3 billion years is a key feature of the Earth's dynamical and
thermal evolution. Understanding the geophysical structure, petrology, and
material properties of cratonic mantles and the tectonic history that produced
them is therefore one of the grand challenges of Earth science. A curious
feature of subcontinental mantles is the presence of distinct reductions in
seismic shear velocity at depths of 60-150 km, often called mid-lithospheric
discontinuities (MLDs). Given the widespread occurrence of MLDs within cratons,
their origins may be linked to craton formation; however, the causal link
between MLD and craton formation is yet to be established, and MLD origins
remain highly debated. One hypothesis is that MLDs represent zones enriched in
CO2-H2O volatiles, which led to stability of hydrous and/or carbonate minerals
or partial melts. This project will test this hypothesis by integrating results
from experimental petrology, mineral physics, and seismology. Through laboratory
experiments, this project will constrain the phase equilibria of cratonic mantle
peridotites fluxed by mixed CO2-H2O volatiles at MLD depths, taking into
consideration how the agent of volatile introduction may vary with craton
formation models. The goal will be to determine the stability of hydrous and
carbonate mineral phases over partial melts and obtain the compositions and
proportions of mineral phases as a function of depth, temperature, and
melt/fluid:peridotite ratio for each of the cases. Guided by the phase
equilibria experiments and compiled xenolith data, thermoelastic properties of
the appropriate end members and intermediate solid solutions of amphibole and
mica will be determined using Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) and first
principles simulation. Using the mineral assemblages from experiments and
updated elasticity data from new mineral physics, mantle velocity models will be
predicted. These will be compared to mantle models for southern African craton
(to be obtained by joint inversion of surface wave, Sp and Ps data) and North
America, and used to calculate synthetic Sp and Ps receiver function stacks that
will be compared to MLD observations globally. The proposed research will test
whether one or several scenarios of fluid/melt infiltration into cratons, if
any, satisfy the geophysical and petrologic characters of continental mantles at
mid-lithospheric depths. Our research will also lead to specific products such
as solidus parameterizations of depleted mantle+CO2+H2O; metasomatized mantle
mineral assemblages as a function of P-T, infiltrated fluid/melt composition and
fluid/melt:rock ratio; codes for computing seismic velocities for MLD-related
assemblages with updated thermoelastic data; and observed mantle discontinuity
parameters and mantle velocity models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.