* 1763649
* CHS: Medium: CAST: Child Adaptive Search Tool
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jerry Fails, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,199,604.00

The goal of the project is to empower emergent searchers -- initially children
ages 6-11 -- by researching, designing, and developing search tools that improve
their information literacy and searching capabilities through modeling and
adapting to their abilities as they search. Current search engines, even ones
specifically designed for children, offer weak support for children's search
needs due to their developing skills related to spelling, language use
(including synonyms), understanding categories, refining queries, and evaluating
relevance and quality of results. This makes it hard for children to create
effective queries, use the results suggested by the search engine, and
understand the relationship between the queries and the results returned.
Bringing together expertise in human-computer interaction, information
retrieval, natural language processing, and education, the project team will
both (a) further scientific understanding of children's search abilities, and
(b) design tools to support it through the iterative development of CAST (Child
Adaptive Search Tool), designed for children aged 6-11. CAST will be designed to
model and respond to users' literacy and maturity levels as well as search
intent missing from their formal queries. For example, when a child submits the
query "Tiger", CAST will tend to prioritize tiger habitat or Winnie the Pooh's
friend Tigger, which likely correlate better to a child's search intent than
information on Tiger Woods. To reach this goal, the team will collaborate with
children and teachers throughout the course of the project, working with
partners in several local schools to increase the impact of the application
itself and to improve the dissemination of the results. The results on
supporting search in the special population of children in this research also
have the potential to inform similar problems and methods aimed at other
populations who might have systematic differences in their search ability, from
older adults to second language speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use
two main lenses to guide the project work. The first is an educational research
lens that grounds design activities in the known needs of children, for example,
using spelling development research to create models of spelling correction that
are tailored to this audience rather than general dictionary-based spelling
correction algorithms. The second is a version of participatory design called
cooperative inquiry that closely involves both children and teachers along with
the research team throughout the design process, allowing the team to benefit
from children's direct perceptions of their own needs and ideas for addressing
them as well as the teachers' knowledge of children's needs when learning to
search for information to support their own education. The work will proceed in
three main phases. The first phase focuses on defining requirements and
resources, through partnering with local public schools and collecting publicly
available datasets of children's search behavior, vocabulary lists, popular
websites for kids, and other resources that can inform models and algorithms
tuned to children's search. The second phase involves designing and developing
an initial version of CAST that includes methods to support query formulation,
spelling, and navigating ontologies in order to help children better express
their search needs, along with tools such as enhanced result snippets for
evaluating the quality and relevance of results. The third phase will focus on
evaluating both individual components and overall system quality; this includes
using quantitative analysis of observable behaviors in the system such as
queries, session lengths, and returned result quality as well as direct testing
with children and teachers to evaluate their perceptions of the system's
usability and their willingness to use it going forward. The team will use the
evaluations to iteratively measure both individual components and the overall
system, which will be deployed at a number of public libraries in the project
team's home state for use by children outside of the research
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.