* 1763399
* SHF: Medium: DeepSEA: A Language for Programming and Synthesizing Certified Software
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 816,000.00

Building certifiably reliable and secure software is one of the grand challenges
facing today's computing community. Despite the extensive progress in
programming languages in the past few decades, today's mainstream operating
systems and hypervisors are still written in C-like low-level languages. There
seems to be an inherent conflict between high-level formal reasoning and low-
level systems programming: the former relies on a rich theory at a high
abstraction level while the latter must manipulate and manage low-level effects
and hardware resources. The chief novelties of this project are (1) to design
and implement a new language (named DeepSEA) that can be used to tackle this
inherent conflict and directly program and synthesize certified software, and
(2) to develop a DeepSEA toolchain and apply it to build certified OS kernels
and Ethereum-style smart contracts. The project's impacts are demonstrated in
multiple ways. The technology for building certified software will have a
profound impact on the software industry and the society in general; it will
dramatically improve the reliability and security of many key components in the
world's critical infrastructure. The project would catalyze a change in the way
computing science is taught at U.S. universities, by pushing new courses on
formal methods into the existing curriculum; it would broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups and give U.S. students a unique combination of
technical training and international experience in this cutting-edge
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certified programming is a unique challenge for
language design: both operating systems and smart contracts are inherently low-
level and effectful, while software verification requires high-level
abstractions and pure functions. Recent projects on OS kernel verification
required writing (manually) the actual kernel in a C-like language and a formal
specification of the kernel in a proof-assistant language; a large part of the
verification effort is then spent on showing that the implementation indeed
satisfies the specification. DeepSEA bridges this chasm automatically---from a
single input program, one can derive the relation between abstract data types
and bytes, and between functional specification and concrete implementation.
Instead of having to choose between high- and low-level languages, DeepSEA can
have the best of both. The DeepSEA language provides native support for layered
specification and abstraction refinement, full equational reasoning, a
functional model of effects (including concurrency), and effect encapsulation
and composition: consequently it directly supports certified programming at
multiple abstraction levels. Using DeepSEA, a programmer need only to write the
formal specification of a desirable system; then the DeepSEA compiler will
automatically compile the DeepSEA program into a certified artifact consisting
of a C program (which is then compiled into assembly by the verified C compiler,
CompCert), a Coq specification, and a formal (Coq) proof that the C program
satisfies the specification. The project opens up a new space of language
designs that can directly support the development of correct-by-construction
system software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.