* 1763287
* Thermal conductivity of Deep Earth's materials studied by combined fast pulsed laser and optical spectroscopy techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2021
* USD 280,000.00

Knowledge of thermal conductivity of the Earth's mantle and core materials under
extreme conditions is important for understanding the physical and chemical
processes and their evolution in the Earth. Sustained heat transport through the
mantle is crucial for the existence and stability of the Earth's magnetic field.
The Earth's mantle dynamics depends on the rate of heat transfer by convection,
conduction, and radiation, and understanding these processes requires knowledge
on the conductive and radiative parts of thermal conductivity. The investigators
will conduct measurements of the conductive and radiative parts of thermal
conductivity at extreme conditions of pressure and temperature that are relevant
for the Earth's deep interior. The laser techniques developed in this work will
advance other fields, which benefit from knowledge of thermal conductivity under
extremes, for example various energy applications. A range of students,
including area high school students, undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates, will benefit from high-quality scientific training at
Carnegie that will be provided by participation in the cutting-edge science that
will be developed in the course of this work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will determine the thermal conductivity of the Earth's key
minerals under high pressure and high temperature conditions (up to 150 GPa and
6000 K) by using pump-probe pulsed laser techniques. To determine the lattice
thermal conductivity, they will measure the heat flux histories across the
sample using time- and spatially- resolved spectroradiometry and/or time-domain
thermoreflectance. To infer the radiative thermal conductivity, the team will
study the optical spectra of these mantle minerals in the ultraviolet-to-
infrared spectral range. They will apply the time-resolved emission and optical
broad band spectroscopy tools that they have previously developed including
pulsed white laser (supercontinuum) in combination with time-resolved
multichannel detectors (streak camera and intensified CCD). The experiments will
be performed on Fe and Fe-rich alloys, high-quality geologically relevant
samples pre-synthesized at high P-T condition in large-volume devices (e.g.
single crystals of bridgmanite), silicate and oxide melts, and planetary ices.
These high P-T experimental data will enable a direct estimate of the radiative
and conduction parts of the thermal conductivity of the Earth's mantle and core.
These measurements will elucidate complex laws which govern thermal conductivity
in the deep interior and reach sufficient accuracy to critically improve
existing planetary models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.