* 1763070
* Data-Driven Learning and Geometric Embedding for Reduction and Control of Complex Heterogeneous Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 389,013.00

Complex systems in which multiple agents (components) affect each other
dynamically are prevalent in nature and human society in different scales, such
as neurons in the brain, bees in a hive, and human beings in a social network.
Undesirable behavior of such systems, in the form of disease, economic collapse,
rumor spreading, and social unrest, has generated considerable interest in
understanding the dynamic structures of such complex networks and devising ways
to control them. Despite the abundance of data, ease of access, and advances in
data science, obtaining reliable models of such networks remains a very
challenging problem. The scale of these emerging complex systems also poses a
great difficulty. These obstacles also form a bottleneck for analyzing and
engineering the dynamic structures (e.g., synchrony and clustering) and for
controlling the collective behavior in such complex networks. This project will
develop a unified data-driven framework to investigate fundamental questions
regarding how to extract dynamics of a large-scale complex system or network
from its simulation or measurement data, and how to control this system if the
dynamics reconstruction is successful and reliable. The project will also
support new initiatives to promote interdisciplinary education for students from
traditionally underserved populations in local high schools in the city of St.
Louis, MO, through the creation of summer research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bridging systems and control theory with
concepts and methods from algebraic geometry, time-series analysis, and machine
learning, a unified data-driven framework will be established. Specifically, a
novel approach based on spectral decomposition will be developed to extract the
dynamics of a complex system and decode the topology of a complex network using
its time-series data. The properties of the reconstructed network, e.g.,
connectivity and the coupling strength of nodes, will then be utilized to
synthesize a dynamically-proximate reduced network that is tractable for
control-theoretic analysis and design. Furthermore, novel topological and
geometrical approaches will be derived to construct local and global embedding
of high-dimensional data to low-dimensional manifolds, which will reveal hidden
topological structures in large data sets and characterize transitions of flow
of the underlying dynamical system. In collaboration with researchers in biology
and chemistry, the network inference, dimensionality reduction, and control
techniques will be applied to a diverse set of complex systems from cells to
societies, for example, for decoding functional connectivity in cellular
networks and analyzing social synchronization in groups of
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.