* 1763481
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Beyond Sparsity: Refined Measures of Complexity for Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Atri Rudra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 501,428.00

Modern data science applications exploit structure in real life data using
machine learning (including deep learning) algorithms. At the core of most of
these systems are algorithms for a branch of mathematics called linear algebra.
In particular, a large portion of these algorithms utilize the fact that real
life data has properties that can be captured using certain parsimonious linear
algebraic structures. This project studies new, more powerful linear algebraic
structures and algorithms that exploit these new structures. Given the
fundamental importance of these algorithms, ideas generated from this project
are expected to be implemented in widely deployed machine learning systems. The
outreach component of this project involves (1) a technical workshop for
researchers from diverse areas and (2) outreach events for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of problems in modern data science have
been successfully characterized using a width. For example, one of the most
common widths, the rank of a matrix, has a near-ubiquitous use across many
applications. This project significantly expands the understanding of several
recently proposed widths and extracts their full potential for positive
practical outcomes. Furthermore, it contributes to the recently growing work on
beyond worst-case analysis in linear algebra, machine learning and coding
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.