* 1763109
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Tornado Loading on Low-Rise Buildings Using Computational Modeling and Tornado Simulator Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Delong Zuo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2022
* USD 243,255.00

Tornadoes are a type of severe windstorm that repeatedly have caused devastating
damage to the built environment in the United States. Low-rise buildings, in
particular, historically have been among the structures that are the most
vulnerable to tornado damage. Failures of this type of structure are often
responsible for the social and economic losses caused by tornadoes, including
the loss of life and property, as well as the interruptions to many critical
societal functions. The goal of this collaborative research at the University of
Arkansas (UARK) and Texas Tech University (TTU) is to further advance the
fundamental understanding of tornadic loading on low-rise buildings. The
outcomes of this research can be used for the assessment of building performance
in tornadoes, the design of new tornado-resistant buildings, and the development
of retrofitting strategies to improve the performance of existing buildings in
tornadoes. The research project will be integrated with educational and outreach
activities at both UARK and TTU to raise public awareness of the impact of
natural hazards, including tornadoes, on the built environment and society in
general. At UARK, students will be involved in the research through the Freshman
Engineering Program, and the George Washington Carver Research Program that
provides research internships to students from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities. At TTU, the project will provide research training for students in
the Wind Science and Engineering Ph.D. program. The research will also be
incorporated with programs such as the Severe Weather Awareness Day in Lubbock,
TX, and through partnerships with local K-12 schools and national organizations,
such as the 4-H Youth Development and Mentoring Program, to reach out to both
local and national communities. These research, educational and outreach
activities will help make U.S. communities more resilient to tornado
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the research goal, this project will
utilize a research approach that combines the complementary strengths of
physical experiments in a tornado simulator at TTU and numerical modeling based
on computational fluid dynamics (CFD) at UARK. Unlike previous experimental and
numerical studies that were conducted independently, the experiments and
computational modeling in this research will be systematically coordinated.
Customized experiments in the tornado simulator will first serve as the basis to
validate and improve the capability of the computational model in simulating
near-ground tornado-like flows and in capturing the interaction between these
flows and generic structural shapes. The validated computational model and
additional experiments in the tornado simulator will then be used to evaluate
tornado-induced forces and pressures on low-rise buildings of various envelope
configurations. Tornadoes of various structures, in terms of the swirl ratios
and the maximum mean tangential velocity to translation velocity ratio, will be
considered. The primary outcomes of this study will be in the form of pressure
and force coefficients acting on different building shapes. These coefficients,
as well as the raw data and the metadata, will be archived at both UARK and TTU
and made available to the natural hazards engineering community through the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.