* 1763297
* CHS: Medium: Drawing from Theories of Justice to Respond to Online Harassment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Clifford Lampe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 925,213.00

This award investigates how theories and models of justice can be designed into
online systems for people and technology to more effectively and productively
respond to online harassment. It develops approaches to respond to online
harassment in ways that promote perceptions of fairness of process and outcome
and reduce likelihood of future harassment by both the offender and the
community. This research will provide Internet users with theoretically-informed
strategies for responding to online offenses. It will also provide technology
companies and policymakers with guidelines for promoting civility and
inclusivity online. It will translate research results to the public through a
web-based resource for Internet users and will produce a toolbox of educational
resources that exposes students to the theories, methods, and open questions
surrounding online harassment - a widespread and socially relevant problem in
computing that has not been solved by existing systems. Currently, automated
approaches such as keyword detection are plagued by errors that have counter-
productive results, while social practices such as reporting demand exhaustive
labor from victims. Both approaches rely on a model of criminal justice that
seeks to identify and punish offenders for their offenses; however, this model
breaks down in online environments where harassers can hide behind anonymous
identities and lagging legal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will first
1) audit existing site policies and practices for responding to online
harassment and map those to theories of justice; and 2) investigate how Internet
users assess and respond to harassment based on characteristics of the site,
offender, post, and community. Then, it will propose and evaluate interventions
that 3) promote perceptions of fairness in process and outcome in response to
harassment; and 4) reduce likelihood of future harassment. Finally, it will
provide a public-facing interactive tool that 5) trains Internet users to
identify and improve their own orientations toward retribution online; and 6)
provides educational content for high school and college students to learn
theories, methods, and opportunities in the field of computing through a robust
set of case studies in online harassment. This research employs a novel and
potentially transformative vision for leveraging fundamental principles of
justice, including fairness, transparency, proportionality, and reparation, into
online interactions. This may be more effective than existing models because it
is not as dependent on the ability to enact consequences for any given user.
This project addresses numerous conceptual and technical challenges, including
how to enact fair processes and proportionate outcomes in responses to online
harassment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.