* 1763514
* CCF: Medium: Enabling Real-Time Quantitative Decision Making over Streaming Data
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

A key component of an effective Internet of Things (IoT) system is the ability
to make decisions in real-time in response to data it receives. While the exact
logic for making decisions in different applications requires domain-specific
insights, it typically relies on computing quantitative summaries of large data
streams in an efficient and incremental manner. Programming the desired logic is
challenging due to the enormous volume of data and hard constraints on available
memory and response time. This project aims to assist IoT programmers in meeting
this challenge by designing a query language with natural and high-level
constructs suitable for processing streaming data, supported by a compiler and
run-time system to facilitate deployment while meeting the constraints of
desired accuracy, memory footprint, and real-time
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of the query language draws upon
insights from two distinct paradigms: extensions of relational query languages
for handling streaming data, and state-based languages for runtime monitoring
and synchronous programming. The novel integration of linguistic constructs
allows the programmer to impart input data stream a logical hierarchical
structure and also employ relational constructs to partition the input data by
keys and to merge data streams from different sensors. While theory of
approximation and streaming algorithms allows exploration of trade-offs among
language features, accuracy, and processing time during compilation, distributed
platforms such as Apache Storm are used for high performance processing. Two
application domains, device monitoring for physiological patient data and
dynamic monitoring of network traffic for anomalies, are used for experimental
evaluation. A course module on predictable real-time decision making is being
developed, and can be used in an undergraduate course on data science, in
graduate courses on database systems and cyber-physical systems, in summer
schools, and as tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.