* 1763128
* 4D Characterization of Damage in Interconnects:  Experiment and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kumar Ankit, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2022
* USD 527,194.00

With a continuous downscaling of very large-scale integrated circuits, metallic
conductors or interconnects are subject to increasingly high current densities.
However, a sufficiently large electric current density can trigger atomic
diffusion, known as electromigration (EM), leading to the generation of small
defects, ultimately causing circuit failure. Current safety measures adopted in
the electronics industry to mitigate EM-induced damage are unreliable, as they
are typically based on limited insights provided by two-dimensional imaging of
the microstructural degradation process. For complete understanding of the
process, a full three-dimensional image of the interconnects is needed, combined
with the fourth dimension of time, to understand the degradation process as it
proceeds. To achieve this "four-dimensional" (4D) imaging, advanced x-ray
tomography is combined with computational simulations of the degradation
process. This award supports research to apply this unique 4D imaging to
determine the fundamental mechanisms of EM-mediated damage mechanisms in Pb-free
interconnects and solder materials used in integrated circuits where high
current densities are prevalent. New knowledge gained from this study will guide
future strategies aimed at mitigating the EM-induced failure of miniaturized
circuits used in advanced microprocessors. The new knowledge has broad
application in the microelectronics industry, with substantial economic
implications. Research in this project will enhance materials education via the
creation of material-microstructure simulation and visualization software, and
create public awareness through the launch of a new website to expose the
complexity of 3D microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research
project is to devise an integrated experimental and computational approach to
achieve a fundamental understanding of the underlying mechanisms that accompany
microstructural degradation in Sn- and In-based, Pb-free interconnects and
solders. The investigators will utilize real-time 4D X-ray imaging, diffraction
contrast tomography, and phase-field modeling to predict the onset and growth of
EM-mediated defect patterns in multiphase, multicomponent electronic materials.
The following challenges will be addressed: (1) Accelerated failure testing and
4D (3 spatial dimensions and time) in-situ characterization of microdefect
evolution under EM conditions (2) Formulating phase-field models for large-scale
3D simulations of defect pattern formation in BCT Sn-crystals that exhibit
anisotropic diffusion and incorporating the multiphysics of Joule heating, back-
stress, and thermomigration, and (3) Validating the phase-field model using the
in-situ 4D datasets obtained from accelerated EM-failure tests by starting from
the same initial state. The new knowledge to be gained from this work will
enhance current capabilities to predict the onset of EM damage and at the same
time enable new strategies for controlling EM-mediated failure of solders and
interconnects, efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.