* 1763966
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Designing Virtual Worlds for Children - A Developmental Study of How Children Act, Perceive, and Reason Spatially
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* John Rieser, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 707,922.00

Virtual environments can revolutionize how we inform young people's thinking
about 3 dimensional (3D) objects, which is known as spatial reasoning. Spatial
reasoning and thinking are fundamental components of success in STEM fields and
critically important to our nation's future success. Moreover, there is a
positive effect of action or "learning-by-doing" in STEM classrooms. Virtual
environments are ideal for promoting action-based learning because of their
flexibility in creating 3D, immersive, accessible, and interactive spaces that
can simulate many contexts across a spectrum of skills in spatial reasoning,
from simple to complex. Previously, virtual environment technology was not
easily usable by children at critical ages for the development of spatial
reasoning. This team, consisting of computer scientists and cognitive
scientists, will develop a comprehensive understanding of how children perceive
and act in virtual environments, and how their spatial reasoning capabilities
can be understood and applied in the real world. Using the results of this work,
designers of virtual environments should be able to effectively implement
technologies that provide learning-by-doing and harness the positive effects of
action on cognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of STEM learning relies on
spatial thinking, and virtual environments provide a natural tool to facilitate
such learning. Children are a key group of STEM learners, but researchers have
only begun to investigate their spatial perception and reasoning in immersive
virtual spaces due to previous inaccessibility of the technology. The team's
research program will develop a basis for understanding how children perceive,
act, and reason about space in immersive virtual environments. The team will
explore how both locomotion and feedback from the virtual environment in the
form of self-avatars impact perception-action and spatial learning in children.
In these endeavors, we will examine individual differences among groups of
children based on factors such as age, gender, and characterizations of spatial
abilities. These differences will be analyzed to derive actionable
recommendations on how to design virtual environments and customize active
learning methods to best benefit children at different development
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.