* 1763918
* SHF: Compute Caches: Opportunistic Parallelism in General Purpose Processors at Extreme Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Computer designers have traditionally separated the role of storage and compute
units. Memories and caches stored data. Processors' logic units computed them.
It is not obvious that this separation is needed. A human brain does not
separate the two so distinctly. This project addresses this fundamental question
regarding the role of caches. Caches are used in almost all modern processors.
They occupy a large fraction (over 70%) of the computer chip area. Latest
Intel's server class Xeon processor, for instance, devotes several tens of
megabytes just for its last-level cache. By avoiding movement of data in and out
of memory arrays, this project will demonstrate the efficiency of compute
caches, across a broad range of data-intensive applications that span several
domains: cognitive computing, data analytics, security and graphs, and save vast
amounts of energy spent in shuffling data between compute and memory units in
modern computing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel
SRAM array designs for supporting a rich set of operation types and address
various architectural challenges that arise in integrating highly parallel
compute caches with a general-purpose host processor. Until today, caches have
served only as an intermediate low-latency storage unit. This project directly
challenges this conventional design, and imposes a dual responsibility on
caches: store and compute data. The key advantage of this approach is that it
allows data stored across hundreds of memory arrays in caches to be operated on
concurrently. The end result is that memory arrays morph into massive vector
compute units that are potentially one to two orders of magnitude wider than a
modern graphics processors (GPUs) vector units. This project considers
vertically integrated solutions that cut across the computing stack: circuits,
architecture, compilers, to applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.