* 1763761
* SHF: Medium: Time Based Deep Neural Networks: An Integrated Hardware-Software Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Qi Zhao, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Recent advancements in deep learning hardware and algorithms are providing
computers with unprecedented levels of human-like intelligence for applications
such as self-driving cars, patient diagnosis and treatment, speech processing,
strategy games, and education. Traditional deep learning algorithms rely on
powerful computers tethered to the cloud which incurs a large communication
overhead, requires extensive computing resources, and compromises privacy and
security. There is a strong consensus among experts that the next frontier in
deep learning will be highly-efficient neural network processors running on
mobile platforms. This project aims at developing a compact and low power
alternative to conventional deep learning computing hardware, specifically
targeted for edge devices. The proposed approach is based on a novel computing
concept called time-based circuits, which can deliver a similar level of
inference performance at only a fraction of the power consumption compared to
traditional methods. Throughout the project, the investigators will consider
transferring the new neural network computing methods to industry. The new time-
based deep learning computation methods will be incorporated into the graduate
and undergraduate curricula, as well as K-12 outreach activities, of the
electrical engineering and computer science departments at the University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on both hardware and
software techniques for enabling deep learning applications on resource-
constrained mobile platforms. On the hardware side, the team will demonstrate a
prototype low-power deep neural network processor where internal operations such
as convolution, pooling, and activation functions are performed entirely in the
time domain. On the software side, the team will develop pruning, approximation,
and hybrid approaches that can effectively reduce the complexity of deep neural
networks with minimal impact on the overall inference accuracy. A unique aspect
of this project is the continual interaction between the hardware and software
groups to deliver the first fully time-based deep neural network engine targeted
for edge devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.