* 1763503
* CSR: Medium: Performant Architecturally Diverse Systems via Aspect-oriented Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeremy Buhler, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,251,075.00

Architecturally diverse computers are systems that incorporate hardware
accelerators such as graphics engines, and reconfigurable logic to achieve some
tangible benefits in terms improved performance, and decreased power are
difficult to program. This project seeks to dramatically improve the
programmability of architecturally diverse computers by enabling them to tune
themselves, freeing the application developer to focus on correctness issues
rather than performance issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be accomplished
by using aspect-oriented programming techniques to expose tuning knobs that have
direct impact on the benefit of interest, notably, performance or power
consumption. Understanding the impact of these tuning knobs will be achieved
using queueing network models which are automatically derived from the
application's specification. The queueing models will be used to guide an
automated control process that seeks to maximize the benefit of interest by
adjusting the tuning knobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize a
number of computational science applications as test cases, providing benefits
to both of the computational biology and data science communities. Both graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and several
university-level programs will be used to help attract members of
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relevant data, code, and
other supplementary materials will be placed in the university library's
permanent repository at https://openscholarship.wustl.edu/data/. This repository
will provide persistent, curated access to both code and data, including support
for DOIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.