* 1763906
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Continuous Integration Testing for the Open-Source Ecosystem
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Lingming Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 362,997.00

Continuous integration (CI) is an important software development activity that
aims to improve software development by automating software compilation and
regression testing. Recent studies report that CI helps developers deploy faster
and reduce development cost. Given these success stories, CI has attracted
rapidly increasing interest and adoption, e.g., Travis CI, the currently most
popular CI service, is used by over 300,000 GitHub projects. Despite the success
of CI, developers report they would like to see improvements in CI. First, they
want to faster obtain regression test results. Second, they want better handling
of so-called flaky tests, which are regression tests that can non-
deterministically pass or fail, and whose failures negatively affect developer's
productivity. Third, developers report that CI builds do not provide sufficient
debugging assistance for reasoning about failed regression tests. While
regression testing has been studied for over three decades, it has not been
studied in the context of CI until recently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
substantially improve regression testing in CI, the PIs propose to develop novel
techniques and tools that address three important challenges: (1) test selection
to speed up regression testing and the development cycle, (2) test reliability
to mitigate the problems that flaky tests introduce, and (3) debugging
assistance to ease the effort of diagnosing and fixing the true and flaky
regression test failures. The PIs plan to develop techniques and tools based on
a mix of static and dynamic program analyses, leveraging not only information
from two project revisions (as traditional in regression testing) but also from
all historical build and testing information available in CI testing. The PIs
plan to embody their techniques in a tool-set and evaluate them extensively on
open-source projects and in industrial collaborations. The broader impacts of
enhancing continuous integration testing are to allow software developers to
faster build higher quality software, which can benefit our modern society that
greatly depends on software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.