* 1763309
* NeTS: Collaborative Research: Assessing the Feasibility of Programming the Ambient Wireless Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Kyle Jamieson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 191,278.00

Wireless connectivity has become an indispensable utility in everyday life. Far
beyond providing basic communications, wireless infrastructure comprises the
backbone of the control and management functions of many Internet of Things
(IoT) ecosystems, ranging from smart home solutions to autonomous vehicles.
Therefore, countless efforts have been made to ensure the efficiency and
reliability of such critical infrastructure. Against this backdrop, this project
follows the same overarching theme of improving wireless infrastructure towards
faster and seamless connectivity. From a scientific perspective, the project
seeks to investigate the feasibility of fundamentally transforming the technical
approach to wireless network design by shifting the focus from the data networks
themselves to the ambient environment. From an industrial perspective, the
project opens the way for the contribution of techniques to both improve
cellular network link quality and enable co-existence of Wi-Fi technologies in
dense urban deployments, where interference limits their effectiveness. From an
educational perspective, the project has the potential to change the way
academia teaches the topic of wireless communications and the wireless channel
to undergraduate students and graduate students alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
traditional approach to optimizing wireless networks revolves around the
wireless endpoints, i.e., the transmitters and the receivers, and takes the
wireless channel as a hard constraint, invoking a multitude of solutions to
fully utilize that channel. This project will instead focus on whether it is
feasible to optimize the ambient wireless environment. Instead of changing the
ways in which endpoints behave, the project will explore ways of changing the
perceived channel along the wireless link to create more favorable conditions
for wireless communication. Specifically, the team will explore how to
instrument the wireless environment with small wireless elements to effect
changes in the wireless channel that a wireless receiver measures from a
wireless sender. A substrate comprising these elements is then combined with a
control infrastructure that measures the channels between wireless senders and
receivers in real time, and actuates the element substrate in order to effect
channel variations. As a proof of concept, the team will explore using this
design to improve individual links as well as reduce interference between
concurrent links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.