* 1763312
* Research: Collaborative Research: Changing the Conversation with Humanitarian Engineering Context
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Cristina Poleacovschi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2020
* USD 20,280.00

Undergraduate students with a strong engineering identity define themselves as
engineers, feel that they belong in engineering, feel positively about
engineering and engineers, and feel that others feel positively about
engineering and engineers. Engineering identity is important because there is
evidence that a lack of identification with engineering motivates students to
leave the discipline despite demonstrated technical skills. This issue
differentially impacts female students, who are more likely to perceive an
identity mismatch between themselves and engineering. This is a nationally
important problem for a variety of reasons, including strong industrial demand
for engineers, research that indicates diverse teams produce more creative
results, and concerns of social justice. This research tests the potential of
humanitarian context to address this perceived identity mismatch. Humanitarian
engineering is distinguished by its focus on vulnerable or otherwise underserved
populations; for example, this could include infrastructure design and
construction in disaster recovery or international development contexts. There
is limited evidence that humanitarian issues disproportionately motivate female
students to persist in engineering. As such, this research empirically measures
whether or not humanitarian context supports engineering identity formation in
undergraduate students, paying particular attention to gender. If justified by
the research results, this project will create and widely disseminate an open
source textbook companion for construction engineering educators at universities
nationwide. This textbook companion will frame disciplinary content in
humanitarian context, and will make this curricular innovation available
nationwide.

In this research, 650 undergraduate engineering students will experience
technical engineering content framed by humanitarian, industrial, or no context.
Pre- and post-tests of the students' engineering identity will be measured by
existing, validated survey tools, and will be complimented by qualitative data
from Describe an Engineer activities and reflection activities intended to help
students build meaning from the research experience. These data will be
collected through in person, online, and course based interventions. This
research will build new theory, bridging the engineering education literatures
in context, community engagement/service learning, and engineering identity. By
reframing engineering content in terms of humanitarian outcomes, we are
providing students with an alternate theorization of the nature of - or, the
identity of - engineers and engineering work. This may enable us to increase the
number of students who can identify with engineering and thereby open the
gateway of engineering to a wider and more diverse population. Ultimately, by
providing empirical evidence of the impact of humanitarian context in
engineering pedagogy, this research is a step towards a more inclusive
engineering curriculum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.