* 1763896
* CIF: Medium: Multi-Agent Consensus Equilibrium: Modular Methods for Integrating Disparate Sources of Expertise
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Charles Bouman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,216,000.00

Over the past decade, two major trends have reshaped data science: (i) a growing
tidal wave of imaging and sensing devices and (ii) the rapid adoption of break-
through machine learning technologies. From autonomous vehicles to medical
devices, the ability to collect and analyze large quantities of data is changing
the world. The goal of this research project is to create a new mathematical and
computational framework for integrating distributed and multimodal sensor data
into multiple types of emerging models in data science and machine learning so
as to extract more information from data. The project team includes researchers
from diverse disciplines who will address problems ranging from physical science
and medicine to consumer imaging and industrial inspection. The research will
result in theories, algorithms, and open software that can be used to integrate
information from heterogeneous sensing systems to estimate and reconstruct
signals and images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework for model-data
integration is based on a new theory of Multi-Agent Consensus Equilibrium
(MACE). MACE allows for modular integration of multi-modal physical sensor
information with information derived from data science models. At the core of
this approach is the computational solution of the consensus equilibrium
equations. These equations balance distributed sensor information with prior
knowledge provided by machine learning models. The MACE framework is a
generalization of the more traditional Bayesian or regularized inverse approach,
but it allows for the use of non-traditional data science models such as deep
convolutional neural networks in the solution of sensing and imaging problems.
This project's contributions are in four areas: Thrust 1: Foundational
Theoretical Methods; Thrust 2: Robust Sensor and Data Model Integration; Thrust
3: Multimodal and Networked MACE; and Thrust 4: Automated Experimentation. The
project also includes integrated educational activities, engaging both graduate
and undergraduate students in this research, as well as the development of new
courses on consensus equilibrium and nonlinear optical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.