* 1763176
* Quantitative nonlinear time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) for large systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Neuhauser at the University of California, Los
Angeles, is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the Chemistry Division to explore
electron motion in nanomaterials in response to intense laser irradiation. This
is an interesting and complex regime where new phenomena are emerging but it
remains largely unexplored since accurate theoretical and computational methods
for the description of excited states can only be applied to small systems. Dr.
Neuhauser and coworkers are developing new methods which incorporate the
necessary quantum mechanical effects at moderate computational costs. A novel
computational framework is being developed that merges quantum chemistry,
condensed matter physics and applied mathematics through a probabilistic
approach to the problem. Specific efforts are being made to involve
undergraduate and high school students, and the project emphasizes leadership
opportunities for graduate students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain
the fundamental physical characteristics of complex systems, a fully ab-initio
quantum description is necessary. The most suitable approach is to employ real
time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory (TDDFT) with long-range exact
exchange which approximates quasiparticle energies and includes attractive
electron-hole interactions. The latter are necessary to account for excitonic
effects and the redistribution of spectral weight in absorption cross sections.
However, conventional implementations severely limit the maximum size of the
system that can be treated using TDDFT with exact exchange. The project develops
a stochastic TDDFT method which simulates the exchange interaction
stochastically, i.e., summations over all occupied states are replaced by random
sampling of the occupied Hilbert subspace, while the remaining parts of the
description can be simulated traditionally. This makes it possible to treat
systems with thousands of atoms and calculate the nonlinear response for systems
that could not be handled previously. Description of the optical response of
highly inhomogeneous systems, e.g., defect states, is being treated with a new
Embedded Stochastic TDDFT, which combines stochastic and deterministic TDDFT for
different regions of space. Mentoring of students ranging from high school to
postdoctoral status is provided through this work, and the software developed is
being made available to the wider community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.