* 1763336
* Structure Constants for Bases of the Polynomial Ring
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sami Assaf, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Schubert calculus began around 1879 with Herman Schubert asking, and in special
cases answering, enumerative questions in geometry. For example, how many points
in the plane meet two given lines simultaneously or how many lines in space meet
four given lines? To answer the latter, Schubert considered the case where the
first line intersects the second and the third intersects the fourth, in which
case the answer is 2 (the line connecting the two points of intersection and the
line of intersection of the two planes spanned by the two pairs of intersecting
lines). He then asserted, by his principle of conservation of number, that the
general answer, if finite, must also be 2. David Hilbert, in his 15th problem
for the twentieth century, set out the task of making rigorous Schubert's
principle of conservation of number. Cohomology resolved this and lead us to
modern Schubert calculus and intersection theory, which has ramifications in
geometry, topology, combinatorics, and even plays a central role in string
theory. Yet today, Schubert's original question remains unanswered: how can one
effectively compute intersection numbers for linear
subspaces?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lascoux and Schutzenberger in 1985 defined
polynomial representatives for the Schubert classes in the cohomology ring of
the complete flag variety. These Schubert polynomials give explicit polynomial
representations of the Schubert classes whose structure constants enumerate
flags (sequences of nested linear subspaces) in a suitable triple intersection
of Schubert varieties, which are precisely the nonnegative integers Schubert
calculus aims to compute. The principal investigator will lift powerful tools
and techniques from symmetric function theory to the full polynomial ring and
apply them to Schubert polynomials with the ultimate goal of finding a
combinatorial formula for these intersection numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.