* 1763964
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative: Reliable Underwater Acoustic Video Transmission Towards Human-Robot Dynamic Interaction
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Francisco Diez-Garias, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2022
* USD 523,999.00

In the past decade underwater communications have enabled a wide range of
applications; there are, however, novel underwater monitoring applications and
systems based on human-robot dynamic interaction that require real-time
multimedia acquisition and classification. Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) are
key instruments to support such interactive applications as they can capture
multimedia data from places where humans cannot easily/safely go; however,
underwater vehicles are often tethered to the supporting ship by a fiber cable
or have to rise periodically to the surface to communicate with a remote station
via Radio Frequency (RF) waves, which constrains the mission. Wireless acoustic
communication is the typical physical-layer technology for underwater
communication; however, video transmissions via acoustic waves are hard to
accomplish as the acoustic waves suffer from attenuation, limited bandwidth,
Doppler spreading, high propagation delay, high bit error rate, and time-varying
channel. For these reasons, state-of-the-art acoustic communication solutions
are still mostly focusing on enabling delay-tolerant, low-bandwidth/low-data-
rate scalar data transmission or at best low-quality/low-resolution multimedia
streaming in the order of few tens of Kbps. Hence, the objectives of this
research program are: (1) To design novel communication solutions for robust,
reliable, and high-data rate underwater multimedia streaming on the order of
hundreds of Kilobits per second (Kbps); (2) To investigate the problem of
integrating communication methods available in multiple environments on an
innovative software-defined testbed architecture integrating
Microelectromechanical (MEMS)-based Acoustic Vector Sensors (AVSs) that will
enable processing-intensive physical-layer functionalities as software-defined,
but executed in hardware that can be reconfigured in real time by the user based
on the Quality of Experience (QoE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploiting multiple-
antenna arrays and AVSs, in Task 1 a novel physical-layer solution will be
proposed to boost the data rate for underwater acoustic transmission so as to
transfer high-resolution video underwater. By following a novel probabilistic
approach, an efficient Medium Access Control (MAC) layer solution will be
designed to share reliably the space among the steered vehicles by using AVSs so
as to reduce the acoustic interference. The quality of multimedia delivery will
be improved by applying a robust closed-loop hybrid Automatic Repeat Request
(ARQ) coding technique based on the estimated angles of arrivals using AVSs. In
Task 2, the SEANet G2 acoustic networking platform will be modified to
investigate the design and fabrication of a new class of miniaturized and
integrated AVS arrays based on the Aluminum Nitride (AlN) piezoelectric MEMS
technology. Finally, in Task 3, scenarios will be defined to validate the ideas
proposed in Task 1 using the Naviator, AVSs, and SEANet testbed; Task 2 will be
evaluated by integrating SEANet to a buoy and the Naviator along with AVSs to
build a testbed for conducting video transmission experiments. Tasks 1 and 2
will be also integrated by comparing the pros and cons of MEMs AVSs with
Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) AVSs and by evaluating the semi-autonomous
human-in-the-loop features to enhance user QoE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.