* 1763509
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Activity Recognition for Reducing Delays in Fast-Response Teamwork
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Aleksandra Sarcevic, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 293,974.00

Human performance in time-critical teamwork settings relies on appropriate and
timely task completion. Time perception, a critical cognitive function that
influences team performance, is often skewed in these settings and is impacted
by cognitive workload. This project will address timeliness errors by
automatically and unobtrusively modeling and tracking cross-disciplinary task
performance through analysis of verbal communication and the use of information
artifacts. The resulting model will be used to display alerts about timeliness
of critical tasks in a way that supports team members' information needs without
increasing their cognitive workload. The benefits and costs of this approach
will be evaluated in a simulation setting, measuring its impact on team
performance and overall goal accomplishment, as well as its impact on workload
and distraction. The application domain for this research is trauma
resuscitation, the early evaluation and management of injured patients in the
emergency department; the goal is for increased temporal awareness to improve
both trauma team efficiency and patient outcomes, saving money and lives.
Further, the project will provide opportunities for interdisciplinary education
involving students from computer science and medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop techniques for monitoring the
progress of teamwork and displaying alerts about timeliness of critical tasks.
The key system components will include recognizing activities, modeling process
deviations and delays, and displaying process information in a way that does not
divert attention from the work. Novel techniques for activity recognition in
fast-paced and crowded collaborative settings will be based on passive RFID,
speech recognition, and computer vision, supplemented by other sensors and
digital devices. The proposed research will develop (1) temporal models of
verbal communication and digital document interaction during complex activities
in fast-paced teamwork for the purpose of automatic activity recognition; (2)
approaches for real-time recognition of over a hundred different activities in
the presence of up to a thousand RFID tags; and (3) approaches for displaying
delay information for rapid assimilation under high task load that learn from
workers' responses to improve their usefulness to the team. Together, the work
will provide building blocks for computerized support of teams not just in the
trauma domain, but in other domains with complex, interleaved tasks such as
surgery, traffic control, and disaster management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.