* 1763929
* CSR: Collaborative Research: Mobile Elastic Edge Clouds for Scalable, Low-Latency Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2022
* USD 120,614.00

Smart wearables, the Internet of Things, and new application types, such as
augmented reality promise to revolutionize how people interact with technology
in their daily lives. While embedded and smart devices have growing
capabilities, they still rely on a backend cloud infrastructure to provide
additional storage and computational capacity. However, these new application
types have characteristics such as strict performance requirements and frequent
mobility that are ill suited for today's centralized clouds. This project will
develop new system architectures that will increase the scalability, elasticity,
and mobility of "edge" applications that connect to mobile
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this end, the project will explore the
communication and system architectures needed to effectively support edge cloud
services. The project will leverage advances in network function virtualization
to provide high performance networking, and will explore the communication and
Operating System primitives needed to support scalable middleboxes and
application endpoints. Using this platform as a base, the project will design
models that capture the new challenges inherent in mobile edge cloud workloads.
These models will be used to guide elastic scaling
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are increasingly reliant on mobile computing
devices to guide our cars, help us keep in touch with others, gather data of our
surroundings, and more. The mobile elastic edge cloud platform being developed
in this project will help improve the scalability, agility, and efficiency of
edge clouds, allowing them to support new types of performance critical
applications. The researchers will engage a broad range of students from the
undergraduate to Ph.D. levels in the educational and research activities of this
grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be a project website
(http://faculty.cs.gwu.edu/timwood/projects/me2c) that includes all of the
artifacts produced throughout the project as well as links to key related
technologies and papers. The web repository will include all of the source code
developed during the course of the project, documentation with guidance to
adopters on using the software, and links to all the papers published and
technical reports that are released publicly. The project web page will be
maintained for a period of five years after the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.