* 1763681
* SHF: Medium: Embracing Architectural Heterogeneity through Hardware-Software Co-design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The last decade has witnessed a proliferation of heterogeneity across diverse
application domains spanning from high-end datacenters to low-cost embedded
systems, because they are capable of better performance and energy efficiency
compared to homogeneous multicore architectures. These systems typically include
a subset of CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs and ASICs as compute engines and hence, present
unique programming/resource management challenges. However, the lack of required
compiler and runtime support, present a barrier to the widespread adoption of
heterogeneous systems. Furthermore, the design of the underlying heterogeneous
architecture in terms of number and placement of various compute engines, memory
subsystems and interconnects for a given area/power budget to satiate various
application demands, is not fully explored. Therefore, it is imperative to
investigate the entire system stack in a cohesive manner spanning applications,
system software and underlying hardware for providing the required support for
efficient application executions. Thus, the main goal of this research project
is to enable dynamic mapping of an application to different computing engines
for improving performance/power efficiency and system utilization. The outcomes
of this project are poised to change the way the programmers and users perceive
heterogeneity and interact with it. The research on heterogeneous computing will
be integrated with the educational activities and student training at Penn State
for nurturing the future workforce in science and engineering, with active
participation of female graduate students and undergraduates (Honors) students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project consists four tasks. Task-I aims at
conducting a profile-based workload characterization for various application
domains including deep learning, cloud computing and high-performance computing
on diverse hardware platforms to understand their performance/power utility.
This will be used to develop a machine-learning (ML) based model for initial
assignment of tasks to different compute engines. Task-II is aimed at exploring
compiler/programming support to transform application code into suitable device-
agnostic 'codelets', that serve as the granularity for seamless scheduling and
execution across different hardware units. Task-III investigates runtime support
to optimally schedule and seamlessly move the codelets across the hardware units
for improving system performance. Finally, Task-IV explores design of
heterogeneous platforms by analyzing issues such as degree of heterogeneity,
placement and integration of various computing engines on a chip and across
chips, the underlying communication support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.