* 1763795
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Predictive Modeling for Next-generation Heterogeneous System Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 354,350.00

With semiconductor scaling reaching physical limits, performance and power
consumption are ever more critical aspects in the design of emerging computer
systems. Fast and accurate design models and tools are critical to support
future computer system designers in evaluating design options before they can be
built. Traditional simulation-based or analytical models are often too slow or
inaccurate to effectively support design processes. This project instead
develops novel machine learning-based, predictive methodologies to rapidly
estimate the performance and power consumption of future generation products at
early design stages using observations obtained on commercially available
silicon today. Such techniques will allow efficient design cycles ensuring that
the next-generation computing infrastructure meets the needs and expectations of
consumers and continues to meet them over the product lifecycle. Along with
research activities, course material on predictive modeling will be integrated
into the university courses taught by the investigators, technology will be
transferred to industrial partners through training and tutorials, and tools and
models developed in this project will be released as open source software. In
addition to training of graduate students, emphasis will be paid to
undergraduate student training, towards including federally recognized under-
represented groups, training of STEM teachers, and to run summer code camps to
increase access for middle school and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically investigates use of advanced
machine learning techniques for prediction of power and performance of any
machine based on hardware-dependent and independent application characteristics
obtained by running on any existing other machine, focusing on large-scale data
center and accelerator technologies, namely multi-core CPUs, GPUs and FPGAs.
Specific research tasks include the investigation of: (1) fast and accurate
models for system designers and system programmers to perform rapid, early
hardware and software design space exploration; (2) fast online prediction
models that can be integrated into modern operating systems and virtual machine;
and (3) fast yet accurate model training procedures that can create new
predictive models while applications run. This research is expected to also
allow semiconductor companies to better understand the scenarios under which
predictive modeling is sufficiently accurate to be deployed during an industrial
design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.