* 1763198
* Altering the Course of Quantum Dynamics Phenomena
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Herschel Rabitz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Professor Herschel Rabitz of Princeton University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Division
of Chemistry. The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms - A program co-
funds the proposal. Rabitz seeks to understand the fundamental principles of
using tailored laser fields to control phenomena at the molecular scale.
Starting in the latter half of the 20th Century and accelerating to the present
time, there is an increasing interest in using modern laser technology to
directly manipulate the motion of atoms and molecules. Many experiments have
demonstrated the feasibility of this concept. Rabitz's research seeks a
fundamental understanding for why such experiments are successful. This
understanding helps to provide a roadmap for performing new classes of laser
experiments in the future. This roadmap includes the goal of achieving new
laser-driven atomic and molecular scale transformations which are not achievable
by any other means. Furthermore, Rabitz's research findings are expected to be
applicable to many domains of science where controlled manipulation is required
to achieve the desired outcome, even without the aid of lasers, including in the
chemical and biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The control of quantum
phenomena entails interceding in the normal evolution of atomic and molecular
dynamical events generally through the introduction of external fields. Quite
surprisingly, finding optimal fields for this purpose is proving to be far
easier than anticipated, both in simulations and in the laboratory. Professor
Herschel Rabitz undertakes fundamental research to understand the origins of
this behavior. To address this matter at the most basic level, Rabitz explores
the structure of the control landscape, which is the physical observable as a
function of the control variables. The most fundamental circumstance will
receive special attention, which the landscape associated with one quantum
system controlling another. Rabitz will employ a family of theoretical and
computational tools to analyze the landscape's topology, aiming to identify the
basic rules for controlling quantum phenomena. Part of his effort includes the
development of special techniques to reveal the mechanisms by which control is
achieved. The outcome of Rabitz's research is expected to be a deeper
understanding of controlled quantum phenomena along with specific guidance
towards promising future experimental directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.