* 1763524
* CSR: Medium: Systems Abstractions for Self-Powered Smart Textiles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Trisha Andrew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,325,062.00

An exciting new direction for ubiquitous computing is the ability to weave
sensors and user interface elements directly into textiles. Recent advances have
demonstrated several capabilities including energy harvesting, sensing,
communication, and interaction using threads coated with different polymers. But
the design of smart textiles that integrate these different elements presents
challenges in hardware design, software architecture, and in the design of
adaptive algorithms that can deal with energy variability. The project objective
is to develop the systems principles and building blocks to enable such self-
powered textile-based sensing applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to design a self-powered, textile-based whole body sensing and interaction
system that is burden-free and non-intrusive. We describe a vertically
integrated stack including thread-level optimizations, hardware architecture
design, and run-time systems to enable our vision. The project has four thrusts:
(a) methods to optimize textile-based energy harvesting and sensing; (b) system
architecture for modular harvesting-based textiles; (c) runtime systems for
self-powered textiles; and (d) application-driven evaluation and
characterization in the context of elder care. This work provides the
foundations for future smart textiles that can enable truly ubiquitous smart
computing and sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling technologies in our
work will impact a range of applications including human computer interactions,
health and wellness, sports analytics, and manufacturing. The project will
provide mentoring and internship opportunities for students at the Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) Starter Academy at Springfield Technical
Community College to fortify the number of underrepresented students in
chemistry and computing. This project will also support an annual workshop for
middle school girls in partnership with Girls Inc. of Holyoke, MA; these
workshops have been held for several years, and will continue with new modules
based on the work on this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data produced as a
result of this project, including trace data, software code, simulation data,
and publications, will be made publicly available at the project repository:
http://sensors.cs.umass.edu/projects/textile/. The data and the resulting
research outputs will be maintained using appropriate methods for at least five
years after the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.