* 1763288
* Research:  Effects of Perceived Bias on Engineering Identity Development in the  Graduate Student Community
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mary Wyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,860.00

This project seeks to address the high level of attrition from engineering
graduate programs. Engineering identity, or how one perceives oneself as an
engineer, is strongly tied to persistence in engineering training and practice.
The three-year research effort will uncover how graduate engineering students
perceive experiences of bias and the effect of perceived bias on their
engineering identity. This research will help engineering educators understand
the ways that perceived bias impacts engineering identity development and
measure perceived bias in a large national sample of engineering graduate
students. The project will advance the understanding of the obstacles that
confront those with the talent and ability to become engineering professionals.
It also aims to recognize the key role that engineering graduate education can
play in advancing research and theory about how graduate students perceive
biases and the ways in which they do (or do not) develop resiliency that buffers
their negative experiences. The focus on graduate-level engineering education
promises to enrich a general understanding of how experiences with bias may
suppress and divert career aspirations, while at the same time providing insight
into the specific circumstances of advanced training in engineering professions
for those who are determined to endure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research on
engineering identity, recruitment, retention, and bias has focused on
undergraduate students, leaving little empirical evidence for understanding
graduate experiences. In addition, bias research studies STEM fields
collectively, whereas we plan to focus specifically on engineering and
individual disciplines within engineering. The project is divided into three
phases of research, which will: (1) qualitatively explore the lived experiences
of minority graduate engineering students' perceived bias and its effect on
engineering identity development, via interviews; (2) quantitatively measure the
perceived bias experiences and engineering identity of engineering graduate
students via a national survey; and (3) qualitatively evaluate the
interpretations of data from previous phases and revisit initial participants'
experiences of perceived bias using interviews and participant video diary
accounts. These three phases of research will be guided by the following
research questions: RQ1. How do engineering graduate students conceptualize
their own identities, perceive their identities as minority, and experience
perceived bias based on those identities and identity intersections? RQ2. How
does existing as a minority in a graduate program and experiencing/perceiving
bias affect engineering identity? How does intersectional identity affect
engineering identity? RQ3. Are there experiences related to engineering identity
that mitigate the effects of perceived bias? RQ4. Can existing identities
support engineering identity development? If so, how can they be leveraged to
support student persistence, performance, and participation? The goal is to
generate empirical evidence that will: identify if/how perceived bias disrupts
the development of an engineering identity, offer recommendations for best
practices for reducing and mitigating bias, and suggest opportunities for
bolstering engineering identity in engineering graduate programs and
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.