* 1763436
* D3SC: Modern Data Analysis Tools for Prediction and Understanding in Catalyst Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Matthew Sigman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 451,980.00

Optimizing catalytic reactions has traditionally been a highly empirical process
that can be labor and material intensive and scientifically unsatisfying. A goal
of chemists in the synthesis field is to streamline this catalytic reactions by
developing methods to correlate reaction outputs (such as reaction rates or
selectivity for a certain product) to molecular structure. The resulting
mathematical relationships then can be used to predict the performance of new
catalysts without spending the labor or materials to make the compounds. To
truly enable this emerging data-driven approach to optimization, new methods to
describe or "parameterize" molecules effectively have to be developed. To this
end, in this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Matthew Sigman of the University of Utah and his team are defining
parameters that are capable at a high level of precision of examining structural
features of catalysts and starting materials in a range of catalytic reactions.
The catalysts produced by this optimization method can be applied to reactions
of societal importance ranging from advanced manufacturing of compounds of
medical relevance to novel materials. This program is highly collaborative in
that several researchers are involved in applying Dr. Sigman's techniques to
modern goals in catalysis. Dr. Sigman is actively engaged in outreach activities
that build upon his research. These activities include mentoring undergraduate
researchers in his laboratory during the summer, building digital curriculum
modules for use by undergraduates and graduate students in their studies, and
performing demonstrations at local elementary schools. These diverse activities
are directed at encouraging students at different stages in their education to
pursue their interest in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sigman is
building diverse structural training sets, parameter libraries, and enhanced
prediction tools for ligand screening to enable rapid identification of improved
ligands for catalysis. The focus of this effort is on privileged ligand
scaffolds, including various diamine ligands (bipyridines, pyridine oxazolines,
and bisoxazolines), monodentate and bidentate phosphines, phosphino-oxazolines,
and phosphoramidites. Results for building statistically significant models are
acquired both within the Sigman laboratory as well as in collaboration with a
wide range of research teams. The ultimate goal is to use the resultant
correlations of the reaction outputs in combination with traditional physical
organic tools to evolve a greater understanding of the underlying phenomenon
responsible for how a particular catalyst/substrate combination performs. Dr.
Sigman is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs including mentoring
undergraduate researchers in his laboratory during the summer, building digital
curriculum modules for use by undergraduates and graduate students in their
studies, and performing demonstrations at local elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.