* 1763432
* Are Remnants of the Tibetan Plateau Preserved in the Southern Himalayan Thrust Belt?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jessica Kapp, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 521,188.00

The Himalaya of Nepal is one of Earth's most rugged and rapidly eroding
landscape, with local relief greater than 5,000 meters and a morphology
dominated by deep fluvial incision. This regional pattern of relief is broken in
western Nepal, where the Bhumichula plateau represents a approximately 250
square kilomter area of low-relief (200-400 meters), but high-elevation
(4200-4800 meters) ground isolated amidst surrounding deeply incised topography
resembling that of Tibet. This projects investigates how and when the Bhumichula
plateau formed. Determining whether the Bhumichula plateau formed as a low-
elevation surface that was later uplifted and incised, or whether it was high
standing from its earlier stages and part of a larger Tibetan plateau and was
later modified by surface processes, is significant for the understanding of the
mechanisms forming high topography on Earth. High elevation features such as the
Himalaya and Tibet are a product of tectonic processes over geological time,
which are responsible today for the location and magnitude of earthquakes. The
Himalayas and Tibet also play a significant role on climate by driving the Asian
monsoon and thus control the distribution of fresh water on our planet.
Important societal outcomes deriving from this project include training of
graduate students This project also supports the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in an important science, technology, engineering and
mathematics discipline (STEM), thereby contributing to the increased economic
competitiveness of the United States. The project also contributes to the
broadening of underrepresented groups in STEM, thereby promoting diversity in
science. and minorities, female research scientists, and promotes diversity in
science. It also is supporting the development of an online virtual field trip
experiences for general education and upper division
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a muldisciplinary invesgation that uses
geological mapping, low-temperature thermochronology, cosmogenic nuclide dating,
geomorphological analysis, stable isotope paleoaltimetry, and 40Ar/39Ar
geochronology to determine the age of basement rocks, the timing of deformation,
erosion/incision and uplift of the Bhumichula plateau in western Nepal. Although
other low-relief, high-elevation surfaces have been identified in the Himalaya,
none has been investigated with the complete array of methods to be employed in
this work. A principal goal of the project is to establish a workflow for how to
analyze and interpret these low-relief surfaces in general, which are common
features in the Himalaya to the east of Nepal. This study is the first attempt
to apply such a wide array of techniques to unravel the history of landscape
development in the India-Asia collisional environment, including the first
attempt to determine paleoelevation on the southern slope of the Himalaya. Three
main hypotheses will be tested: (1) BP formed as a low-elevation surface that
was uplifted to high elevation and incised by antecedent and headward eroding
rivers; (2) the BP is a remnant of a once much larger paleo-Tibetan landscape
that reached nearly to the front of the Himalaya during the Miocene, and has
been etched northward by headward erosion since that time; and (3) the BP formed
in response to drainage reorganization and feedbacks between drainage area,
erosion, and elevation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.