* 1763294
* RAPID: Sensing and Modeling Infrastructure for Storm Surge Monitoring and Forecasting in Coastal Zones
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Leonard Pietrafesa, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,395.00

The Atlantic Coast is threatened by disasterous storms every year. The dangers
of high winds are widely publicized, but flooding has been responsible for more
than half of all associated deaths. Unfortunately, existing forecasting
capabilities are limited. Failure to predict significant flooding is of obvious
concern, but the risks associated with perpetually inflated forecasts could be
equally damaging. A citizen who evacuated Hurricane Irma's path based on storm
surge warnings, only to return home to limited flooding, might consider ignoring
future surge forecasts. Depending on the storm, that decision could be an
enormous mistake. This project addresses surge forecasting limitations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in computer
and network systems research and computational earth systems modeling research
to be undertaken along two connected paths. First, the project will pursue the
design, implementation, and evaluation of a fundamentally new approach to
achieving high-precision in situ measurement of storm-induced surge in
challenging environments. Second, the project will pursue fundamental extensions
to an existing modeling system comprising coupled atmospheric, oceanic, and
hydrologic models. The work will focus on assimilation of in situ surge
measurements to anchor and refine model outputs prior to, during, and after
tropical storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will
be significant: The world's coastal population is growing at an unprecedented
rate. In the past four decades, the U.S. coastal population grew by 45%, with
more than half of the population living in coastal counties. In the coming
decades, coastal states' urban centers are expected to continue to grow. The
resulting population density presents significant challenges. The ability of
state and local governments to efficiently prepare for and respond to storm
surge events is critical. This project will support significant progress toward
the development of reliable storm surge monitoring and modeling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.