* 1763734
* CIF: Medium: Foundations of Learning from Paired Comparisons and Direct Queries
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Nihar Shah, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,199,145.00

Direct queries and paired comparisons are popular means of data acquisition in
various scientific disciplines. These two types of data have been studied
separately, however, several modern applications -- particularly those involving
human judgments -- require analysis of a combination of these two types of data.
Such an analysis presents novel opportunities and challenges for stochastic
modeling, experimental design and algorithm development. This research involves
establishing a unified view of learning from direct measurements and paired
comparisons with the aim of understanding fundamental limits and tradeoffs for
various problems of interest, and developing and implementing practical
algorithms that can leverage both types of data. The utility of the algorithms
will be demonstrated by application to diverse domains including material
science and crowdsourcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
specific technical problems of function estimation, feature selection, and
optimization that can leverage passively and actively acquired direct queries
and paired comparisons, with the following objectives. The first objective is to
establish fundamental information-theoretic limits of learning from a
combination of paired and direct measurements under various statistical models.
These fundamental limits also involve understanding the inherent tradeoffs
between the two forms of measurements that accounts for the different noise and
costs. The second objective is to develop scalable and computationally efficient
algorithms whose performance attains these fundamental limits. The third
objective is to transfer the theory to practice in applications such as material
design using direct experimental and pairwise expert
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.