* 1763736
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Quantum-Secure Cryptography and Fine-Grained Quantum Query Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Gorjan Alagic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2021
* USD 275,000.00

Secure Internet communication faces a real threat in the form of a new breed of
computer that harnesses the laws of quantum mechanics. The technical community
is currently hard at work attempting to construct such "quantum" computers.
While many mysteries about these devices remain, it is certain that a large-
scale quantum computer would easily break all current public-key cryptography
that underpins the current Internet. In certain attack models, important
examples of private-key cryptography would also be rendered insecure. This
3-institution collaborative project studies the basic theoretical issues
underlying these urgent threats to the security infrastructure. It seeks to
understand the cryptography-breaking power of quantum computers, concentrating
on two interweaving themes: quantum security for 1) authenticating, and 2)
constructing quantum-secure cryptography from new primitives. The project
activities also include course development and mentorship at the graduate and
undergraduate level. The project also involves specific outreach activities
intended to broaden participation in Computer Science, including establishment
and development of "women in computer science" chapters, outreach to local high
schools, workshops for high-school STEM teachers, and development of computer
science courses for a general audience at the three partner
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Authentication-proofs, for example, that an
e-mail really did originate from you--is a basic and well-studied cryptographic
challenge. In the setting of quantum adversaries, it is not clear how to
appropriately formulate this essential notion, let alone produce specific
cryptographic tools that achieve it. This project is addressing both of the
challenges noted above, focusing on development of strong formulations of
authentication and new cryptographic constructions that offer secure
authentication. Finding "hidden" algebraic structures--like the fact that two
lists of numbers are merely cyclic shifts of each other--is an emblematic theme
in the study of the computing power of quantum computers. Certain variants of
this problem have resisted decades of concerted effort by the quantum algorithms
community, and appear to be quite difficult. This project studies applications
of these problems to constructing new private-key cryptographic tools with
quantum security guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.