* 1763821
* Enabling Redox Reactions for Catalysis with Group 13 Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Louise Berben, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 503,001.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Louise Berben of the University of California-Davis is studying the reaction
chemistry of the sustainable element aluminum. This work provides needed insight
into environmentally-friendly industrial processes and advanced manufacturing.
Dr. Berben is generating knowledge that can be applied broadly in both
heterogeneous (i.e., solid state) and homogeneous (i.e., in solution) catalysis.
This project contributes to the creation of an environmentally- and
economically-sustainable chemical industry, and to the efficient conversion of
feedstocks to value-added chemicals. Other impacts are in preparing a workforce
of skilled synthetic inorganic chemists specializing in main group elements,
which is needed for the creation of modern materials and electronics, and in
sustainable approaches to large scale chemical synthesis. Dr. Berben is also
partnering with national programs to mentor economically-disadvantaged high
school students and undergraduates in research projects. These outreach efforts
are interwoven with her scientific contributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Berben is exploring molecular redox-active ligand complexes of aluminum (Al) and
gallium (Ga) to understand mechanisms of proton and electron transfer to
generate hydride equivalents, thereby establishing correlations between
molecular structure, thermochemistry, and reactivity of hydride transfer
reactions. Dr. Berben is also exploring redox-mediated substrate activation
pathways for these reactions. Specific areas of investigation include the
synthesis of new ligands and metal-ligand molecules that mediate generation of
hydride equivalents via ligand-based proton and electron transfer chemistry. The
research group characterizes metal-ligand complex via pKa and hydricity values
as well as hydride transfer reactivity, so that structure-property-reactivity
correlations can be established. These characterization studies inform the
choice of reaction conditions and new molecular design. Building on the redox-
active Group 13 molecules that are being developed, the project is defining
substrate activation pathways based on activation and stabilization of
substrates at square planar molecules containing Al or Ga. The project trains a
workforce of skilled synthetic inorganic chemists specializing in main group
elements and in sustainable approaches to chemical synthesis. Collaborations
with ACS Project SEED and the UC Davis NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site provide research mentoring and experience to
economically-disadvantaged high school students and undergraduates,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.