* 1764254
* Variational Problems, Stability and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Eric Carlen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

This research project is aimed at solving mathematical problems that are not
only significant as mathematics, but that have been suggested by problems
arising in physics, quantum information theory and biology. The analysis of the
equations governing physical processes often requires a precise quantitative
understanding of the relative sizes of various quantities involved in these
processes, and this is provided by mathematical inequalities. An example
familiar to the general public can be paraphrased as saying that ``entropy never
decreases'' in physical processes; the inequality in question says that the
entropy at a later time is at least as large as the entropy at an earlier time.
For more specific physical systems one can say much more, and the search for a
better understanding of physical processes, and the evolution equations that
govern them, is in part a quest for new and more precise mathematical
inequalities governing these processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connection
between mathematical inequalities and physical processes runs both ways, so that
in trying to prove such an inequality, one may try to relate it to a simple and
well understood evolution equation. This area of research has been fruitful not
only in producing results that are of interest to a wider scientific community,
but also in engaging the interest of Ph.D. students. The intellectual merit of
the research is that it will produce not only significant new mathematics, but
results that are relevant to the physical sciences and engineering as well. This
applicability in other fields guarantee a broad impact of the work, which is
further enhanced by the involvement of students, contributing to training of the
next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.