* 1764135
* Chiroptical Sensing with Stereodynamic Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 820,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christian Wolf of the Department of
Chemistry at Georgetown University is developing molecular probes for
quantitative analysis of the amount, absolute configuration and enantiomeric
composition of chiral compounds in complex samples. Many pharmaceuticals are
chiral compounds and their effective analysis is clearly important in developing
new medicines. This project could lead to new analysis methods that are
compatible with modern workflow platforms, that can minimize waste production
and operational costs, and that are applicable to automated parallel analysis of
small scale reactions or biomarker sensing. The project is highly collaborative,
involving industrial and academic partners. It provides multiple training
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students, including
those from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals are
to introduce and test several molecular probes that are designed to capture a
chiral target either by covalent bond formation or noncovalent interactions and
to then translate the molecular recognition event via spontaneous substrate-
controlled chirality amplification across the stereodynamic receptor scaffold
into a distinct chiroptical response. The prospects of this research are
multifaceted and include important applications such as direct asymmetric
reaction analysis or quantification of medicinally relevant biomarkers.
Comprehensive optical sensing (determination of absolute configuration,
enantiomeric purity and concentration of chiral substrates) is to be achieved
using conceptually new molecular recognition and chiral amplification
strategies. These strategies utilize stereodynamic cup-shaped architectures,
foldamers, axially chiral reporter units, molecular propellers, multicomponent
assemblies, dynamic covalent chemistry, organocatalysis, frustrated Lewis pairs,
and tropos ligand derived metal complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.