* 1764012
* Combinatorial Connections with Algebra, Geometry, Probability and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sara Billey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 187,269.00

Combinatorics is an area of mathematics which is quintessential for applications
in computer science, biology, physics, chemistry, and industry. Optimized
algorithms based on combinatorics have revolutionized business decisions in our
lifetime. Current research is uncovering connections to all areas of mathematics
and science. This project focuses specifically on interdisciplinary applications
of combinatorics in connection with problems in algebra,geometry, probability,
and computer science. Combinatorial connections have been at the core of the
investigator's prior work and continue to inspire innovation and collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project describes three main themes for research. The
first relates to the classical study of the coinvariant algebra and its
representation theory. The problem is to study the asymptotics of the underlying
decomposition into irreducible symmetric group modules. The methods of attack
include tools from combinatorics, algebra and probability theory. The second
studies a newly proposed family of symmetric functions related to the matroid of
0-1 vectors in n-dimensional space. Conjectures and theorems in this direction
use tools from algebraic geometry. This research has connections to physics and
economics. The third topic, which is a mixture of combinatorics, theoretical
computer science and discrete geometry, pertains to placements of circles in the
plane with a wrapping condition. This area of research was inspired by the
general discrete geometry problem of finding an appropriate polygonization of a
region in the plane which appears in graphics and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.