* 1764194
* Theory and Design of Transition-Metal Heterodinuclear and Homodinuclear Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Daniel Ess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 234,205.00

Developing new catalysts is essential to discovering new chemical reactions.
Traditionally, molecular catalysts use one metal atom. Catalysts with two metal
atoms (dinuclear) have significant promise for new reactivity, especially for
many challenging chemical reactions not yet solved by the classic one metal
strategy. Currently, scientists do not completely understand how dinuclear
catalysts operate, or how they can be improved. In this project Dr. Daniel Ess
of Brigham Young University is using computational methods to understand
mechanisms and develop general principles of dinuclear metal-metal interactions.
This work, combined tightly with experimental collaboration, is leading to the
discovery of new catalysts and chemical reactions. This work also provides
scientific training at the interface of chemistry and computer science for
graduate and undergraduate students. Dr. Ess is engaged in several outreach
activities related to this research. For example, each year Dr. Ess directs a
summer chemistry camp at BYU for more than 100 children and youth ages 9-14 with
significant participation from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Chemistry Division, Dr. Ess of Brigham Young University is using
computational chemistry methods to develop understanding of transition-metal
heterodinuclear and homodinuclear catalysis. Catalysts being investigated have a
single covalent bond or direct dative/electrostatic interaction between two
transition metals or a transition metal and main-group metal. Reaction
mechanisms are being investigated for cobalt-zirconium, ruthenium-silver,
dinickel, and dirhodium catalysts used in reactions such as carbon-carbon
couplings, alkyne hydrogenation, and arene amination. Dinuclear catalyst
principles of reactivity and selectivity are being developed by comparing
dinuclear versus mononuclear catalysts, and the impact of metal-metal pairing,
for ruthenium-zirconium, ruthenium-silver, rhodium-lithium, and nickel-sodium
catalysts for reactions such as ethylene polymerization and diene
hydroarylation. This work is also using computational methods to design new
heterodinuclear catalysts for arene borylation and chiral allylic amination.
Undergraduate and graduate students are being trained in modern computational
techniques that include using and developing software for spin crossover
reactions and direct dynamics. Students interact with experimental groups and
are learning how to interface computational chemistry with experiment. Dr. Ess
directs a summer chemistry and biochemistry camp using undergraduate labs at BYU
for more than 100 children and youth ages 9-14 with significant participation
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.