* 1764328
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic Reaction Rates and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division. Professor Kendall N. Houk of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering is
developing new computational methods to understand chemical reactivity,
mechanisms, and selectivities. Professor Houk's group has pioneered in this area
and continues to demonstrate to organic chemists in how computation is a crucial
adjunct to their experimental research. New methods of theory and simulation
will be demonstrated for the experimental community. Theoretical support to
experimentalists throughout the country will be provided through collaborations,
leading to broadening the horizons of participating experimental and
computational scientists. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctorals
will all be trained in the use of theory and computation as a companion to
experiment for the solutions of chemical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, this project involves calculations of reaction paths and molecular
dynamics of organic reactions, including reactions in solution. This group will
continue the study of ambimodal reactions that can form several products from
one transition state. Specific systems include: the study of synthetically
important reactions of the reactive intermediates, carbenes and benzynes; Nickel
catalyzed reactions; cation electrostatic catalysts; organocatalysts;
cycloaddition reactions; dynamics of molecular machines, solid state rotors, and
molecular gears; and the functionalizations of
graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.