* 1764427
* Integrating Construction Engineering and Geospatial Technician Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kathryn Wetzel, Dallas County Community College Dist Brookhaven College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 224,813.00

Based on national data and specific input from Dallas/Fort Worth construction-
related industries, great demand exists for geospatial and construction
engineering technicians who have skills in the use location-based data. To
educate students in these areas, transformative changes must be made within
curricular material. In response, Brookhaven College in Texas will engage
industry to identify needed curricular revisions and will create learning
modules to educate geospatial and engineering technicians about the spatial data
technologies that support civil and construction engineering. By incorporating
real-world, service-learning experiences into the curriculum, the project will
seek to prepare technicians to enter the well-paying industries of civil
engineering, commercial construction, and geospatial technology. The institution
will align the new curriculum with the emerging field of constructioneering
(http://constructioneering.com/) to educate construction industry professionals
who are prepared to manage and integrate survey, engineering, and construction
data, and to streamline construction workflows and improve project delivery. The
project will also strive to create an environment that allows students to master
interdisciplinary knowledge and technical skills in both engineering and
geospatial technology. The curriculum changes also aim to promote 21st century
career-ready abilities that use technologies to improve efficiency and lower
costs. This project is designed to serve as a national model for cross-
disciplinary approaches to technology education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate recent advances in imaging, spatial intelligence
techniques, and analysis technologies, and adopt and adapt those technologies
into new instructional materials in two ways: by creating new content modules
that serve the needs of engineering and commercial construction industries; and
by integrating cross-disciplinary field experiences throughout the content
modules. These field experiences may help close the identified skills gaps
between current curricula and real-world rapidly advancing technology
applications and allow student teams to learn and practice the knowledge, skills
and abilities needed on the job. It is expected that, as a result, technicians
will understand connections between related geospatial, construction, and
engineering disciplines and will be better prepared to meet the needs of
construction engineering-related industries. The curriculum materials will be
designed for use in community college engineering and geospatial technician
education programs, as well as for professional development by the incumbent
workforce. Graduates who participate in this program have the potential to
become resources and role models, and may expand community partnership
opportunities. In addition to serving more traditional students, the project
will also recruit students from a population traditionally underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields (e.g., African
American, Hispanic, and low-income students) and will create curricular
materials based on research on how these groups learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.