* 1764230
* Computational methodology to determine rare event chemical reaction dynamics and networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2022
* USD 469,470.00

Graeme Henkelman of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to address a major fundamental challenge to the field of
computational chemistry and materials science. This challenge is to model the
dynamics of active materials over experimental time scales. Conventional
computational algorithms allow for simulations of atomic scale systems for very
short times: from nanoseconds to microseconds. Such simulations are useful, but
they are a million times smaller than the timescale needed to study important
systems and processes including catalysis and batteries. Henkelman and coworkers
aim to bridge this so-called "timescale gap" through the further development and
improvement of a method called adaptive kinetic Monte Carlo (AKMC). In AKMC, an
efficient exploration of the potential energy surface is used to determine
reaction rates and reaction mechanisms. The goal of this project is to overcome
the technical and algorithmic challenges related to applying AKMC to the
discovery of new catalysts and functional materials. A significant broader
impact of this project is the development, distribution and support of a
software tool that is freely available to the entire research community. This
software permits scientists to directly model their materials over relevant
experimental timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of AKMC relies on
transition state theory, where the simulation timescale is determined by the
rate of the slow chemical transitions of interest rather than the vibrational
timescale of atomic vibrations, which is the limitation for molecular dynamics.
While AKMC has been used routinely for model systems based upon empirical
potentials - fit to experiment - it needs to be extended to accurate
calculations based upon quantum mechanics which can be used to model systems
that are relevant to, for example, energy applications. For that, AKMC need to
be coupled to standard chemical and materials modeling software, based upon
density functional theory, so that the scientists and engineers working to
discover new catalysts and improved materials can use this methodology to
simulate the timescales of relevance for their applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A limitation of AKMC and an ongoing challenge that is
addressed in this project is the problem of low barriers. An explicit treatment
of the state-to-state kinetics can require an intractable number of KMC
transitions over low barriers between the higher barrier events of interest. A
strategy for overcoming the low barrier problem is to use an analytic solution
of the master equation such as the Monte Carlo with adsorbing Markov chains
method. In large and disordered systems, however, the number of states connected
by low barriers (superbasin states) grows exponentially with system size. Not
only is this a problem for the efficient solving of the rate equations, large
global superbasins need to be reconstructed whenever an AKMC step alters the
superbasin structure. A localization algorithm is being implemented to avoid the
combinatorial increase of superbasin states. Development also focuses on a
method to automatically build reaction networks of catalytic systems.
Specifically, Cu oxidation and catalytic CO oxidation is being modeled on
supported metal alloy nanoparticles. The intrinsic activity of these
nanoparticles can be a result of direct and dynamic participation of the
nanoparticle and support atoms in the reaction mechanisms. In this project,
stable states are defined by a clustering algorithm of reactive events from long
time scale trajectories. In this way, long time scale dynamics may be used to
determine reactivity descriptors for complex catalytic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.