* 1764269
* NSF-Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sharad Ramanathan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

The NSF-Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology at
Harvard University aims to use mathematics and statistics to understand biology
well enough for scientists to make accurate predictions of how organisms, from
simple bacteria and yeasts to mammals, respond to changes in their genes and
their environments. The Center's research will focus on three areas: how cells
and organisms make decisions that change their behavior and their fate; how
sophisticated structures, from the outer coating of viruses and the machinery
that segregates a cell's chromosomes to the structure of embryos and organs, can
assemble without explicit instructions; and how organisms change their
structures and activities to deal with changes in their environments over
timescales that range from minutes to millennia. In each of these areas, the
Center will bring together mathematicians and biologists, with the hope that the
mathematicians will help to create deeper and more general understanding of
biological systems and that the biologists will stimulate the mathematicians to
develop new techniques in mathematics, statistics, and computation that can be
applied to questions outside as well as inside biology. These close interactions
will produce a new generation of scientists who see themselves as both
mathematicians and biologists and are thus equipped to tackle a variety of
questions that cannot be answered today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-Simons
Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biological Systems has three
aims -- advancing knowledge of complex biological systems using mathematical and
computational tools, developing new mathematics and statistics, and training a
new generation of researchers in mathematical and computational biology. The
goals of the Center are to ask how molecular networks within individual cells
allow them to make developmental decisions, to discover how proteins and cells
self-assemble and self-organize to produce intra-cellular structures, tissues,
and organs, and to understand how these biological systems adapt within and
beyond the lifespan of individual organisms. These questions span a broad range
of timescales (from milliseconds to millions of years) and length scales (from
microns to meters). To extract general principles, the Center will study a range
of experimental systems that span viruses, cells, tissues, organs, and
organoids. The Center aims to build predictive and causal mathematical models
for decision making, self-organized morphogenesis, and adaptation, linking
development and evolution. Just as physics has been intricately allied with
mathematics for centuries, biology will be similarly allied with mathematics
going forward. The Center aims to strengthen this link by training graduate
students and postdocs who are already experts in mathematics and computation to
use their skills to provide a layered understanding of biological complexity and
by hosting visitors and workshops that will establish broad linkages between
mathematicians and biologists who embrace the natural complementarity of these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.