* 1764366
* Collaborative Research: Discrete and Topological Models for Template-Guided Genome Rearrangements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Laura Landweber, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 570,318.00

One of the breakthroughs of 21st century science is the precise genome editing
that is enabled through RNA templates. The societal impact of understanding
template-guided genome rearrangement is potentially enormous, both as a natural
phenomenon that, when mis-guided, can lead to disease, and that if harnessed
could lead to the next generation of tools for genome editing. This project
seeks to learn from both theory and experiments how a mechanism for RNA-
templated DNA recombination sculpts the assembly of genetic information in
certain species of ciliates, the organisms with the greatest levels of natural
genome editing. Through use of high-throughput experimental tools and novel
mathematical concepts based on knot theory and discrete mathematics, the project
will gain temporal and structural insight into the process of programmed genome
reorganization, including genome-wide surveys of DNA-- DNA and DNA--RNA contacts
during somatic development in ciliates. The proposed research will impact
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate education in mathematics, biology, and
chemistry, with at least two postdocs, three PhDs and several senior theses
expected to result from this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the ciliate
Oxytricha undergoes hundreds of thousands of programmed DNA rearrangements
during development, more than any other known organism, we use Oxytricha and its
close relatives as a tractable lab model to study template-guided genome
rearrangements. This project increases our understanding of template-guided
chromosomal DNA rearrangements, both during the process of nuclear development
and across the evolutionary steps that gave rise to scrambled genomes. Previous
studies have shown that the general mechanism that orchestrates this
rearrangement process is guided by maternal RNA templates that can be
mathematically modeled by spatial graphs, while the rearrangement pathways can
be modeled as paths in a directed acyclic graph whose vertices are the spatial
graphs. The project approaches the problem through the lens of the intermediate
molecules, as well as the higher level interactions that arise during
rearrangement, and it will examine both experimentally and theoretically the
global rearrangement pathways. Specific aims include: 1. Experimental dissection
of the temporal order of events and the formation of DNA-- DNA and DNA--RNA
interactions during genome rearrangement. 2. Build mathematical methods for
genome rearrangements using graph based descriptions of the changes in the
intermediates. 3. Develop mathematical models to measure differences in
underlying scrambling patterns, as well as differences in possible rearrangement
pathways between different species. 4. Initiate mathematical techniques based on
graph theory, knot theory and algebraic topology that provide understanding of
the structural patterns of the genome unscrambling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.