* 1764415
* CDS&amp;E: D3SC: Applying Video Segmentation to Coarse-grain Mapping Operators in Molecular Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrew White, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 488,605.00

Andrew White and Chenliang Xu of the University of Rochester is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to apply advances in computer vision to improve models of
multiscale systems in chemistry. Multiscale systems describe chemical and
physical processes that occur on many different time and spatial scales, for
example, both very fast and very slow motions may contribute to the overall
process. In both the computer processing of videos and the modeling of
multiscale chemical systems, reducing complexity via removing extraneous details
is essential. Without removing some model details, simulating multiscale
processes like DNA transcription or the peptide aggregation which leads to
plaque formation in Alzheimer's disease is impossible. Current approaches to
reduce the number of atoms in a model rely on intuition and tradition due to the
near infinite ways in which atoms can be removed or combined. White, Xu and
their research groups are developing a novel approach built upon advances in
video segmentation. Video segmentation is the process of identifying foreground,
background, and objects in a video. Surprisingly, the same mathematical
structure can be applied to chemical systems and that is the goal of this
research. White, Xu and their collaborators will introduce the research to a
broader audience via an augmented-reality laboratory for students. Students will
be able to decide how to simplify molecular models and see the results by
combining the visual experience of augmented-reality with the interactivity of
molecular simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coarse-graining (CG) is the
dimension reduction technique used to simulate multiscale systems more
efficiently. There is not a rigorous theory for generating mappings from all-
atom (fine-grain) system to the CG system. This missing component is essential
because past CG work shows that many mappings lead to homogeneous, weakly
interacting, gas-like CG models but the number of possible mappings is
combinatorial with respect to the number of atoms. Andrew White and his
collaborators are working to solve this mapping problem by (i) developing a
theory to represent mapping algorithms based on video segmentation algorithms;
(ii) creating a database of mappings and their performance on benchmark
simulations to foster community involvement; (iii) studying and testing these
methods on multi-protein surface interactions, where current mapping approaches
struggle. Achieving success here, along with recent advances in calculating CG
potentials, will better advance the community's ability to model complex
multiscale phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.