* 1764178
* Gas Phase Oxidation of Resonance-Stabilized Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Fabien Goulay, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 462,634.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division and by NSF EPSCoR, Professor Fabien Goulay
from the Department of Chemistry at West Virginia University investigates
combustion reaction mechanisms. The central focus is on the oxidation of large,
stable free radicals which can accumulate in combustion environments. These
intermediates are known to play a major role during the formation of pollutants
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and particulate matter. Gas
phase and high temperature reactions are investigated both experimentally and
computationally. Experimental studies employ spectroscopic methods to
characterize intermediates and their chemical behavior. This research provides
critical information on reaction mechanisms that will be used to develop more
efficient combustion processes for transportation and power generation. This
project also provides training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, including first generation college students and students from the
Appalachian region, who have been traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the oxidation of
resonance-stabilized radicals in the gas phase. These radicals can build up in
appreciable concentrations and have recently been hypothesized as precursors to
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and soot. The concentration of these radicals
in the gas phase is depleted mostly by oxidation reactions with very reactive
species, such as the hydroxyl radical. Although theoretical studies have been
performed to predict their reactivity toward the hydroxyl radicals, no
experimental data are available to validate these predictions. The experimental
study of radical - radical reactions is difficult because both radicals need to
be formed simultaneously at sufficient concentrations. Professor Goulay and his
Group produce both radicals in a flow reactor using laser photolysis, and detect
their concentrations using laser spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. Theoretical
calculations are used to analyze the reaction mechanisms. This work also
contributes to the career development of future scientists by providing training
at state-of-the-art experimental resources, including synchrotron
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.