* 1764171
* Evaluating the Impact of Future Volcanic Eruptions on Stratospheric Ozone:  Influence of Multicomponent Injection, Climate Change, Latitude, and Seasonality
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* David Wilmouth, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 532,412.00

This project is focused on investigating the potential impacts of future
volcanic eruptions on stratospheric ozone. Stratospheric ozone shields the Earth
from harmful ultra-violet radiation and hence it is important to understand how
volcanic eruptions might impact stratospheric chemistry leading to changes in
the protective ozone layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this
proposal are threefold: (1) characterize column ozone sensitivity to
contemporary and future explosive volcanic eruptions as a function of volcanic
latitude and season; (2) determine ozone column sensitivity to the direct
stratospheric co-injection of inorganic chlorine, bromine, and iodine along with
sulfur dioxide from volcanic eruption; and (3) quantify future bromine and
iodine alpha factors (the relative ozone-destroying activity of bromine and
iodine relative to chlorine) in a variety of greenhouse gas emission
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will employ the SOlar Climate Ozone
Links model with aerosol microphysics (SOCOL-AER) for the majority of the
scenarios. The chemical transport model AER-2D will also be used to quantify the
sensitivity of stratospheric ozone for elements of the project where dynamics
play a less significant role. A postdoctoral fellow will perform many of the
experiments and the work will provide opportunities for the development of
research skills by undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.