* 1764126
* Developing Novel Analytical Systems for Deciphering Complex Mixtures of Organic Compounds and Training the Next Generation of Scientists
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Drew Gentner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 373,195.00

This project is focused on developing methods for identifying and characterizing
specific organic compounds or classes of compounds in a complex mixture of
organics in the atmosphere. A large array of sophisticated analytical techniques
and instrumentation will be used in the laboratory for optimal characterization
of atmospheric gases and aerosols. Understanding the complex composition of gas
and particle phase constituents is critically important for air quality studies,
especially with regards to determining the toxicity of the inhaled components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes support for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the research. The project will also
involve high school students from the EVOLUTIONS program. The goal of EVOLUTIONS
is to supplement the formal school experiences of underserved students to
develop transferable skills, STEM literacy, college preparation, and foster
aspirations for STEM futures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal involves
methods development for offline analytical GC x MS-MS and LC x MS-MS techniques
to improve characterization of compound classes that are difficult to measure
using online techniques. Laboratory studies will be used to evaluate various
analytical configurations for optimal characterization of classes of organics
present in atmospheric aerosols, many that are likely important for the
characterization of organic aerosol sources and atmospheric processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Task 1, an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
(APCI) source and a secondary electrospray ionization (SESI) source will be
integrated with an Agilent GC x MS-MS. Method development will be employed to
improve thermal extraction of intermediate volatility/ semi-volatile organic
carbon (I/SVOCs) collected on adsorbent tubes. Task 2 is focused on LC x MS-MS
method development, with specific focus on improving solvent extraction of
highly oxygenated molecules (HOM) species collected on adsorbent tubes. Task 3
will intercompare results for target analytes (e.g. I/SVOCs, HOMs, organic
nitrates) with an online ToF-CIMS. This work has the potential to contribute new
insight to organic aerosol characterization, especially with regards to the
intercomparison studies with ToF-CIMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.