* 1764437
* New advances in (4+3)-Cycloadditions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Michael Harmata, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2022
* USD 468,300.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Michael Harmata of the University of Missouri-Columbia is
developing new methods for the construction of molecules containing rings of
atoms. Molecular rings are found in many compounds that possess significant
biological activity and are potentially applicable to human health. Examples
include colchicine, used in the treatment of gout, and the experimental
resiniferatoxin, a lead compound in the treatment of pain. Molecular rings are
also of interest in the development of new materials. In addition to
synthesizing these compounds, Dr. Harmata is investigating the how the reactions
progress. Certain molecules have a 3-dimentional structure that makes them non-
superimposable on their mirror image, just as right and left hands are not
superimposable on each other. Dr. Harmata is developing methods to control which
mirror image product is formed. Because the different mirror image forms of a
molecule can have very different biological activity, the methods Dr. Harmata
developed have broad, general significance. Dr. Harmata is also engaged in
activities directed towards younger chemists and the general public. He
organizes a symposium called Organic Chemistry Day to bring chemists from
Missouri and neighboring states together to talk about organic chemistry
frontier. Dr. Harmata also speaks at a program at the University of Missouri
called Saturday Morning Science. These outreach activities enable him not only
to teach organic chemistry, but to explain how research is done and how it
serves the general public, sometimes to children as young as six or seven years
old. Last but not the least, Dr. Harmata sponsors a summer program for
underrepresented high school students to work in his lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Harmata is studying two unique (4+3)-cycloaddition
reactions. The first synthetic scheme is an asymmetric, catalytic process.
Expanding the scope of this process beyond cyclopentenyl oxyallylic cations that
are currently being used and understanding the origins of the high
enantiocontrol observed are being investigated both experimentally and
computationally. The second area makes use of developing oxidopyridinium ions as
dienophiles in (4+3)-cycloadditions. This research is being pursued at the most
fundamental levels, developing tools for simple stereoselection as well as the
control of diastereoselectivity and enantioselectivity. For all of the reactions
mentioned, the investigations include both intermolecular and intramolecular
prospects. Finally, unique aspects of these reactions are being studied. These
include chemical modification of the products to produce reactive species such
as strained alkenes and radicals that allow the synthesis of molecules of
greater structural complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.