* 1764409
* Mechanisms of Proton Transport in Ionic Liquids: Grotthuss vs Vehicular
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,999.00

Professors Sokolov and Paddison from the University of Tennessee combine
experimental and computational studies of ionic liquids to unravel important
requirements for elucidating highly efficient proton transport mechanisms.
Protons are hydrogen atoms that are missing their single electron, and therefore
positively charged. Proton motion is vital for the function of various
biological systems (for example, energy production and nerve function) and is
important in many technological applications, such as energy conversion and
storage. Ionic liquids are substances in which the constituent molecules are
themselves charged. For example, a neutral molecule can release a proton (+1
electrical charge) from its structure, thus rendering itself a negatively
charged (-1) ion. Ionic liquids are a promising class of substances for energy
technology applications because they can facilitate very fast transport of
protons (in other words they can be highly electrically conductive). Profs.
Sokolov and Paddison are seeking to distinguish the various mechanisms of proton
transport. One these, the "Grotthuss mechanism" leads to high conductivity
because it arises from the cooperative motion of several protons at a time.
Experimental identification of this mechanism and understanding its occurrence
relative to different kinds of molecular structures would greatly advance our
ability to design molecules for ionic liquid
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
develop a fundamental molecular level understanding of the chemical and
structural aspects that control proton transport in protic ionic liquids. The
PIs expect to reveal systems with extremely low energy barriers for proton
transfer by choosing the right combination of proton acceptors and proton
donors. In addition, they focus on analysis of correlated proton dynamics in
search for experimental evidences of the collective Grotthuss-like proton
transfer mechanism. To achieve these goals the PIs employ broadband dielectric
and light scattering spectroscopies, neutron scattering, rheology, and NMR
studies, all in tight connection with density function theory (DFT) based
electronic structure calculations and ab-initio molecular dynamics simulations.
The broader impact of this work includes significant societal benefits from a
predictive understanding of proton transport mechanisms, as well as opportunity
for training students and postdoctoral associates in advanced experiments and
complex simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.