* 1764152
* Distinct photophysics of the spin-entangled triplet-triplet versus free triplets in organic semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Solar cells absorb sunlight and generate electricity. Solar cells constructed
out of organic molecules or polymers are of interest because they are cheap,
easily processible, lighweight and flexible. The electric power generated by
today's organic solar cells is limited because of thermodynamic constraints.
There is currently intense scientific effort to overcome these constraints and
to construct solar cells that yield higher power. One possible approach is to
use singlet fission, a photophysical process within which the electrical current
generated by light absorption is in principle doubled. In this project funded by
the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Sumitendra Mazumdar of the University of Arizona is
performing quantum mechanical calculations to understand the detailed mechanism
of singlet fission. Understanding of the process is needed to find new molecular
materials that yield larger amounts of charge upon light absorption, which in
turn may lead to organic solar cells with significantly higher efficiencies. The
broader impacts of this work include cutting-edge interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow in computational
chemistry and physics. Outreach efforts are fostering interest in chemistry and
physics among members of underserved groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently it
is difficult to ascertain whether singlet fission in targeted materials is
complete. The only way to distinguish between the initial optical spin-singlet
and the free triplets that are end products, as well as the active intermediate
triplet-triplet biexciton is from transient absorption spectroscopy, and
transient absorptions in the visible from all three species are overlapping.
Experiments in the near and mid infrared need to be performed to distinguish
between the different excited species. The project focuses on computations of
excited state absorptions from the optical spin-singlet exciton, the lowest
spin-triplet exciton and the triplet-triplet biexciton, using high level
configuration interaction approach and an exciton basis within a many-electron
model Hamiltonian that yield physical, pictorial interpretations of many-body
eigenstates and of excited state absorptions. The goal of the project is to
develop structure-property correlations with predictive capability of three
families of organic semiconductors that are candidates for intramolecular
singlet fission. The three families are, (i) covalently linked dimers of acenes
and related molecules, (ii) conjugated polymers, and (iii) low bandgap donor-
acceptor copolymers. Computations are yielding diagnostic tools for
experimentally distinguishing between transient absorptions from the triplet-
triplet and free triplets, and determination of whether or not concerted two-
electron transfers from the triplet-triplet occur in a bulk heterostructure
environment, as has been proposed recently. This research project has
implications for solar energy and other technologies that could be based on
organic materials. The students and post-doctoral researchers involved in this
project are gaining experience in state-of-the art computational methods,
including many-body quantum chemistry and physics
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.