* 1764441
* RUI: Characterizing the birth of a nanoparticle: toward molecular control over nanoparticle synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Krista Vikse, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 0.00

Scientists are striving to gain precise control over the creation of
nanoparticles and nanomaterials. If this goal is achieved, society will gain
access to customizable nanomaterials that can be made-to-order for applications
including targeted drug delivery, diagnostic imaging and chemical separations.
However, while scientists understand how nanoparticles grow in size, it is still
not clear how nanoparticles are born. Without understanding this very first step
of nanoparticle formation, scientists cannot rationally design protocols that
will deliver custom nanomaterials. In this project, Professor Krista Vikse of
San Francisco State University conducts experiments to uncover the exact details
of how the seed of a nanoparticle forms. At the same time, Professor Vikse is
developing enhanced educational infrastructure for undergraduate students who
are working in an active chemical research laboratory for the first time.
Scannable Quick Response (QR) codes are being incorporated into the physical
research space. Using their cell phones, student can scan these codes to link to
relevant virtual training materials on-demand. In this way, Dr. Vikse is aiming
to make STEM research more accessible and less intimidating for all students,
with a particular focus on groups of students who are underrepresented in the
field of chemistry.

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Krista Vikse of San Francisco State
University is elucidating the atomically precise mechanism for the early
reduction and nucleation events in gold citrate nanoparticle formation. The
focus is on the first stage of formation as the clusters grow from 2 - 10 metal
atoms. To this end, nanoparticle synthesis reaction mixtures are monitored in
operando using pressurized sample infusion mass spectrometry (PSI-MS). Kinetic
data are collected for all reactive species. Key intermediates are intercepted
within the mass spectrometer and gas-phase ion-molecule reactions are conducted
to probe the structure and inherent reactivity of each intermediate. Finally,
Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations elucidate detailed structure-
activity relationships based on the experimentally collected gas-phase data. A
complete molecular understanding of the formation of gold nanoparticles
facilitates the rational design of metallic nanoparticle cores and also informs
the field of metal cluster catalyzed reactions. As an integral part of this
project, Dr. Vikse and her students develop and test educational infrastructure
for undergraduate students who are working in an active research laboratory for
the first time. Scannable Quick Response (QR) codes are placed in key locations
around the laboratory giving students direct, on-demand access to virtual
instructional materials using their cell phones. This allows for increased
accessibility to standardized training and timely reminders of best practices in
the laboratory. The goal is to improve student confidence in a STEM laboratory
setting and ultimately attract students to the STEM profession.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.