* 1764118
* RUI: Carbon-carbon single bond activation as a route to new organic transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Johnson, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 273,855.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jeffrey B. Johnson of the Department of Chemistry at Hope
College is developing new methods for the efficient production of organic
compounds through the activation of carbon-carbon bonds. Carbon-carbon bonds are
extremely common, making up the framework of molecules derived from living
things as well as many polymers and other important materials. Despite their
prevalence, there are few reaction conditions known that can selectively break
these bonds. Professor Johnson and his group of undergraduate collaborators are
working to understand the processes by which these few known reactions occur.
They are using this information to develop new methods to activate and transform
carbon-carbon bonds. Successful realization of these goals promises more
efficient synthetic routes to complex molecules, including new compounds that
can be examined for biological activity as potential pharmaceutical agents.
Undergraduate students strengthen their personal scientific preparation through
participation in this project. In turn, these undergraduates serve as Upward
Bound mentors, assisting at-risk high school students prepare for college and
potential futures in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jeffrey B.
Johnson is developing new reactions for the transition metal-catalyzed
activation and functionalization of carbon-carbon single bonds. Undergraduate
collaborators are carrying out the mechanistic investigation of the rhodium-
catalyzed decarbonylation of 2-pyridylbenzophenones, determining energy barriers
and identifying reaction intermediates. As Lewis basic directing groups are
generally required for selective carbon-carbon bond activation, efforts focus on
the use of readily removed or manipulated directing groups for the
identification of conditions that allow the use of a broad range of ketones and
carboxylic acid derivatives. The activation of these substrates, followed by
coupling with readily available pi systems or organometallics, promises rapid
access to a wide range of complex molecules with potential biological
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.