* 1764141
* New Chemistry Enabled by Aryne Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Daesung Lee, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 470,317.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Daesung Lee. Professor Lee is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago. He is developing new classes
of synthetic transformations that take advantage of highly reactive chemical
compounds known as arynes. Arynes they have enough internal energy in their
chemical bonds to enable the synthesis of highly strained, four-membered cyclic
structures that are often used to make pharmaceuticals, molecular scaffolds for
bioactive natural products, and other functional materials. Professor Lee is
using an established reaction to carefully assemble arynes that are tethered to
trapping groups. The project includes synthetic method development, mechanistic
studies, and natural product synthesis. Professor Lee's group is well positioned
to provide a high level of education and training for a wide variety of
students. A summer research internship for undergraduate and high school
students is part of the project. This research benefits society by providing
innovations to the chemical industry and medicine and by producing a highly
technically-trained workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relatively
high electrophilic nature of arynes in combination with their tendency to
interact with transition metal complexes provide a versatile platform for
exploring new reactivity. This research focuses on novel transformations enabled
by the high reactivity of silver-complexed aryne intermediates, which allows for
the formation of a variety of four-membered ring structures as isolable products
or as transient intermediates. Specific areas of research involve the
exploration of four-membered ring-forming Alder-ene reaction by arynes relying
on steric effect and hydrogen bonding elements and an investigation of chemo-
and regioselectivity for Alder-ene and [2+2] cycloadditions employing various
aryne-allene intermediates, and their application for the synthesis of
herbindole B. Professor Lee also considers the development of a new synthetic
method for the construction of chromanone derivatives relying on the aryne-
carbonyl [2+2] cycloaddition reactions and of new annulation reactions of arynes
with carbon-nitrogen multiple bonds to form novel heteroaromatic compounds.
Exploration of benzocyclobutene derivatives for transition metal-catalyzed
transformations is also under study. The educational plan includes a summer
research program for high school students to introduce them to synthetic organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.