* 1764467
* Diversifying Technician Education in North Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Ken Quamme, Williston State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,873.00

Williston State College is in the center of the Bakken shale oil reserves of
North Dakota, where the oil industry drives much of the regional economy. As a
result, the college's Automation and Control Program originally focused on oil
industry needs. However, the region includes other well-established industries
that are independent of oilfield fluctuations. This project aims to transition
the previous automation and control program from preparing technicians for oil
industry jobs to preparing technicians who can also meet the region's more
diverse workforce demands for automation and control expertise. Project aims are
to: 1) broaden the focus of the existing automation and control program; 2)
establish stackable/latticed credentials; 3) embed industry-relevant
certifications into the program; and 4) make the program accessible to more
students by offering hybrid courses. The expanded program aims to teach
transferable skills that meet workforce needs in non-petroleum industries in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance the academic quality of
the current automation and control program. In response to industry demand, the
new automation and control program will incorporate information technology
skills such as networking and programming. In addition, it will offer industry
certifications such as the National Institute for Metalworking Skills-based
Industrial Technology Maintenance certification and the Cisco Interconnecting
Networking Device certification. The project expands on infrastructure developed
and best practices learned as a recipient of a Trade Adjustment Assistance
Community College and Career Training grant from the Department of Labor. The
project will expand technical knowledge in the region as students offer new
skills and expertise to their employers and to peer networks. Students who learn
transferable automation and control skills that incorporate the nationally
recognized National Institution of Metalworking Skills certification will have
improved career options, in the region and beyond. In addition, the regional
economy can benefit by having a workforce that can apply automation and control
skills in diverse industries. Newly hired technicians who have industry-needed
skills can be immediately productive, contributing to increasing technical
knowledge and application in the region. The program that serves as the
foundation for the proposed project has strong enrollment and completion by
women and minorities. The expectation is that this these trends will continue,
helping to diversify the automation and control technician
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.