* 1764450
* A New Class of Selenium Catalysts for the Amination of Alkenes and Alkynes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Forrest Michael, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

A New Class of Selenium Catalysts for the Amination of Alkenes and
Alkynes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most organic molecules in biology contain nitrogen
atoms that are critical to their activity. In making these compounds, chemists
employ many powerful catalysts based on transition metals. As we progress
towards a greener, more sustainable future, it is critical that we find new
catalysts that are equally powerful, yet less expensive and less toxic. In this
project, Prof. Michael of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Washington is studying catalysts based on selenium as alternatives to transition
metal-based catalysts. These catalysts can introduce nitrogen-containing groups
at specific, key points in simple organic molecules. This project is determining
how changes to the structure of the selenium catalysts controls these reactions.
Prof. Michael is engaged in outreach activities that provide research and
learning opportunities to highly gifted and talented young scientists through
his work with the Center for Excellence in Education and the Research Science
Institute and Research Science Initiative, where he teaches high school students
in the US and China about cutting-edge research in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Michael of the University of Washington is
studying how ligands normally used for transition metal catalysts, such as
phosphines and N-heterocyclic carbenes, can be employed to control the catalytic
reactivity of selenium. These reactions will allow the transformation of
inexpensive hydrocarbon starting materials into more complex compounds by the
selective introduction of nitrogen substituents via allylic, vinylic and
propargylic C-H amination reactions, as well as diamination and hydroamination
reactions. The fundamental reaction mechanisms and key intermediates in these
transformations are being studied by testing structure-function relationships
and examining intermediates by multi-nuclear (1H, 31P, 77Se) NMR spectroscopy.
Prof. Michael is engaged in outreach activities that mentor highly gifted and
talented young scientists through his work with the Center for Excellence in
Education and the Research Science Institute and Research Science
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.