* 1764264
* Well-Defined Nanographene-Metal Complexes for Selective Electrocatalytic CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Krishnan Raghavachari, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 460,000.00

Converting the excess carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by so many of society's
activities to fuels and other useful materials requires an input of energy.
Currently, decreasing the energy needed to accomplish this is recognized to be a
highly challenging task. In this project, Drs. Liang-shi Li and Krishnan
Raghavachari at Indiana University are investigating how to combine ordered
carbonstructures known as nanographenes with transition metal atoms to make a
new family of catalysts. These catalyze CO2 reduction, that is, they improve the
energy efficiency of the conversion. This is being accomplished by a synergistic
combination of the experimental efforts from the Li group and the computational
modeling from the Raghavachari group. The study seeks a basic understanding of
how the structures of the carbon materials determine the catalytic performance
of the transition metal. More broadly, the work aims to provide design guidance
for improved catalysts based on metal-containing carbon materials, thereby
leading to renewable uses of carbon materials for environment- and energy-
related applications, while providing a diverse range of educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach to
underrepresented groups include a summer research experience program with
Prairie View A&amp;M University targeting undergraduate students from that
historically black university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Liang-shi Li and
Krishnan Raghavachari at Indiana University are developing well-defined
nanographene-metal complexes (NMCs) and investigating their electrocatalytic
activities for selective CO2 reduction. Specially, well-defined nanographene
ligands form complexes with Re or Mn to analyze and optimize their performance
for selective electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO. Because of their large
conjugation size, the nanographenes can readily undergo multiple reductions,
effectively storing the electrons for chemical transformations, and in
preliminary work, NMCs (containing Re) have already been demonstrated to yield
an onset CO2 reduction potential that is the lowest reported so far. With
synergistic experimental and theoretical efforts, the necessary conditions for
the NMCs to be activated to catalyze the CO2 reduction are investigated. With
nanographene ligands of various sizes and functionalizations, a detailed
understanding on catalytic mechanisms of the NMCs is sought for the design of
energy efficient and stable electrocatalysts that contain earth abundant metals
and can be made with simple methods. In a broader context, the project aims to
establish the nanographenes as a new class of redox non-innocent ligands, for
potential application to the development of transition metal catalysts for many
classes of multi-electron reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.