* 1764177
* Analysis of Non-Linear Partial Differential Equations in Free Boundary Fluid Dynamics and Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Robert Strain, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This project aims to advance scientific understanding and develop new methods in
the study of non-linear partial differential equations that predict the future
behavior of fluid flow with moving boundaries, and particle dynamics in Kinetic
Theory. The first part of the project considers a basic mathematical model in
petroleum engineering, which was formulated by the petroleum engineer M. Muskat
in 1934 to describes the mixture of water into an oil sand. The second part of
this project considers the study of a highly accurate mathematical model for a
dilute hot plasma. These types of plasmas appear regularly in fundamental
physical problems from astrophysics, nuclear fusion, and tokamaks. In the third
part of this project the PI will study fundamental partial differential
equations from relativistic particle dynamics and it is expected that this
research will increase our physical understanding in a variety of places in
astrophysics, for instance in high atmosphere aerodynamics where the air is a
very rarefied gas and fluid equations are no longer a suitable mathematical
model. This project will involve training in research and teaching of
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduate students from the
University of Pennsylvania and other universities. The project will also involve
outreach to undergraduate students through the UPenn Center for Undergraduate
Research &amp; Fellowships program. The PI is fully committed to facilitate the
training and education of these students through teaching courses, regular
direct mentoring, and running regular research seminars. The PI is actively
working to develop new innovative mathematics courses at the University of
Pennsylvania in order to further the goal of developing a diverse and globally
competitive STEM workforce and to improve STEM education at the collegiate
level. The PI is engaging in outreach activities to groups that are
traditionally under-represented in mathematics, and these activities will
continue over the course of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to fully understand both global existence and singularity
formation for several different fundamental physical models in non-linear
partial differential equations. The first part of this work studies fluid
dynamics problems with free boundaries, such as the Surface Quasi-Geostrophic
equations and the Muskat problem. Another part of this work looks at existence
and uniqueness problems for the relativistic Landau equation from plasma
physics. And a third part of this project considers mathematical problems in the
the relativistic Boltzmann equation from Kinetic theory with physically relevant
non-integrable particle interactions. The PI proposes to develop new methods to
advance the current level of scientific knowledge on a diverse collection of
recognized questions in these different areas in the mathematical analysis of
non-linear partial differential equations. It is expected that the techniques
developed will be useful for future mathematical and physical
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.