* 1764140
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Understanding the nature of water transport between the transition zone and the lower mantle through the interdisciplinary studies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Bijaya Karki, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

Earth is the water planet, with much of its H2O chemically bound within its
rocky interior. The goal of this project is to provide new insight into the way
in which water circulates, carried by the slow heat convection of Earth's
silicate mantle. Geophysicists now have strong evidence that there is a
substantial amount of water in Earth's interior, perhaps more than the current
mass of the oceans. There is strong evidence that most of this water resides
within the mantle transition zone (MTZ), between 410 km and 660 km depth in the
Earth. The MTZ spans the stability range of minerals that can incorporate water
within their crystal structures, up to a mass-fraction of a percent or more. It
appears that the transition zone acts as a refillable reservoir of mineral-bound
water within Earth's interior. The water in Earth's surface oceans can exchange
with the water in the mantle transition zone via mantle convection, on time
scales of 10-30 million years. How does the transition zone maintain its
elevated water content as mantle rock flows upward and downward through it,
converting to water-phobic minerals at its boundaries, particularly at its lower
boundary at ~660-km depth? The goal of this project is to study the MTZ and
lower-mantle minerals at high pressure in the lab and with computer simulations
to determine how the water behaves near 660-km depth, and to detect water
expulsion from descending rock masses using scattered seismic waves. The award
will provide graduate and undergraduate training, including summer research
projects, for several students in a broadly interdisciplinary research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the nature of large-scale water
transport in Earth's deep interior is one of the key issues in the study of
evolution of Earth (and other planets). Since diffusion is inefficient, the most
important process to control the large-scale transport of water is melting and
subsequent melt-solid separation. The goal of this study is to improve our
understanding on these two issues. Melting likely occurs when water-rich
materials in the transition zone are brought into upper or the lower mantle
where the water solubility in minerals is low. However, when metallic iron is
present, then a majority of water partitions into it. Hence metallic iron has a
controlling effect on the melting behavior. One aspect of this research is to
obtain a better understanding of metallic iron content in the lower mantle. When
melt is formed, most of water (hydrogen) goes to the melt. Melt migrates up or
down depending on its density relative to the unmelted residual rock. Melt
density under deep-mantle conditions has not been constrained well, particularly
considering the range of likely chemical compositions. This project will
investigate melt density under deep-mantle conditions with different redox
values and plausible variations in the iron-magnesium ratio. Combining these,
the investigators will have an improved view of deep-Earth water circulation.
With scattered seismic waves, primarily using the receiver-function technique,
the team will map out locations beneath the mantle transition zone where water-
enhanced partial melt is present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.