* 1764464
* LIGO Laboratory Operations and Maintenance 2019-2023
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* David Reitze, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 12/31/2023
* USD 236,249,999.00

Researchers at the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO)
seek to observe and understand gravitational waves. Gravitational waves (GWs)
are oscillations in space and time that are generated whenever mass moves
suddenly. They can carry information about cosmic catastrophes, such as the
collisions of black holes and neutron stars. Since 2015, LIGO has observed six
GW events, revealing entirely new information about these exotic objects, which
are located tens or hundreds of millions of light years away. This award will
enable LIGO to search for additional GW signals and to improve LIGO?s
sensitivity so that it can observe even more distant cataclysms.&lt;br/&gt;LIGO
is the world?s premier gravitational wave observatory. It is a key part of an
emerging global network of similar detectors. These are now in operation or
under development in Italy, Japan, and India. Concurrent measurements by LIGO
and optical, radio, and X-ray observatories have inaugurated the era of multi-
messenger astronomy, when synergistic detections of gravitational waves and
electromagnetic waves reveal entirely new and exciting information about the
cosmos. LIGO?s historic GW observations were recognized by the award of the 2017
Nobel Prize in Physics to LIGO pioneers Barry Barish, Kip Thorne, and Rainer
Weiss.&lt;br/&gt;This award will stimulate the development of a scientific and
technically educated workforce, advance the multidisciplinary application of
LIGO-related technology, and it will disseminate information about LIGO-related
science and technology to the general public. This award will fund the operation
of the existing LIGO apparatus, as well as the design, test, and operation of
apparatus that will improve LIGO?s sensitivity. This, and related research
activities, will create continued opportunities for interdisciplinary
collaboration between LIGO staff members, post-docs, and students, and the
approximately 1100 researchers and students at 108 universities world-wide that
collaborate with LIGO. &lt;br/&gt;Technical part: Funding in the amount of up to
$225,000,000 is provided for the continued operation of the LIGO observatories
at Hanford Washington and Livingston, Louisiana, the associated science and
engineering support programs at Caltech and MIT, and for carrying out education
and public outreach programs that disseminate information about LIGO. Funding
will be awarded through a new current cooperative agreement (PHY - 1764464) for
the period from October 1, 2018 through September 30, 2023. The proposed effort
includes:&lt;br/&gt;? Maintenance and operation of the LIGO sites and
interferometers&lt;br/&gt;? Commissioning the interferometers to enhance their
sensitivity to GWs &lt;br/&gt;? Conducting astrophysical data analysis and
detector characterization to discriminate GW signals from noise
sources&lt;br/&gt;? Carrying out research and development to enhance detector
sensitivity beyond the current design performance&lt;br/&gt;? Curation of LIGO
data and its dissemination to the broader research community &lt;br/&gt;?
Provision of software and computing resources to LIGO, and the development of
new computing tools and methods that extend LIGO?s data analysis capabilities
&lt;br/&gt;? Continuation of the vibrant observatory-based LIGO education and
public outreach program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.