* 1764000
* SHF : Medium : Collaborative Research: Decentralized On-Chip Infrastructure for Robustness and Portability in Heterogeneous Multicores
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Luca Carloni, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

When new hardware options emerge in modern computer systems, software code must
be rewritten or retailored to work on the new systems. The result is that
application code-bases do not seamlessly port from one generation to another.
Even worse, they often cannot fully or nimbly adjust to dynamic variations
during execution even on a given system. This work will mitigate the complexity,
portability, and robustness challenges of heterogeneous platforms, while also
continuing to garner high performance. Leveraging the research team's experience
in open-source software release and curriculum development, this project will
distribute the tools developed in these research thrusts as well as teach these
new tools via an existing course on design and programming of heterogeneous
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the research challenges of this
project requires moving away from a processor-centric viewpoint, and towards a
broader perspective aimed at managing communication issues. The research team
will introduce the concept of "hardware shims" that can be employed for a range
of uses such as acting as prefetchers, translating between different
communication protocols, or assisting with dynamic verification of properties
specified by the designer. The project will automate the design and synthesis of
static or dynamic shims that can verify the memory consistency of an arbitrary
heterogeneous multicore for which the designer provides a set of ordering
specifications. The proposed research activities will demonstrate gains in
performance, functional robustness, and code portability as the application is
compiled and executed on systems that differ significantly in terms of the
number and type of processors and specialized hardware accelerators that they
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.