* 1764142
* Hybrid Halide Perovskite Materials for Photocatalytic Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Yong Yan, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 140,512.00

Natural photosynthesis in plants stores the energy of sunlight in new carbon-
carbon bonds formed from carbon dioxide. One of the grand challenges of the 21st
century is to figure out how to accomplish similar chemical reactions with man-
made materials known as photocatalysts. Efficient photocatalysts use low cost
and abundant molecules like carbon dioxide and methane for the light-driven
production of valuable organic chemicals. Scientists have been trying to develop
photocatalysts using metals such as iridium or ruthenium. However, these and
many of the other materials currently under examination perform poorly as
photocatalysts, are expensive, are not abundant on Earth, and/or are difficult
to recycle. Dr. Yong Yan of the New Jersey Institute of Technology is developing
easy-to-process photocatalysts from the lead halide perovskites that are
composed entirely of low cost and abundant elements. This project focuses on
demonstrating that small particles of perovskite photocatalysts can help to
efficiently form new carbon-carbon bonds. Professor Yan engages in outreach to
students from economically disadvantaged areas, to under-represented minorities,
and women. High school student interns synthesize some of the perovskite
nanoparticles used for this project.

With funding support from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Yong Yan of the New Jersey Institute of Technology is developing a
novel photocatalytic approach for carbon-carbon bond formation reactions using
inexpensive lead halide perovskite nanoparticles. APbX3 perovskite, where A is
either methylammonium or cesium and X is a halide, has displayed the potential
to be an efficient and cost-effective photovoltaic material. These perovskites
also show promise for photocatalytic organic synthesis due to their simple
synthesis, post-reaction processability, composition from earth-abundant
elements, exceptional photophysical properties, readily tunable conduction and
valence bands, and high catalytic turnover numbers. Although the instability of
these perovskites towards moisture hinders their application as photovoltaics,
moisture sensitivity is less of a hindrance for chemical catalysis with suitable
organic solvents. This project examines the stability of perovskite
nanoparticles in various organic solvents and their suitability for several
carbon-carbon bond formation reactions. Band edge-tuning of perovskites is used
to adjust their excited-state redox potential to optimize photocatalytic organic
synthesis. High school student interns synthesize some of the perovskite
nanoparticles used for this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.