* 1764352
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Mechanism of High Enantiomeric Resolution with Bile Micelles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Maria Panteva, University of Illinois at Springfield
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 43,448.00

In this collaborative project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors David Rovnyak,
Timothy Strein, Michael Krout, and Maria Panteva seek to understand how bile
salt assemblies interact with chiral (right or left handed) molecules. Naturally
occurring bile salts are of interest because of their significant physiological
functions and for potential applications in the design and analysis of chiral
functional materials. This project investigates how specific regions on the
complex surfaces of bile aggregates control selective interactions with chiral
guest molecules. Advanced tools in magnetic resonance, separation science,
chemical synthesis, thermodynamics and computation are applied to achieve a
detailed understanding of molecular-level interactions. Undergraduate
researchers take leading roles throughout this work, including participating in
experiment design and dissemination of results. Emphasis is on close
interactions with faculty, who mentor students while they develop the expertise
needed to perform independent data acquisition and analysis. This research
provides opportunities for women and for students from under-represented groups
who plan careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bile salts undergo
concentration-dependent stepwise aggregation, accompanied by intricate changes
in their surface and bulk chemistries. Despite considerable study, a precise
description of the structure, the surface-available binding sites, and the
enantioselective "hot spots" of bile aggregates is only beginning to emerge.
With an expanded, multi-disciplinary toolkit, this research provides detailed
understanding of the molecular-level interactions characteristic of both natural
and unnatural bile salt systems. Specifically, this work involves several
complementary foci: (1) Development of more detailed models for chiral selection
by bile micelles, including how bile aliphatic chains contribute to chirally
selective solubilization of guests. This research employs a suite of one and
two-dimensional NMR experiments, as well as micellar electrokinetic capillary
electrophoresis (MEKC), to characterize chiral binding by measurements of
mobility difference. (2) Investigation of how temperature changes tune the
enthalpic and entropic driving factors for chiral selection of guests.
Isothermal titration calorimetry is used to isolate the heat difference
associated with binding different enantiomers by bile aggregates. (3) Strategic
synthesis of analogues of bile acids through functionalization of key regions.
This advances understanding of the mechanisms of chiral selection and permits
the design of improved bile salt analogues. (4) Employment of rigorous, unbiased
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of spontaneous bile salt assembly. In
synergy with experiments, computations help to understand and predict aggregate
structure and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.