* 1764164
* Bifunctional Catalysts for Selective Hydrogenation of Biomass Derivatives: Furfural Hydrogenation over Pt-Sn Supported on Titania
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Donna Chen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 592,171.00

The chemical transformation of biomass into fuels is a process that provides a
renewable source of energy, decreases dependence on fossil fuels, and provides
new markets for agricultural products and bioproducts. A major challenge in the
reforming of biomass is the removal of oxygen, which decreases the long-term
stability of biomass derivatives. New catalysts are needed to facilitate the
conversion of biomass into useable fuels, as well as high-value chemicals. In
this research project, Dr. Donna A. Chen of the University of South Carolina and
Dr. Graeme Henkelman of the University of Texas at Austin are studying catalysts
composed of two different metals that target specific chemical reactions
associated with the different functional groups in biomass derivatives. Both
researchers are also engaged in outreach activities that promote the scientific
education and training of students of all levels. In conjunction with local
elementary schools, Dr. Chen is developing hands-on chemistry tutorials and
demonstrations that fit directly into the students' science curriculum. Dr.
Henkelman leads an initiative that recruits freshman college students into
active research programs and targets students who are from backgrounds that are
historically underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Donna A. Chen
from the University of South Carolina and Dr. Graeme Henkelman from the
University of Texas at Austin develop selective catalysts for the conversion of
highly functionalized molecules derived from cellulosic biomass reforming.
Oxide-supported bimetallic catalysts such as Pt-Sn are investigated for the
selective hydrogenation of furfural for the subsequent production of adhesives,
cements, and coatings. The bifunctional nature of the Pt-Sn surfaces should
allow selective hydrogenation of the C=O bond with high activity while
inhibiting other hydrogenation pathways. On the other hand, strong interactions
between Pt and the oxide support are expected to improve selectivity and prevent
carbon fouling. Dr. Chen studies model, well-defined Pt-Sn/titania surfaces
prepared in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV). These model surfaces are characterized using
a variety of surface science techniques. Catalytic activity studies are
conducted in a microreactor directly coupled to the UHV chamber. Dr. Henkelman
models the supported bimetallic particles using density functional theory to
understand activity, selectively and stability, and to predict which bimetallic
combinations are expected to exhibit desirable
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.