* 1764370
* Combinatorics in Algebra, Geometry, and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Alexander Postnikov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

This project is dedicated to several questions in algebraic and geometric
combinatorics. A key topic of the research is a geometric object, called the
Grassmannian, that appears in the study of a wide variety of other mathematical
topics, but also in physics, where it is related to certain quantum field
theories. Despite its technical nature, some questions explored in the project
are suitable for undergraduate and high school students, and the investigator
will work with these students through the various programs, such as the Program
for Research in Mathematics, Engineering, and Science for High School Students
(PRIMES) and the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP), available
at his institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses several questions
about the positive Grassmannian, a beautiful geometrical object with a rich
combinatorial structure. It is closely related to matroid theory, Schubert
calculus, symmetric functions, and cluster algebras, as well as the study of
scattering amplitudes of elementary particles. Several sub-projects are
concerned with an extension of weakly separated collections and purity
phenomenon to oriented matroids. This area of research is related to the study
of combinatorics of zonotopal tilings and cluster algebras. The project explores
questions about the chip-firing game for root systems. There are many
fascinating conjectures and open problems in this area. Several questions
concern generalized permutohedra, which are certain convex polytopes whose
volumes and numbers of integer lattice points produce many classical
combinatorial sequences. The research on generalized permutohedra involves a new
analogue of the Tutte polynomial for hypergraphs and a remarkable duality, with
links to the theory of knots and tropical geometry. The project also includes
questions regarding the algebra of Chern forms and related power ideals. These
are objects from commutative algebra involving combinatorics of graphs, forests,
hyperplane arrangements, parking functions, and matroids. Many constructions
that will be investigated in this work are related to convex polytopes and other
polytope-like structures, such as permutohedra, amplituhedra, cosmological
polytopes, and root polytopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.