* 1764111
* Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Cation Solvation in Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Duncan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 473,847.00

Many important reactions in Chemistry, from industrial processes (battery
operation, electrochemical plating of metal films) to the function of biological
systems (photosynthesis, cell respiration) involve charged species known as ions
dissolved in water solutions. The interactions between these ions and water
molecules at the atomic and molecular level determine the rate at which they
move in solution and their reactivity, which affect the outcomes and efficiency
of the chemistry involved. Because of the complexity of ion interactions with
the many solvent molecules in solution, it is difficult to understand these
processes to optimize them or to predict the effects of changing conditions such
as concentration or temperature. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Michael Duncan addresses these challenges using new techniques to make
and study small molecular assemblies known as "clusters" containing individual
ions imbedded in a few solvent molecules of water. The composition of these
clusters is controlled by selecting ions attached to a specific number of water
molecules using a mass spectrometer. The structure of these ions and the solvent
network surrounding them is determined by measuring the distinctive patterns of
infrared light that the clusters absorb. Studies on clusters containing a single
water molecule up to dozens or more allow systematic investigation of the
initial solvent organization around the ion and the eventual development of the
full complexity of the liquid solution. Additionally, the work trains students
in the design and operation of vacuum systems and mass spectrometers, as well as
optical experiments using lasers. A partnership with a minority faculty member
at Emory University facilitates the recruitment of minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates cation-solvent clusters
in which the charge carrier is either a protonated molecular species (e.g.,
protonated acetylene or CO2) or a transition metal atom, and the solvent is
usually water. M+(H2O)n complexes are produced by pulsed laser ablation, whereas
protonated ions are produced in a pulsed discharge. The ions are cooled via
supersonic expansion in a molecular beam, mass-analyzed and selected with a
time-of-flight spectrometer, and studied with infrared laser photodissociation
spectroscopy. The measured vibrational patterns are compared to those predicted
by computational chemistry for different isomeric configurations to determine
the structures of these clusters and how this changes with the number of solvent
molecules present. The performance of anharmonic vibrational theory methods is
also evaluated. Ion photofragment imaging experiments investigate the bonding
energetics and charge transfer processes in these systems. The molecular level
understanding of ion solvation is a universal challenge for Chemistry and
Biology. The structures of molecular ions and how they respond to solvation
represent severe obstacles for present levels of theory. Benchmark data from our
experiments are of value to computational researchers as they validate and
refine their high-level anharmonic theory methods. The results from the Duncan
laboratory may also influence molecular dynamics simulations of solutions or
their interfaces. Small protonated ions are also interesting for interstellar
chemistry; data can guide higher resolution measurements needed for interstellar
ion identification and suggest new ions for
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.