* 1764347
* Developing A Sustainable Metal Alkynyl Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Tong Ren, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2023
* USD 548,970.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the project
by Professor Tong Ren. Professor Ren is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at Purdue University. He and his coworkers are developing new classes
of metal alkynyl complexes with interesting photochemical properties. The goal
of this research is to establish a unique family of donor-metal-alkynyl-acceptor
complexes based on earth abundant metals, to study how electrons move within
these molecules under sunlight, and to learn how to control such electron
movement. This study may provide clues on how to improve molecular photovoltaic
systems for the conversion of solar energy into electricity using earth abundant
materials. The project involves both organic and inorganic syntheses and
ultrafast spectroscopy, which provides broad training for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Professor Ren's group is also actively engaging students
underrepresented in science, and plays a significant role in bringing the state
of arts equipment to the K-12 students in the rural areas of Indiana by
enhancing their hands-on laboratory experience. This research and education
program promotes US competitiveness through an exploration of sustainable
systems for photovoltaics, photocatalysis, and molecular electronic devices.

Transition metal acetylide compounds have been employed in a number of
technologically important areas including photovoltaics, photo-catalysis and
molecular electronic devices. The current project begins with the preparation of
the symmetric and unsymmetric bis-alkynyl metal complexes supported by
C-substituted cyclams. A special focus of the synthetic effort is the donor-
bridge-acceptor (D-B-A) dyads, where D and A are respectively alkynyls capped
with appropriate electron donor and acceptor, and B is the M(cyclam) unit.
Besides the establishment of molecular geometry through single crystal X-ray
diffraction, the degree of donor-acceptor interaction and its impact on redox
and photophysical properties is assessed using voltammetric,
spectroelectrochemical and steady-state emission spectroscopic techniques.
Through the collaboration with both colleagues at Purdue and elsewhere, the
investigators explore the attenuation of photoinduced electron transfer within
the D-B-A dyad using both pump-probe and pump-pump-probe techniques. The
transformative nature of the project lies in the promise of replacing precious
metals in metal-alkynyl based materials with earth abundant 3d metals and
discovering new electronic and optoelectronic properties. Professor Ren is
striving to broaden the participation in chemical research enterprise by
underrepresented groups on multiple levels from incoming freshman to junior
faculty, and has maintained a diverse research group. Professor Ren and his
coworkers also play an active role in Purdue's Science Express program,
especially in introducing new teaching modules that reflect the heightened
interest in sustainable chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.