* 1764034
* Finite time blowup for supercritical equations, and correlations of multiplicative functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Terence Tao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 680,526.00

This project concerns two mathematical research directions. The first direction
involves the mathematical study of waves such as water waves or sound waves.
Both physical experiments and numerical simulations exhibit the phenomenon of
turbulence: fluids that are initially very smoothly-flowing and slowly-varying
can develop much more complicated eddies and fine-scale behavior. It remains
unknown whether the equations that model fluid dynamics can give rise to "blow-
up," in which some portion of the simulated fluid achieves infinite velocity.
This project studies the extent to which blow-up can be "engineered" by tweaking
the equations that model fluid mechanics, such as changing the number of
dimensions in space. The second direction involves questions related to the
notorious twin prime conjecture in number theory. This conjecture asserts that
there are infinitely many pairs of prime numbers that are separated by a
distance of two, such as 3 and 5, 5 and 7, 11 and 13, 17 and 19, and so on. It
is still not known whether the assertion is true, but recently much progress has
been made on understanding more tractable questions, such as how often it occurs
that a pair of numbers, separated by a distance of two, both have an odd number
of prime factors. This project aims to develop these promising new techniques
further, with potential application to proving or disproving the twin primes
conjecture and to other difficult, important questions in number theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the fluid dynamical part of the project
focuses primarily on variants of the Euler equations for incompressible fluids,
especially higher-dimensional Euler equations on Riemannian manifolds. The
ability to select the metric of such a manifold gives a promising way to
"program" the equations to exhibit certain desirable behavior. Prior work has
established that the dynamics of certain quadratic ordinary differential
equations can be programmed into such systems. The project will continue work
towards exhibiting finite-time blow-up (or other interesting behavior, such as
Turing universality) for these models. For the number-theoretic aspects of the
project, the investigator and collaborators aim to establish further cases of
the Chowla conjecture (or its logarithmically-averaged variants) on correlations
of the Liouville function, by combining the recently-developed entropy decrement
method with techniques from analytic number theory, combinatorics, and ergodic
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.