* 1764148
* Conformer-specific Spectroscopy and Isomerization Dynamics  of Peptide and Synthetic Foldamer Helices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Scott McLuckey, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Most biologically relevant molecules (for example, proteins and DNA) are large
enough that they can take on many molecular shapes, dictated by a delicate
balance of internal ("intramolecular") interactions and interactions with the
surrounding solvent or other neighboring molecules. One of the common folding
patterns (called "foldamers") of naturally occurring peptides and proteins are
alpha-helices, held together by hydrogen bonds ("H-bonds") between the amino
acid constituents of the protein. However, synthetic chemists are designing new
amino acid building blocks that prefer other hydrogen bonding arrangements
(called "synthetic foldamers"), including helices with a wide array of different
hydrogen bonding patterns. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure
Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Timothy Zwier of Purdue University is using an array of laser-based spectroscopy
methods to probe these helices and their interconversions in new ways. They take
these molecules out of their natural environment by bringing them into the gas
phase via laser desorption or electrospray ionization, and cool them to
temperatures within a few degrees of absolute zero. In so doing, they probe the
unique properties of each molecular conformation in the absence of solvent
effects and without interference from the other conformations that may be
present in the sample. Laser spectroscopic tools then probe the network of
H-bonds in each helix, and reveal why some foldamers are preferred over others,
and how much energy is needed to change from one foldamer form to another. This
research project impacts society at large by providing incisive experimental
tests of theoretical models that attempt to predict the shape and motions of
molecules. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project are being
trained for careers in high-technology industry, academia, and government
laboratories. The Zwier research group continues to collaborate with
predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUI, namely Profs. Stephen Drucker of
UW-Eau Claire and Matt Kubasik at Fairfield University), thus enhancing the
training of a broader range of undergraduate students, and provide unique career
preparation opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zwier
group is employing an array of laser-based spectroscopic methods for obtaining
single-conformation spectra of gas-phase peptides in the infrared (IR) and
ultraviolet (UV) spectral regions. Laser desorption and electrospray ionization
are used to bring molecules or ions into the gas phase. Samples temperatures are
brought below 10K via supersonic expansion or cryo-cooling. The gas-phase
species are then interrogated using UV photo-fragmentation and UV-IR double-
resonance techniques. Of particular interest are the inherent conformational
preferences and unique vibrational and electronic absorptions of of natural and
synthetic foldamer helices. Some of these molecules incorporate a molecular
"tether" that "locks" the helix in place. On the other hand, conformational
constraints synthesized into the molecular backbone may cause the molecule to
fold in a specific way. The experimental spectra obtained are lending new
insights into the mechanism and energy requirements for helix interconversion,
and provide benchmark tests of the accuracy of state-of-the-art calculations (ab
initio, density functional theory and semi-empirical force field calculations
done on molecules in the absence of solvent). In addition to the benchmarking of
theoretical models and the training of students, the findings of this research
are advancing our understanding of synthetic foldamers, which may have
applications in new materials and the treatment of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.