* 1764039
* CSR: Medium: Understanding and Automatically Adjusting Performance Sensitive Software Configurations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Shan Lu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,149,113.00

Every day, people interact with complex software systems on their mobile devices
and in the cloud. Experts develop this software, but they cannot account for all
possible uses, so they make the software configurable using redefinable
parameters. Most of these parameters affect software's performance. These
performance-related configuration parameters are growing exponentially.
Unfortunately, so is the difficulty of setting them. Performance-related
misconfigurations are a leading cause of system failures (e.g., web services
crashing) and lag (e.g., delayed response to user requests). This project will
develop AutoConf to automatically set performance-related configuration
parameters and eliminate these sources of failure in critical software
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand and manage
performance-related configurations, AutoConf has four major research objectives.
The first is studying existing configuration parameters to understand why and
when they lead to failures. The second is designing a new interface where users
set high-level goals in terms of desired performance rather than setting
specific parameter values. The third is developing techniques that automatically
and dynamically configure software to meet these goals. The final objective is
constructing tools that ensure the interface's proper usage to produce the
desired behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, AutoConf will change the
way users deploy software. Instead of setting 100s of configuration parameters,
they will state their goals. AutoConf will automatically adjust performance-
related configurations to ensure the goals are met, resulting in faster and more
robust software deployment. Additionally, the AutoConf project will create many
research opportunities that will be used to broaden participation in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation and software releases will be posted
at http://autoconf.cs.uchicago.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.