* 1764323
* HSI Conference: Dissecting the STEM Education Ecosystem in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs):Regional Insights from Southern California
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Yusheng Liu, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 02/29/2020
* USD 90,784.00

California State University Fullerton will conduct a three-day regional
conference focused on the STEM education ecosystem at Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) to identify the most critical challenges and opportunities
in STEM undergraduate education and actionable solutions that may be relevant to
the mission of the National Science Foundation. The conference is framed and
guided by a theoretical model that integrates social cognitive career theory and
prior literature on factors related to minority students' academic choices and
outcomes. The conference will host 80 participants from eight critical
stakeholder groups to discuss six themes: (1) Preparing pre-college students -
gaps in and opportunities for entering STEM majors, (2) Transforming the first-
year college experience - innovative educational technology and inclusive
pedagogies for student learning and retention in STEM, (3) Smoothing transitions
from two- to four-year HSIs - opportunities and challenges for institutional
partnerships, (4) Building coalitions among stakeholders in undergraduate
research experience - opportunities and challenges for student persistence, (5)
Removing academic barriers - gaps and opportunities for academic remediation,
and (6) Sustaining ecosystems at HSI campuses - social and cultural
inclusiveness for student success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will use
the Appreciative Inquiry (AI) methodology to guide the panel discussions of the
six conference themes, each representing an aspect in the STEM education process
in the ecosystem. Using this approach, participants will develop a shared vision
for change and innovation by focusing on HSIs' greatest assets, capabilities,
capacities, and resources to create new possibilities for student success. The
expected deliverable is a comprehensive report that will serve as an evidence-
based synthesis to support the establishment of a center for undergraduate STEM
education at HSIs. The event is intended also to result in coalitions of
partners to continue discussions about improving STEM undergraduate education at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.