* 1764399
* Coupled Experimental and Computational Investigation of Interfaces in Multicomponent Photoelectrodes for Solar Water Splitting
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Kyoung-Shin Choi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 540,887.00

Solar water splitting provides a sustainable and environmentally benign route
for the production of hydrogen gas for use as a clean fuel source. This is why
low cost and efficient solar water splitting is one of the grand scientific
challenges. One way to split water with sunlight is with a photoelectrochemical
cell (PEC), but these devices are not yet efficient enough for practical use.
This project examines methods of optimizing parts of the PEC: the catalyst and
protection layers that are key components for efficient and sustainable solar
water splitting. It also examines the semiconductor electrodes that harvest
solar energy, then generate and transport the electrical charge used for
hydrogen generation. The overall performance of a PEC is affected not only by
the bulk properties of these individual parts, but also by the interfaces formed
between them. However, the difficulty of studying the interfaces relevant to
water splitting have stood in the way of their study. In this project, Dr.
Kyoung-Shin Choi of the University of Wisconsin - Madison and Dr. Giulia Galli
of the University of Chicago combine experimental and computational studies to
understand and control interfacial properties of a representative PEC system -
bismuth vanadate-based photoanodes and their interfaces with other metal oxides.
This project makes it possible to devise general strategies to construct optimal
interfaces between the different parts of a PEC to enhance solar water
splitting. Dr. Choi and Dr. Galli are also setting up combined experimental-
computational tutorials to teach researchers in the field how to best compare
computational and experimental results. Finally, they are creating and
maintaining a website that contains useful data on PECs that can be accessed and
used by researchers worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a photoelectrochemical
cell (PEC), in addition to semiconductor electrodes that harvest solar energy
and generate/transport charge carriers, catalyst and protection layers are key
components for efficient and sustainable solar water splitting. The overall
performance of multicomponent photoelectrodes is affected not only by the bulk
properties of the individual constituents but also by the interfaces formed
between them. The characteristics of these interfaces can considerably affect
the charge transport properties and recombination loss, thus determining the
number of charge carriers reaching the electrode surface to participate in water
splitting reactions. To date, systematic studies of the atomic and electronic
structures of interfaces relevant to water splitting have been extremely rare,
due to numerous experimental and computational challenges. In this project, Dr.
Choi and Dr. Galli are establishing a general and fundamental understanding of
the effect of interfacial atomic and electronic structures on
photoelectrochemical properties by combining experimental and computational
studies. In order to elucidate interface-photoelectrochemical property
relationships, BiVO4-based photoanodes are used as a representative
multicomponent photoelectrode system, and a series of semiconductor/oxygen
evolution catalyst (OEC), semiconductor/protection layer, and protection
layer/OEC interfaces are constructed and examined by using single crystal and
polycrystal BiVO4 electrodes with systematically varied surface terminations. An
atomic level understanding of interface-photoelectrochemical property
relationships makes it possible to devise general strategies to construct
optimal interfaces among photon absorbers, protective materials, and catalysts
to enhance solar water splitting. The proposed work also provides the community
with validated coupled experimental-computational strategies for studying
complex, heterogeneous interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.