* 1764265
* Metrics and Singular Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Brian Street, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

One of the most basic concepts in mathematics is the notion of distance. In
different contexts, different notions of distance are relevant. For example,
when parallel parking, the goal is to move a car horizontally into a parking
space, but this takes a lot more time than driving the car the same distance
forwards or backwards. It is natural, therefore, to treat such a horizontal
distance in parking as being further than the comparable distance in driving
straight forward. Distance measures of this type are known as "sub-Riemannian"
distances and have played a decisive role in several areas of mathematics. This
project concerns generalizations of such distances and their applications to
open questions. The principal investigator will consider two important questions
in harmonic analysis where such distances are a key component, with the goal of
using a deeper understanding of these distances to make progress on open
questions. The tools to study these generalized sub-Riemannian distances are
borrowed from several different areas of mathematics: differential equations,
geometry, and harmonic analysis. They are then applied to questions from other
areas of mathematics: several complex variables and singular integrals. The
project thus brings together ideas from several areas of mathematics to attack
important open questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By defining a generalized notion
of a sub-Riemannian metric, this project introduces two primary areas of inquiry
where geometric methods can be applied. The first area is the study of the
Bergman and Szego projections on a class of domains of finite type. To study
this, the principal investigator plans to develop a generalized notion of
scaling in the holomorphic category. This is presented as a quantitative version
of the Newlander-Nirenberg theorem. This is the holomorphic analog of the
quantitative theory of sub-Riemannian geometry, which has proven to be useful in
many areas of analysis and geometry. The second area of study is providing a
measure-theoretic approach to singular Radon transforms. Singular Radon
transforms have been an active area of research for fifty years, though work has
mostly focused on results where the underlying surfaces are smooth. This project
introduces a geometry that is intrinsic to a singular Radon transform, through
which one can study these operators from a purely measure-theoretic standpoint.
The project aims to use this framework to address questions regarding curves
where certain types of curvature vanish to infinite order, a topic which has
proven unamenable to current methods. The project also explores a new kind of
differential equation that arises in inverse problems. In some settings, this
differential equation exhibits existence but not uniqueness, while in others it
exhibits uniqueness but not existence. Study of this differential equation will
be the topic of an undergraduate research project and will use methods developed
to study a special case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.