* 1764119
* The Inviscid Limit and Large Time Behavior of Fluid Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Toan Nguyen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2022
* USD 210,000.00

This research project studies the motion of fluids such as water or air moving
past solid objects such as a ship or an airfoil. A particular focus will be on
studying the thin layers that emerge near the surface of solid objects. The
research will provide a more accurate description of the fluid motion that
involves several thin layers with different length scales and a better
understanding of the transition from laminar to turbulent flows. The study will
help to better calculate the skin friction drag on an airfoil and the heat
transfer between a body and the fluid around it. The project will include
research activities that train graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project proves the instability of generic boundary layers, constructs multi-
layer solutions to classical Navier-Stokes equations with small viscosity in
domains with a boundary, and studies the damping mechanism of fluid flows at the
large time. The goal is to elucidate the new understanding of viscous boundary
layers. The main approach will involve the spectral analysis and resolvent
estimates of linearized Navier-Stokes equations near generic shear flows. The
study of fluid damping will make use of techniques that are adapted from
dispersive equations and quantum theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.