* 1764298
* Oxidative Coupling in Complexity Building Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Marisa Kozlowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 484,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Marisa Kozlowski of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Pennsylvania. She is developing new methods to couple molecular fragments into
larger molecules. The chemistry allows for these larger molecules to be rapidly
assembled in a manner that enables variations in their overall structure. This
in turns allows for the study of how those variation alter the molecules
properties. The molecules targeted for synthesis have a wide variety of
potential applications ranging from their use as semiconductors with
charge/energy transport properties for use in organic electronic devices and as
liquid crystal materials to pharmaceutical applications in connection with the
opium alkaloids. Much of the project lies at the interface of organic,
computational, and materials chemistry. Therefore, the diversity of the science
being pursued is well suited for the education of scientists at all levels.
Broadening the participation of underrepresented populations in chemistry
research is a particular focus of Professor Kozlowski with support for the
Alliance for Diversity in Science and Engineering (ADSE) at Penn.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goals of this research program entail the
development of oxidative methods for the coupling of fragments to generate more
complex targets. Such routes introduce functionality at non-functionalized
centers, thereby eliminating the need for complex pre-functionalized starting
materials. The chemistry studied is contributing to environmentally benign
methods for chemical synthesis by 1) engineering reactions at non-functionalized
centers, thereby eliminating the need for complex pre-functionalized starting
materials, 2) using oxygen is used as the terminal oxidizing agent, and 3) using
less toxic and less expensive base metals. Transformations that are being
pursued include oxidative phenol coupling to bring together three or more
aromatic subunits, which are then oxidized further to provide polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons with selective peripheral functionalization. Kinetic
resolution is being explored with oxidative phenol coupling to create complex
enantioenriched architectures, such as precursors to the opium alkaloids.
Finally, oxidative coupling of the sp3 centers of alkyl arenes with a range of
tertiary nucleophiles are being explored. Successful development of the methods
is having a broad impact on a number of areas as there is a need to access such
structures in the pharmaceutical, chemical, materials science, and agricultural
industries as well as in basic biological and chemical research endeavors. The
educational plan involves training high school students, undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers as well as outreach to foster
inclusion of underrepresented communities into the chemistry research
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.