* 1764304
* Collaborative Research: Combining Operando Spectroscopy and Multi-Scale Modeling to Elucidate the Mechanism of Aqueous Phase Reforming of Oxygenates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Carsten Sievers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 317,681.00

One of the greatest challenges facing society is supplying energy to an ever-
increasing population in the face of declining petroleum reserves and an
increasingly need for sustainability. One promising strategy is to derive energy
from biomass. Specifically, it is estimated that by 2030, the U.S. can produce
more than 1 billion metric tons of dry biomass per year, which would have an
energy content equivalent to 46% of the current oil consumption, if properly
converted into usable fuels. However, many processes for converting biomass into
fuels and chemicals require the addition of hydrogen gas. Unfortunately, present
methods for supplying hydrogen gas from renewable resources are inefficient and
costly, impeding the expansion of the biomass economy. The aqueous phase
reforming (APR) of biomass is a promising strategy for producing hydrogen gas.
Specifically, in APR, a part of the biomass is converted into H2 over a
catalyst, which is a material that enables a chemical reaction without being
consumed itself. Although promising, hydrogen yields from APR have thus far been
disappointing, indicating a need to improve the efficiencies of APR catalysts.
The first step in designing new catalysts entails understanding the function of
the existing catalysts. Here, Dr. Rachel Getman of Clemson University and Dr.
Carsten Sievers of the Georgia Institute of Technology are combining state-of-
the-art modeling and spectroscopy to study the three key steps of the APR
reaction: i) the removal of hydrogen; ii) generation of carbon monoxide; and
iii) reaction of water and carbon monoxide to form hydrogen and carbon dioxide.
Since the carbon dioxide produced in APR will be used to grow new biomass, APR
is a "carbon-neutral" process. Broader impacts involve the inclusion of
undergraduates, especially women and underrepresented minorities, into
meaningful explorations of fundamental and applied chemistry. Research results
are also being presented at the Robert C. Williams Paper Museum of Papermaking
in Atlanta, GA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Rachel Getman from Clemson University and
Dr. Carsten Sievers from the Georgia Institute of Technology are combining
multiscale modeling and operando spectroscopy to provide fundamental insight
regarding the active sites and mechanism of the Aqueous Phase Reforming (APR) of
biomass-derived oxygenates to hydrogen and carbon dioxide over supported Pt
catalysts. Specifically, the project is focused on how selective and non-
selective dehydrogenation, decarbonylation, and Water Gas Shift (WGS) are
affected by water as a solvent, co-adsorbed water and spectator species, and the
nature of support. The new insight will enable researchers to design improved
catalysts and optimize process conditions. Modeling studies involve combining
methods in density functional theory with classical molecular dynamics, in order
to simultaneously incorporate the breaking and forming of chemical bonds and the
thermal motions of the liquid water molecules in the solvent. The main
experimental technique is attenuated total reflection IR spectroscopy, which
allows for probing surface species on catalysts that are immersed in a solution
of the reactant. Experimental and theoretical efforts are highly integrated. For
example, calculated and measured vibrational frequencies of surface species and
rate constants for their formation and conversion are compared, enabling the
development of models that are consistent with experimental observations. The
PIs are strongly supporting the participation of female and underrepresented
minority students. Further, the results from this project are presented to a
broader audience through a display at the Robert C. Williams Paper Museum of
Papermaking in Atlanta, GA as well as through a biorefining
elective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.