* 1764421
* NSF-Simons Center for Quantitative Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* William Kath, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

The NSF-Simons Center for Quantitative Biology at Northwestern University will
catalyze quantitative approaches to fundamental questions about growth and
development by integrating mathematical modeling and analysis with state-of-the-
art experimental investigations. One of the great mysteries of our world is how
myriad forms of life grow and develop from a single cell into a new organism.
The sequence of developmental events is surprisingly robust, even though the
biological processes emerge from a complex interplay between genetic programming
and environmental inputs that can be quite variable. The revolution in "omics"
and high-throughput analysis has uncovered associations in this process, but the
causal mechanisms remain unknown. The research at the Center seeks to understand
the underlying biological mechanisms and principles associated with these
remarkable phenomena. The Center focuses on four interrelated research areas
selected to elucidate distinct aspects of growth and development. Each project
integrates hypothesis-driven mathematical modeling and data-driven mathematical
analysis with advanced imaging, genomics, and metabolomics tools to explore
biological processes across time, space, and extrinsic variables. Graduate,
undergraduate, and postdoctoral trainees will be embedded in shared mathematical
and biological environments, engaged in work with investigators across this
multi-disciplinary spectrum. The Center will build interdisciplinary capacity
through a visiting scholars program, a named fellows program, a pilot project
program, a middle-school science club learning module, workshops, and training
courses. It will advance knowledge in the biological and mathematical sciences,
generate new conceptual models explaining development and growth, and train new
investigators who are experienced in both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-
Simons Center for Quantitative Biology aims to transform understanding of
organismal growth and development through quantitative approaches that combine
three fundamental mathematical areas: dynamical systems theory, stochastic
processes, and dimension reduction. The Center also intends to make substantial
technical advances in quantitative approaches, by producing new high-dimensional
biological datasets across spatial (cellular to organismal) and temporal scales,
new conceptual models of diverse developmental processes, and mathematical
models that describe developmental emergence. Project 1 will produce single-cell
RNA-sequence data from a frog embryo and mouse embryonic stem cells at various
stages during development and new conceptual models of embryogenesis using
dynamical systems theory and statistical dimension reduction. The high-
dimensional approach and datasets from Project 2 will enable a new mathematical
model of roundworm growth as a function of genotype and environmental variables.
Project 3 will provide a new overarching conceptual model of environmentally-
driven oscillatory dynamics in the fruit fly and unique datasets that link
molecular signatures in the fat body of the fly with phenotypic behavior. The
image analysis of Project 4 will study stochastic variation in fruit fly
development and generate a new mathematical model of the impact of protein
expression noise on development processes. Across projects, new statistical
methodologies and methods for combining multiple types of mathematical
approaches will be tested and validated. New biological datasets, conceptual
models, and mathematical models will be made available to the broader research
community. The Center will promote interdisciplinary education and workforce
training at the intersection of mathematical sciences and biology, scientific
outreach to the underserved K-12 education community, and interdisciplinary
training for visiting scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.