* 1764273
* Collaborative Research: Telomerase Regulation in Deep Branching Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kausik Chakrabarti, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 438,341.00

This project focuses on telomerase, the enzyme that is responsible for making
telomeres, structures that protect the ends of all eukaryotic chromosomes,
reminiscent of the hard ends of shoelaces. The genetic mechanism of telomere
replication by telomerase is better studied in yeast and mammalian cells; as far
from each other as those two organisms are, they in fact represent relatively
recent branches of eukaryotic phylogeny. In contrast, in this study an ancient,
deep branching lineage of eukaryotes, kinetoplastid protists will be examined.
The organism of choice, Trypanosoma brucei, has telomerase with unique
structural and functional properties, and result should indicate how this enzyme
works. The project will encourage full participation from women and
underrepresented minorities in science. Apart from training graduate and
postdoctoral trainees, this project will also implement a three-year
undergraduate program (BIOKEYS) in both PIs' laboratories; the major goal of
this program will be to teach undergraduate researchers to value
interdisciplinary sciences early in their research careers. In addition to
gaining experience from designing experiments and problem solving using high-end
technologies, students will be teaching and learning from each other as part of
a research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein enzyme,
provides the major means for elongation of chromosome ends (telomeres), thus
counteracting the loss of linear DNA ends in each cell cycle due to incomplete
DNA replication by conventional DNA polymerases. Telomerase has two core
components, the Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase (TERT) that catalyzes telomere
elongation, and the telomerase RNA (TER), which provides a template for telomere
DNA synthesis. The mechanisms of telomere elongation by telomerase are poorly
understood in Trypanosoma brucei, a deep branching Kinetoplastid. Therefore,
this project dissects structural, biochemical and genetic features of telomerase
RNA in T. brucei to understand the mechanism of telomerase regulation in early
eukaryotic species. The recent discovery of the T. brucei TER reveals novel
features exclusive to deep branching eukaryotes, suggesting mechanistic
differences in the process of telomere synthesis between T. brucei and higher
eukaryotic organisms. Therefore, this project: (i) investigates telomerase RNA
structure at a single nucleotide resolution using NMR and SHAPE chemistry, (ii)
defines key TERT contact sites on TER that are essential for telomerase function
in T. brucei using HITS-CLIP technology, and (iii) establishes the functional
significance of TR domains by genetic manipulations and telomerase functional
assays. Overall, this research will allow significant advances in understanding
the mechanistic details of telomerase evolution in protists.