* 1764154
* Spectral Theory and Dynamics of Ergodic Schrodinger Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Zhenghe Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 209,938.00

The goal of this research project is to develop dynamical techniques for the
spectral analysis of the ergodic Schroedinger operators, which arise in modeling
the motion of quantum particles in certain disordered media. A large part of the
theory of dynamical systems deals with long-term behaviors of typical
trajectories in certain mathematical or physical systems, such as hyperbolic
systems or Hamiltonian systems. A key task of spectral analysis of the ergodic
Schroedinger operators is to study the asymptotic behaviors of the solutions of
the associated eigenvalue equations. Bridges between two different areas can
then be built since ``asymptotic behaviors of solutions'' may be interpreted as
``long-term behaviors of certain systems''. The goal of this project is to
develop dynamical techniques that are driven by building such bridges and that
may benefit both areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different disordered media lead to
different type of ergodic base systems. The famous and intensively studied
Anderson model corresponds to i.i.d. random variables which can be generated by
full shift. Two types of base systems with which this project is concerned are
quasi-periodic systems, typical almost periodic systems, and hyperbolic systems,
classic type of strongly mixing systems. Various levels of randomness may be
detected by a dynamical object, the Lyapunov exponent, which is the main object
of study of this project. One focus of this project is the study of positivity
and large deviation estimates of the Lyapunov exponent. These properties are
super sensitive to the randomness of the base dynamics, are generally difficult
to obtain, and are thus among central topics in dynamics systems. From the side
of spectral theory, they are strong indications of the Anderson Localization
phenomenon and imply immediately certain regularity of both the Lyapunov
exponent and the integrated density of states. Deep investigation of the two
properties for both quasi-periodic and hyperbolic base dynamics may shed light
on how to obtain positive Lyapunov exponent of the standard map. This is one of
the most notorious unsolved problems in dynamical systems where the difficulty
lies exactly in the complicated coexistence of both elliptic and hyperbolic
behaviors. Another fundamental relation between dynamical systems and spectral
theory is the Cantor Spectrum phenomenon. The most famous physical example
regarding this phenomenon is the Hofstadter's butterfly. In dynamical systems,
Cantor spectrum phenomenon may be viewed as some kind of ubiquity of uniformly
hyperbolic systems. Another focus of this project is then to investigate Cantor
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.