* 1764268
* HSI Conference: Stakeholder Perspectives on Challenges and Opportunities for Improving Undergraduate STEM Education at HSIs
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Lee Clapp, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 03/31/2019
* USD 99,871.00

The Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station, Angelo State University, El
Centro College, West Texas A&amp;M University, Del Mar College, Texas A&amp;M
University-Kingsville, Texas Tech University, Texas Woman's University, and the
Texas Association of Chicanos in Higher Education, will conduct a conference
titled Stakeholder Perspectives on Challenges and Opportunities for Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education at Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). Up to 140
students, faculty, staff, administrators, advocates, and funders will identify
challenges and opportunities for improving STEM education at 2- and 4-year HSIs,
building capacity for and student participation in STEM research, and
implementing institutional change for addressing barriers to Latinx student
success in STEM. Nationwide surveys of stakeholders will further explore themes
from the conference, and results will be disseminated to the HSI community and
NSF to inform funding and institutional initiatives. The conference was proposed
in response to a Dear Colleague Letter issued by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) calling for submission of conference proposals to inform the design of
NSF's new Hispanic-Serving Institution program, to be established in fiscal year
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will 1) identify the specific
challenges 2- and 4-year HSIs face in adopting evidence-based institutional
changes for improving STEM education and Latinx student success, with a specific
focus on areas the National Science Foundation could potentially address through
targeted funding opportunities; 2) identify challenges and opportunities for 2-
and 4-year HSIs in building capacity for research and expanding STEM instruction
and other Latinx student supports through collaborations with other institutions
and by pursuing appropriate funding opportunities; 3) solicit Latinx STEM
student and alumni perspectives on barriers to success in STEM and
psychosociocultural tailoring of institutional changes to meet Latinx student
needs and improve STEM education at HSIs; and 4) conduct a follow-up survey of
stakeholders at 2- and 4-year HSIs across the country to capture a more
representative cross-section of their needs, challenges, and priorities based on
themes developed through focus groups, semi-structured interviews, and
conference discussions. Attendees and presenters will participate in focus
groups, semi-structured interviews, and roundtable discussions that will
generate key themes of interest to NSF and the broader HSI community, and these
themes will be integrated in a stakeholder survey to quantify related 2- and
4-year HSI needs and priorities. Results are expected to inform NSF's new HSI
program and contribute to an improved understanding of institutional
barriers/opportunities and student perspectives on improving Latinx student
recruitment, retention, and advancement in STEM. In addition to informing NSF's
new HSI program, conference and survey results will be disseminated to all HSIs
and the broader student success research community by making reports available
online, presenting results at relevant conferences, and publishing in peer-
reviewed journals.