* 1764316
* RCN: Evolution in Changing Seas
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 523,044.00

How marine species will react to changing environment and climate is not well
understood. While the interaction between oceanographic and ecological processes
has yielded considerable insight into the ecology of marine species, the
evolutionary responses of marine species are not well integrated into this
framework. This project research coordinated network on "Evolution in Changing
Seas" (ECSRCN), will bring marine scientists together with evolutionary
biologists having expertise in population genetics, eco-evolutionary dynamics,
and phylogenetics to better understand and predict the evolutionary responses of
marine species to climate stressors. ECS-RCN will increase the impact of
evolutionary studies in marine systems through increased&lt;br/&gt;collaboration
among scientists from diverse fields. Furthermore, the empirical robustness of
these studies will also be improved through the development of standards for
experimental design and statistical analysis, especially for genomics data
analysis. ECS-RCN will build a diverse network through a dedicated workshop for
early-career participants, by advertising with diversity groups, and by
dedicating funds to increase diversity. This project will support one
postdoctoral researcher who will play a key role in&lt;br/&gt;coordinating
scientific activities of the network as well as receive interdisciplinary
training through network activities, strongly positioning them to become a
leader in the field. ECS-RCN will also build the foundation for a lasting
network through establishment of a listserv, open access to publications,
development of a website, and development of teaching modules for undergraduate
and graduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, ECS-RCN will
consider how coupling between oceanographic and evolutionary processes shape
adaptive and plastic responses to climate change, from the fundamental level of
genomes scaled up to entire populations. Under this theme,&lt;br/&gt;the
objectives of ECS-RCN are to synthesize the current state of knowledge, to
prioritize lines of inquiry that will advance knowledge in marine and
evolutionary biology, to determine the appropriate experimental designs and
statistical approaches for robustly testing these lines of inquiry (including
genomics approaches), and to build a foundation for a diverse and lasting
network. These goals will be realized over the course of 3 years, starting with
a Synthesis Workshop in Year 1 where working groups will be established,
followed by working group meetings and formation of a Genomics Subcommittee in
Year 2, and ending with an Integration and Training Workshop aimed at early
career scientists in Year 3. To promote synthesis and self-organization at
workshops, the workshops will employ the Open Space format. ECS-RCN will promote
evolutionary thinking in biological oceanography and integrate unique aspects of
marine life-histories into evolutionary principles. ECS-RCN will also advance
knowledge in both marine and evolutionary biology through synthesis and the
development of frameworks for merging genomics and ecology. The activities will
provide novel insights into pressing questions in both marine and evolutionary
ecology, such as: what drives geographic patterns of local (mal)adaptation and
plasticity?; what are the mechanisms that generate adaptive vs. nonadaptive
plasticity?; what is the role of genotype dependent dispersal in adaptation?;
what are the genetic constraints on adaptation of function-valued traits to
climate change?; and how do epigenetic modifications act as a mediator between
adaptation and plasticity? Ultimately, the RCN aims to develop a quantitative
understanding of the relative importance of ecological versus evolutionary
responses to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.