* 1764102
* CSR: Medium: Declarative Programmable Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Carl Maltzahn, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 850,000.00

Everyone who processes large amounts of data - biologists and physicists, data
scientists, and computer scientists of all stripes - must rely on distributed
storage systems. Storage systems deal with conflicting demands: they must
accommodate the changing workloads of the domain experts who use them, while
ensuring good performance by taking advantage of changing hardware such as
faster disks and networks - and guaranteeing that data is safely stored. This
means that they must be rigid and flexible at the same time. Declarative
programmable storage attempts to provide the best of both worlds by providing a
simple, concise language for describing new storage interfaces, and using
techniques from database optimization to automatically find correct and
efficient implementations of the interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Declarative
programmable storage identifies key opportunities to apply classic data
management systems concepts - such as declarative language and cost-based query
optimization - to the domain of large-scale storage systems, allowing for cross-
pollination between the storage, data management and distributed systems
research communities. Additionally, this project requires novel research into
cost modeling and query planning in the context of the storage domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By decoupling the specification of new storage application
programming interfaces (a task that should be undertaken by domain experts -
e.g., physicists - in a high-level language) from their concrete implementations
(a low-level task that can be automated), this project will free the users of
distributed storage systems from the need to be experts in the internals of such
systems. Consequently, these domain experts will be able to focus on innovation
within their own area of expertise rather than becoming expert storage system
programmers as well. These application programming interfaces can be specified
once and re-optimized whenever device characteristics change. Hence the labor of
these users will be made "future-proof" against the rapid evolution of storage
hardware, software and configurations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific results,
software, and data from the work performed under this grant will be made
available to the public under a free and open source software license. The
project repository will be available at https://declstore.soe.ucsc.edu/ backed
up by departmental backup systems to ensure long-term preservation of digital
artifacts. In the long-term, this project will aim to engage open-source
software communities to maintain and evolve software created under this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.