* 1764257
* Nano-elasticity of lipid membranes: continuum theory, molecular-level simulations, and application to dynamin-induced membrane fission
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Markus Deserno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 480,000.00

Markus Deserno from Carnegie Mellon University is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop predictive theoretical and computational models for lipid membranes at
very small scales. The Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the
Division of Materials Research also contributes to this award. Lipid membranes
are a major structural components of all living cells. They separate a cell from
its environment and often divide cells into smaller specialized compartments,
called "organelles". In dividing cells, membranes assume a great variety of
intricately shapes. While researchers have excellent theoretical and
computational models to describe some shapes, others are less well understood,
even though these shapes may have key roles in cellular processes. Professor
Deserno and his research group are developing better theories for understanding
the shapes of lipid membranes and how this affects the cell function.
Furthermore, this project advances learning, by providing many
examples&lt;br/&gt;for classroom and homework material in both undergraduate and
graduate courses (statistical thermodynamics, biological physics), as well as
pedagogically-instructive scripts for theoretical or computational modeling
tutorials. The topic offers opportunities for productive undergraduate research
projects. Special efforts are made to attract minority students to science using
outreach projects with both middle and high schools in Pittsburgh. Demonstration
materials are made of everyday materials such as paper and plastic foils. The
ability to manipulate such materials quantitatively guide students from
intuitively-familiar ideas about mechanical stability, as applied to buildings
and bridges, to their unexpected applications in cell biology?related to
understanding the human body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to improve the quantitative
description of lipid membrane elasticity at the nanoscale. The project seeks to
extend the classical coupling between membrane curvature and lipid tilt to
biquadratic order, opening the door to understanding numerous new cell biology
phenomena. The research group confronts the refined theory with a broad
repertoire of computational and experimental data, to thoroughly test the theory
and extract underlying elastic parameters needed for further predictions. The
researchers extend the theoretical framework to encompass the challenging but
biologically common situation of membranes that not only consists of a mixture
of lipids, but whose composition might differ between the two membrane leaflets
(asymmetric membranes). Finally, the team predicts emergent membrane properties
such as edge tensions or fission barriers, or more generally, situations
involving highly curved regions that push present elastic membrane theories
beyond their limits. As an especially important application, the process of
membrane fission is being studied through a combination of theoretical and
coarse-grained computational modeling. This work is elucidating the stresses
between the lipid membrane and the enclosing dynamin filament, the importance of
symmetry-breaking end-effects, and the role of thermal fluctuations; and the
consequence of active constriction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.