* 1764235
* Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Photoheterolysis Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Arthur Winter, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program
supports the research of Professor Arthur Winter at Iowa State University.
Professor Winter seeks to understand the structure-reactivity principles for
photochemical reactions, with the long-term goal of developing a predictive
theoretical model that relates chemical structure to reactivity. The research
focuses on why certain types of structures break apart to form ions. The
research uses a combination of theory and experiment. Photochemical reactions
have broad applications in biology and environmental chemistry. Establishing the
basic mechanisms for fundamental bond breaking contributes to the broader
challenge of understanding the guiding principles in photochemical reactions.
Professor Winter engages college freshman in an early multidisciplinary research
experiences through the Freshman Research Initiative. This research provides
research opportunities for undergraduates and students from under-represented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study photoheterolysis reactions, Professor
Winter uses a joint theoretical/experimental approach. High-level computational
methods are used to map excited state transition states and surface crossing
topologies in selected reactions which are known to proceed by heterolysis.
Ultrafast femtosecond-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy is used to
determine the rates and mechanisms of photoheterolysis reactions on model
substrates, while high-level excited state calculations are designed to provide
a mechanistic rationale. This combination of theory and experiment determines
the effect of structure on the rates and mechanisms of photorelease in model
systems. The Professor Winter leads a Freshman Research Initiative at ISU that
engages freshmen in an early multidisciplinary research program. He also
continues his Chats with Eminent Female Scientists (ChEFS) Initiative, involving
online video interviews with successful academics, providing insights and advice
for students interested in an academic career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.