* 1764127
* ECA-PGR:  Identifying Host Factors that Influence the Association of Tall Fescue (Festuca arundinacea) with beneficial Epichloe endophytes
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Carolyn Young, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,059,504.00

Meeting the demand for increased crop and agriculture production in the 21st
century will require innovative and transformative approaches. One area with
great potential for benefitting agriculture is harnessing beneficial microbes
for agriculture. Although some microbes cause disease, many others are harmless
and some even benefit the plant. This project studies one such beneficial
partnership to determine how the plant and microbe work together to improve
plant health. Tall fescue, an important grass for livestock, can withstand much
greater stress (heat, drought, etc.) when a specific fungus grows inside it,
although some types of the fungus also produce a toxin that can sicken
livestock. Thousands of tall fescue plants will be analyzed to find the plant
genes that influence the production of these toxins to understand how plants can
influence their microbe partners. Studying what changes occur in newly infected
tall fescue seedlings will lead to a better understanding of how this
partnership is established. Comparing plants with and without the fungus under
heat stress will help determine how both plant and fungus work together to
withstand the stress. The project will assist middle- and high-school teachers
in developing hands-on teaching projects related to these topics that they can
implement in their own classrooms. Together, these studies will increase
understanding of how plant-microbe partnerships work and how to use them to
improve agricultural production and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even
though highly beneficial plant-microbe interactions are known, most of them are
too poorly understood to exploit fully, and the mechanisms behind them are
largely unknown. This project will address these knowledge gaps by identifying
genes and pathways that influence the beneficial symbiosis between tall fescue
(Festuca arundinacea), an economically important forage grass, and its obligate
fungal endophytes. Specifically, this project will (1) create a large,
multiparental mapping population of tall fescue and identify the plant genes
that control the production of economically relevant fungal defense compounds,
(2) profile the transcriptomic response of newly infected tall fescue seedlings
to identify the pathways involved in establishing a successful host-endophyte
partnership, and (3) identify the plant transcriptomic response to heat stress
with and without endophytes to identify the genes and transcriptional modules
responsible for the plant achieving enhanced stress resistance in the presence
of the endophyte. These results will identify the key genes involved in an
important plant-fungus symbiosis and will serve as a model for beneficial plant-
microbe interactions more generally. These results will have direct application
to the US forage industry, and will more broadly inform investigations into
agricultural plant-microbe interactions in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.