* 1764228
* Visualizing Charge Carrier Dynamics in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Nanoflakes Using Femtosecond Pump-Probe Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Nontechnical description: Semiconductor nanostructures are playing an ever-
increasing role in technologies that range from solar energy conversion to light
emitting diodes. These nanostructures are small crystals, perhaps 1/1000 the
diameter of a human hair, and come in a variety of shapes, including small
particles, long flexible wires, or thin sheets. They are not perfect crystals,
however. Atoms at the edges and surfaces act differently from those located in
the interior. In addition, their small dimensions increase their flexibility,
enabling wires to bend, and sheets to buckle and fold, which in turn changes
their properties. Nanostructure functionality is oftentimes dominated by these
imperfections, yet it is difficult to disentangle the influence of specific
defect structures on material behavior. This project is addressing this
challenge by developing microscopy methods that can image the movement of
electrons in individual nanostructures on short time scales, and with high
spatial resolution. These methods are then used to explore the spatial variation
in electronic dynamics across semiconductor nanostructures that are only a few
atomic layers thick. The project's discoveries could have broad implications for
emerging technologies ranging from solar energy conversion and catalysis to
quantum information systems. The research also provides training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, and the project participants are
working with college science majors from underrepresented backgrounds to develop
skills in scientific communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
The project is advancing pump-probe microscopy methods and using them to explore
how the electronic relaxation dynamics and charge carrier transport vary
spatially across semiconductor nanoflakes. The nanoflakes are a few microns
across and consist of 3-30 transition metal dichalcogenide layers (like sheets
of paper) held together by weak van der Waals forces. Individual nanoflakes are
excited with a femtosecond laser pulse that is focused to a diffraction limited
spot by a microscope objective, promoting electrons from the valence band to the
conduction band in a localized region of the structure. The excited electron
population is then probed by a second focused laser pulse that is delayed in
time. The probe pulse ejects electrons from the structure through a multiphoton
absorption process, and their momentum is measured using velocity-map imaging
photoelectron spectroscopy. The momentum distribution of the ejected electrons
provides a direct window through which the energetic relaxation can be
monitored. Experiments performed at different locations in the nanoflake (e.g.
edge vs. center) show how different structural features affect the charge
carrier relaxation and recombination. The microscope can also excite the
nanoflake in one location, and probe it in another, enabling direct
visualization of the electrons as they move through the structure. The
microscopy tools developed by the research activities are broadly applicable to
a wide range of the nanomaterials, and the students are gaining experience in
the construction of sophisticated instrumentation. The graduate and
undergraduate students are also working with entering freshmen in the University
of North Carolina Chancellor's Science Scholars Program to explore the
importance and challenges of explaining complex scientific discoveries to broad
audiences through the development of short videos that highlight the project's
research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.