* 1764156
* Conference on Hyperbolic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Alberto Bressan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2019
* USD 27,000.00

This award provides support for graduate students and junior researchers to
attend the "XVII International Conference on Hyperbolic Problems: Theory,
Numerics, and Applications" (HYP2018) held at the Pennsylvania State University,
University Park on June 25-29, 2018. The conference highlights recent advances
in the fundamental theory of hyperbolic partial differential equations, as well
as related mathematical models that have experienced sustained activity and
exciting recent progress. Hyperbolic problems are ubiquitous in modern science
and engineering, ranging from the mathematical theory of fluids, to collective
motion of animals (such as flocks of birds), to traffic and pedestrian flow. The
meeting is expected to have considerable impact on future developments of
applied mathematics in academia, industry, and national Labs in the United
States. The conference website can be found at
http://www.hyp2018.psu.edu/&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the conference's
objectives is to bring together researchers, students, and practitioners with
interest in the theoretical, computational, and applied aspects of differential
equations of hyperbolic type. HYP2018 is the seventeenth meeting in a biennial
series with varying venues, whose last United States meeting (the twelfth) was
held in 2008. The conference series is unique in its emphasis on encouraging
interdisciplinary collaborations that involve sophisticated mathematics applied
to challenging problems of great contemporary interest. Among the topics
highlighted at the conference are: the mathematical theory of fluids, with new
engineering, medical, and biological applications; hyperbolic equations on
networks, with a variety of applications, most notably to traffic flow on a
network of roads; kinetic and fluid models for collective dynamics of many-body
systems; transport equations, with particular focus on optimality and mixing;
the equations of general relativity; and control problems for hyperbolic partial
differential equations and differential games. The list of plenary and invited
speakers includes leading world experts in these scientific areas. Special panel
sessions will be devoted to framing open problems to attract the attention of
junior scientists in the audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.