* 1764201
* Research Initiation Award: Uncovering the Role of Germline-Specific MAGE-B2 Protein in Maintenance of Cellular Identity
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Steven Damo, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Fisk
University will provide an outstanding venue for students to gain both
competence and confidence across more traditional disciplinary lines. The
research proposed broadens collaborative research opportunities with other Fisk
Faculty, by bringing the tools of mammalian cell culture, epigenetics and
computational analyses of gene expression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to determine the fundamental biological processes that drive
expression (transcription) of MAGE-B2, a member of this enigmatic gene family,
and test the hypothesis that aberrant expression of MAGE-B2 perturbs cell cycle
control, proliferation and/or differentiation. Melanoma antigen genes (MAGEs)
encode for proteins that are critical regulators of endosomal trafficking,
neuronal development, cell cycle progression and germ cell development. A subset
of the MAGE proteins (Type I MAGEs) is physiologically restricted in expression
to male germline cells. Aberrant expression in any other cells leads to a wide-
variety of cellular dysfunctions pertaining to cell proliferation. The work
involves molecular and cell biological approaches as well as computational
analyses critical for engaging in contemporary biological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.