* 1764436
* RUI: Developing Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry Techniques for Determining the Structure and Mechanisms of Metal Ion Recognition &amp; Redox Activity of Metal Ion Binding Oligopepti
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Laurence Angel, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2022
* USD 216,267.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Laurence Angel of the Department of
Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University - Commerce is developing new classes of
copper and zinc chelating peptides. Disruption of copper and zinc homeostasis is
directly implicated in Menkes and Wilson's disease as well as cancers and
neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer's and prion disease. Metal chelators
are used in the treatment of these types of diseases. The project is well suited
for the interdisciplinary training of students in support of the growing
bioanalytical, proteomic, bioengineering, and biomedical workforce. Under-
represented groups of undergraduate students, including first-generation college
students, African-American, Hispanic, and female students, will be encouraged to
join the research efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the solution-
phase metal ion reactivity of alternative metal-binding peptides (AMBS) and
methanobactin (mb-OB3b) is being examined by electrospray ionization ion
mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS) and density functional theory (DFT).
Ultraviolet-visible and fluorescence spectral techniques are being used to check
for correlations across gas- and solution-phase analyses to answer the following
questions: (1) Which solution-phase behaviors can be examined in the gas phase?
(2) Does pH-dependent metal-ion binding result in positively or negatively
charged complexes that reflect the solution-phase states? (3) Which sequence
residues affect AMBS and mb-OB3b metal-ion binding? (4) Which dissociation
mechanisms are involved in the collision-induced dissociation (CID) of AMBS and
AMBS cationized by Zn(II) or Cu(I)? (5) Can the metal-ion coordination sites be
identified using energy-resolved CID and IM-MS? (6) Can metal-ion displacement
be monitored by IM-MS titrations and collision cross-section changes? (7) Can
IM-MS analyses and theoretical collision cross-sections identify which type of
coordination each metal ion prefers? (8) How do IM-MS, DFT, UV-Vis, and
fluorescence findings correlate? The study could discover new reaction
mechanisms and develop more effective IM-MS molecular analysis techniques, while
moving toward the design of chelating agents for treating diseases related to
metal-ion imbalance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.