* 1764248
* Regularity Estimates for the Linearized Monge-Ampere and Degenerate Monge-Ampere Equations and Applications in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Nam Le, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2021
* USD 168,820.00

This research project studies fine quantitative behaviors of solutions to
several classes of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) that have
connections and applications in several areas of mathematics such as analysis,
PDEs, the calculus of variations, convex geometry, shape optimization, and fluid
mechanics. They also appear in many areas of sciences and engineering such as
economics, urban planning, meteorology, and geometric optics. For example, the
Monge-Ampere type equations investigated in this project arise naturally in the
optimal transportation problems (which consist of finding the least expensive
way to transport a distribution of mass from one location to another) in
economics and in traffic network planning in cities, in the design of reflector
antennae in geometric optics and in the weather forecast models used in
meteorology. The PDEs investigated in this project have two distinguished
features: their key structural quantities could be possibly extremely small
(degenerate) or extremely large (singular) and their settings frequently involve
irregular geometries. Classical methods are usually inadequate in handling these
equations and thus, their analysis calls for new methods, fresh perspectives and
advancing knowledge in many fields of mathematics. The main goal of the project
aims at providing deep insights into these problems, discovering novel
methodologies to tackle them as well as revealing unexpected connections with
other areas of mathematics. The results of this project will be widely
disseminated via publications of research papers and lecture notes, via
presentations at national and international venues, and via training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, in the field of analysis and
partial differential equations (PDEs), focuses on regularity properties of
solutions to the linearized Monge-Ampere (LMA) and degenerate Monge-Ampere
equations and their applications in nonlinear PDEs arising from convex geometry,
optimal transportation, and meteorology. The purpose of this project is to
obtain fine and higher order regularity properties of some important classes of
LMA and degenerate Monge-Ampere equations and apply them to several interesting
problems in analysis, geometry, and PDEs. More specifically, the objectives of
the project are to: (i) investigate higher order derivatives estimates for LMA
equations with lower order terms having low regularity and their applications in
the semigeostrophic equations as well as polar factorizations; (ii) study the
sharp Sobolev estimates for the Monge-Ampere equation and its related maximal
functions; (iii) settle a shape optimization problem concerning the minimum of
the Monge-Ampere eigenvalue on convex domains subject to a volume constraint;
and (iv) establish global regularity for degenerate Monge-Ampere equations on
nonsmooth domains and the second boundary value problem for degenerate Monge-
Ampere equations. The principal investigator and his collaborators have recently
developed new methods and techniques including the Green function estimates,
localization technique, iteration argument, sliding paraboloids method and
geometry of the Monge-Ampere equation to solve some open problems related to
these proposed problems. These techniques are expected to be further developed
and strengthened to successfully attack the problems proposed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.