* 1764116
* Collaborative Research: Understanding an Active and Beneficial Role for Water in Solid-Acid Catalyzed Hydrocarbon Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Jeff White, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 240,000.00

A need for robust catalysts to transform raw materials to useful chemicals is
critical to developing more flexible and less energy intensive processes. The
ability to use raw materials derived from various sources, ranging from
petroleum to plant biomass to recycled plastics, is also needed. Catalysts need
to be able to perform in realistic reaction conditions, such as in the presence
of contaminants. Many catalysts have been successfully used in industrial
processes but require high-temperature and moisture-free conditions. Dr. White
of Oklahoma State University and Drs. Resasco, Crossley, and Wang of the
University of Oklahoma are engaged in an active collaboration that combines
synthesis, testing, and computer simulations to help identify new catalysts and
new reactions that will work efficiently at lower temperatures and in the
presence of moisture. Understanding how water interacts with catalysts and
feedstocks is required to meet these goals. Through pursuit of these research
goals, the team is training students at all university levels. This is enabling
undergraduate, graduate, and under-represented groups to be active contributors
to the national STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
infrastructure. The team is using state-wide media to increase awareness of how
fundamental catalysis research impacts economically important industries, both
present and future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, a collaborative team from Oklahoma
State University and the University of Oklahoma is using an interdisciplinary
synthesis, characterization, simulation, and reaction analysis approach to
determine to whether or not water actively influences reactions in solid acid
catalysts. Drs. White, Resasco, and Crossley, are engaged in tailored synthesis
of zeolites, post-synthetic modifications of zeolites, in-situ spectroscopic NMR
measurements, and reactor studies at varying temperature and pressure to
determine how catalyst structure responds to the presence of both gas-phase and
liquid-phase water. Dr. Wang is providing DFT (density functional theory) and MD
(molecular dynamics) calculations to help the team elucidate probable reaction
pathways. Conversion of both non-polar hydrocarbons derived for traditional
petroleum sources as well as oxygenated molecules derived from biomass are under
investigation. Also under investigation is the role of small populations of
highly-active ?defect? catalytic sites in the absence and presence of water The
team is advancing inclusion of under-represented groups in STEM disciplines
through programs on each campus, and increasing public awareness of the benefit
of catalysis through public media outlets at the university and state
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.