* 1764309
* Beyond Acylation: New Methodology and Mechanistic Studies of Anhydrides for Stereoselective Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Jared Shaw, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2023
* USD 609,439.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports this
research project in the laboratory of Professor Jared Shaw in the Chemistry
Department at the University of California, Davis. Professor Shaw discovers new
reactions that enable simple, chemical starting materials to be converted into
complex molecules with control of their overall shape. To accomplish this,
Professor Shaw and his students are exploring three under explored modes of
chemical reactivity. Each of these use a well-known molecular fragment, an
anhydride, in a new way. The new reactions involve both the development of the
new methods and an exploration of the factors that control the speed and
specificity of the new reactions. Professor Shaw is the founding host of the
Davis Science Cafe, which is a monthly event that brings scientists together to
describe their work to the general public. This project support efforts to
maximize the impact of the Science Cafe and other outreach events and bolster
the spread of science communication in Northern California. This project also
supports an array of outreach activities to achieve the goal of science
education at all levels, including participation in a science fair at an
elementary school, work with middle and high school students at Chemistry Camp
for the Blind, and the revival of the Chapter of the Society for the Advancement
of Chicanos/Latinos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) at UC Davis. This
research may provide new, innovative approaches and advanced manufacturing
opportunities for the chemical industry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although the
chemistry of anhydrides is dominated by their ability to serve as electrophilic
acylating agents, new advances in the Shaw group exploit the ability of these
compounds to serve as versatile nucleophiles. This project is pursuing three
specific avenues of inquiry. First, the addition of anhydrides to alpha-chiral
imines has shown stereocontrol that defy the rules established for carbonyl
compounds. A broad investigation of the outcomes of these reactions paired with
computational studies is being used to build a new stereochemical model to
describe the behavior of imines in reactions with soft nucleophiles, i.e.
electron-rich alkenes. Second, the base-mediated and, if possible, catalyzed
reactions of anhydrides with new electrophiles are being studied. This effort
involves the synthesis of a new class of chiral catalysts and the development of
addition reactions between anhydrides and electron-deficient alkenes and
aziridines. Third, the reactions of anhydride enol silanes is being nvestigated.
Although a small number of these compounds have been made, the Shaw group has
discovered new organocatalytic reactions that enable the reactivity to be
steered toward at least two different products with the same imine electrophile.
This investigation complements previous work examining the reactions of imines
with anhydrides by providing novel reactivity leading to new and interesting
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.