* 1764191
* Characterizing Structures and Intra-/Intermolecular Forces in Molecular CO2 Reduction Catalysts and Reaction Intermediates by Infrared Spectroscopy of Cryogenic Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* J. Mathias Weber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2022
* USD 475,000.00

The generation of a carbon-neutral, sustainable energy economy has been
recognized by many as one of the most important new technologies to be developed
in the near future. The conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) into chemically
useable fuels is a promising approach to attain this goal. Such processes are
difficult to implement, and they need to be assisted by catalysts, i.e., by
molecules or materials that lower the energy required to convert CO2 into fuel.
In order to develop cost-effective catalysts, we need to understand how CO2
interacts with catalyst molecules. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor J. Mathias Weber of the University of Colorado at Boulder is using a
state-of-the-art combination of mass spectrometric and laser spectroscopy
techniques to study the interactions of CO2 with catalyst molecules. The
catalysts of interest are molecules that contain metals such as cobalt (Co) and
rhenium (Re) surrounded by structures containing other elements (for example
carbon (C) , oxygen (O), nitrogen (N)). The surrounding structures influence how
CO2 binds to the metal atom (key catalytic processes originate in the CO2-metal
atom interaction). These metal catalyst "complexes" are ionic (they possess
electric charge), which means they can be sorted and concentrated using a mass
spectrometer. The desired ionic catalyst complexes are cooled to very low
temperatures (as low as 5 degrees Kelvin (K), or minus 450 degrees Fahrenheit).
At these low temperatures, CO2 molecules bind to the catalyst complexes. Once
the CO2-metal complexes are formed, infrared laser light is used to measure the
vibrations of these complexes. From the vibrations, the structures of the
complexes can be inferred. This approach enables probing key steps in their
reactions, allowing the assembly of detailed mechanisms of how the catalysts
function. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits
towards the development of new sources of chemical fuels with low environmental
impact, as well as the training of graduate student researchers in advanced
experimental and computational techniques. Moreover, the Weber group is
developing a web-based simulation of carbon dioxide conversion, transporting the
laboratory research into the classroom, with the aim to enhance student
understanding of catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Weber
group characterizes the infrared spectra of molecular catalysts for the
conversion of carbon dioxide, as well as other species relevant for the
catalytic cycle involving such catalysts. The catalysts under study are charged
molecules (ions), generated by electrospray ionization. Their complexes with
carbon dioxide, proton donors, and solvents are prepared in a series of
temperature-controlled ion traps, and isolated in a time-of-flight mass
spectrometer. The target molecules are irradiated with pulsed light from a
tunable infrared light source. They fragment upon photon absorption, and the
fragments are detected in a second mass analysis step. The vibrational spectra
of the complexes under study are measured by monitoring fragments while tuning
the infrared wavelength. The spectra yield information on the structures and
intermolecular forces governing the function of the catalysts. Together with
quantum chemical calculations, the spectra provide mechanistic insight into the
chemistry at play in electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide into other,
more valuable molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.