* 1764246
* Homogeneous and Teichmuller Dynamics: A Quantitative Viewpoint
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Amir Mohammadi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 239,997.00

Dynamical systems, which originated from classical mechanics, have become an
indispensable part of modern mathematics. Roughly speaking, a dynamical system
is a rule which predicts the motions of a point in a geometric space; examples
of mathematical models of dynamical systems include the study of fluid dynamics,
airflow dynamics, billiard trajectories, etc. As a concrete example, consider a
polygonal billiard table, e.g., an L-shaped billiard table; and to simplify the
situation, let us assume that the table has no friction and the angle of
incidence equals the angle of reflection. Behavior of billiard trajectories have
long been fascinating to mathematicians and physicists--note that different
trajectories can have different behaviors, e.g., some trajectories are periodic
and some trajectories are dense (they make a visit near every point in the
table). For instance, one can ask whether a billiard table has any periodic
trajectories, or more quantitatively, one can ask how many periodic trajectories
of a certain length exist? Surprisingly, questions of this kind have proven to
be notoriously difficult to answer and are connected to several areas of modern
mathematics. It turns out that even to understand billiard trajectories on one
single table one is led to the study of families of billiard tables which have
same combinatorics, e.g., same number of edges for the table. These families
turn out to have new symmetries and enjoy certain rigidity properties which help
to unravel the original problem. This project studies questions with similar
philosophical point of view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks extensions
and extensions of certain rigidity results where a rather weak initial data
about an object yields an almost complete classification of the object; the goal
is to provide a more quantitative account of these rigidity results with
applications in mind. The following will be the main objectives: (i) Dynamical
systems have become a major player in several unexpected areas in modern
mathematics. Proofs relying on dynamical arguments, however, are usually
existential and not constructive. For various applications, quantitative and
effective accounts of dynamical arguments are much sought after and challenging.
(ii) Discrete subgroups of Lie groups with finite covolume are central objects
in mathematics and have been extensively studied. In some natural settings --
e.g., Kleinian groups, several monodromy groups, Apollonian circle packings, and
Zaremba's conjecture -- however, one needs to consider Zariski dense, discrete
subgroups (and semigroups) of semisimple Lie groups with infinite covolume.
These investigations often lead to the study of group actions on infinite volume
spaces. (iii) The moduli space of a compact Riemann surface is one of the hubs
of modern mathematics. Despite the very inhomogeneous nature of the moduli
space, there are several similarities between this space and homogeneous spaces.
Dynamics on moduli spaces presents a very exciting avenue for research with many
outstanding and challenging problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.