* 1764192
* Activation of Carbon-Hydrogen Bonds at Multinuclear Metal Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Richard Adams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2023
* USD 448,395.00

Simple hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane are now available from abundant
supplies of natural gas. However, since these materials cannot easily be
converted into other products, they are not good feedstocks for the chemical
industry. In large part, this difficulty arises because the carbon-hydrogen
(C-H) bonds in hydrocarbons are relatively unreactive. In this project, funded
by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Richard
D. Adams, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South
Carolina, is developing methods to activate hydrocarbon C-H bonds. Metal
complexes having two or more metal atoms are designed so that several C-H bonds
in a hydrocarbon interact with the metals. These interactions activate the bonds
and allow the hydrocarbons to be converted into valuable products, such as
alcohols, aldehydes and carboxylic acids. These lead to new processes for the
production of industrial materials. In addition to the scientific component, the
project involves both graduate and undergraduate students, including ones from
underrepresented groups and prepares them for careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinuclear complexes of precious metal
elements, such as ruthenium, rhodium, rhenium, iridium, and platinum, are
evaluated for their ability to activate hydrocarbon C-H bonds. By using metal
complexes having two or more metal atoms, multiple CH activations are achieved
and several functionalities are introduced on a single hydrocarbon. The studies
target C-C and C-O bond forming processes and include mechanistic investigations
to uncover details of the transformations. New bimetallic complexes are
converted into bimetallic nanoparticles to create a new generation of high
activity heterogeneous catalysts. Broader impacts include the development of new
processes for the conversion of simple hydrocarbons and related resources into
valuable chemicals for use as industrial feedstocks. Graduate and undergraduate
students are trained in the latest methods of scientific inquiry and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.