* 1764010
* RI: Medium: Neuromorphic and Data-Driven Speech Segregation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Shihab Shamma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 851,674.00

This project investigates how neural representations of speech and music in the
cortex can be adapted and applied to overcome the challenge of robust perception
in extremely noisy and cluttered environments, mimicking processing and
capabilities of the brain. More specifically, the project will formulate
algorithms inspired by the architecture of the brain to segregate and track
targeted speakers or sound sources, test their performance, and relate them to
state-of-the-art approaches that utilize deep artificial neural networks to
accomplish these tasks. Human psychoacoustic and physiological experiments with
these algorithms will be conducted to test the validity of these ideas for
mimicking human abilities. This effort will spur the development of new
neuromorphic computational tools modeled after the brain and its cognitive
functions. In turn, these will provide a theoretical framework to guide future
experiments into how complex cognitive functions originate and how they
influence sensory perception and lead to robust behavioral
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned projects will be organized into
two flavors. The first attempts to borrow from existing neuromorphic approaches
that rely on cortical representations to develop new embeddings within the deep
neural networks framework, which will in turn endow the latter with brain-like
robustness in challenging unanticipated environments. Three specific efforts
within this flavor will be conducted: Learning DNN embeddings using cortical
representations of speech and music, exploring unsupervised clustering of
cortical features using adversarial auto-encoders, and exploiting pitch and
timbre representations to enhance segregation of sound. The second flavor of
projects borrows from the DNN approach to build into neuromorphic algorithms the
desirable performance and flexibility attained by training on available
databases. Two broad areas of studies are planned: one focuses on questions of
neuromorphic implementations that benefit from DNN toolboxes and ideas,
especially in segregation and reconstruction. The other focuses on investigating
how autoencoders can be exploited to implement feature reduction and clustering
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.