* 1764221
* Electron-nuclear coupling, charge transport, and catalysis in biomolecules: the role of vibrational and conformational dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Chemical reactions involving molecules may involve the simple loss or gain of an
electron or a proton (H+, a hydrogen atom missing its electron), or the breaking
of bonds and the formation of new bonds that result in a new molecule. It is
also true that molecules are always vibrating; their bonds act like springs that
are constantly stretching, compressing or bending. The vibrational motion of
molecules is an important factor in their reactivity and the outcome of chemical
reactions. For large molecules like proteins, which can contain hundreds of
atoms (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen) and bonds, the role of vibrations on reactivity
is difficult to determine. And yet, it is important to understand the role of
vibrations in protein chemical properties, as proteins are essential components
of all living systems. In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure
Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Paul Champion of Northeastern University is using sophisticated laser techniques
to study low-frequency (slow) vibrations and how they influence chemical
reactions that facilitate the motion of charges (protons and electrons) in
biological systems. These vibrational motions can also be associated with the
flow of energy and the changes in structure that take place when large protein
molecules like enzymes interact with each other or when smaller molecules bind
to the protein and cause a signaling or catalytic response. This work is
significant because it will generate fundamental new knowledge at the interface
of chemistry and physics that will benefit a variety of biological applications.
Within the broad class proteins called heme proteins (where the most well-known
examples are hemoglobin and myoglobin)which contain iron atoms. An especially
important protein, cytochrome c, which shuttles electrons in the cellular
mitochondria (these are the structures of living cells that process energy). A
new and very important reaction involving this protein has been recently
discovered. Basically, a structural change at the heme iron atom takes place
when cytochrome c interacts with the mitochondrial membrane and this reaction
initiates apoptosis, a fundamental cellular process that leads to cell death.
This is an important topic, which is providing a better understanding of tissue
differentiation and development, as well as the evolution of cancer. This
project has significance to society at large, because a better understanding of
fundamental biochemical processes underpins the ability to make transformational
improvements in human health. Students working on this project (both graduate
and undergraduate) are being trained in cutting edge optical and biological
techniques that benefit society through the enhancement of the human resource
infrastructure that is crucial to the academic, medical, biotech, and optical
communications industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reaction dynamics of several
specific biomolecular and chemical systems involved in charge, group, and energy
transport processes is being investigate. One investigation is focusing on
proton transport in green fluorescent protein and is testing hypotheses related
to both the excited and the ground state reactions. Proton "inventory"
experiments will evaluate the participation of multiple protons in ground state
tunneling. In the excited state, the temperature and excitation energy
dependence of vibrational coherence, energy relaxation, dephasing, and
population transfer is being examined. In another investigation, the
photophysics that underlies a recent ultrafast x-ray study of ferrous cytochrome
c is being investigated. Temperature dependent measurements of methionine
(Met80) and NO ligand photolysis in cytochrome c is being carried out and the
enthalpic barriers for the rebinding reactions are being determined. The strong
vibrational coherence responses predicted for these photoreactions are also
being compared. Low temperature kinetic methods are being used to probe the
excited state photo-processes of photolyases, enzymes that use blue light to
repair several types of ultraviolet-induced DNA damage. Finally, development of
a new experimental methodology is focusing on the use of nanopores to probe
dynamic allostery, conformational interconversions, and fluctuations of
individual proteins. For example, the nanopore methodology is being used to
investigate allosteric activation in proteins that regulate DNA transcription as
well as protein complexes with effector functions that help to regulate enzyme
activity. Proton and electron transport underlie highly evolved biological
mechanisms of energy storage and enzymatic catalysis (including DNA photo
repair).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.