* 1764186
* Multiconfiguration Pair-Density Functional Theory for Complex Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Laura Gagliardi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 550,000.00

Laura Gagliardi and Donald G. Truhlar of the University of Minnesota are
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Chemistry Division to develop a theory that enables high-accuracy
calculations on chemical reactions on large systems. This method, Multi-
Configuration Pair-Density Functional Theory (MC-PDFT), was recently introduced
as a practical way to treat reactions where bonds are breaking, situations where
electrons are excited, or systems that contain transition metals. All of these
examples involve interactions among multiple electronic states, that are
challenging problems for many other high accuracy methods in quantum chemistry.
MC-PDFT is being broadly applied to systems in photochemistry, catalysis,
supramolecular chemistry, and spectroscopy and thus has relevance in advanced
manufacturing, renewable energy, and the chemical industry. In addition to the
wide impact the method may have on the computational chemistry community, a
broader impact of this proposal is the combination of expertise of two
investigators, which allows students to benefit from a wider range of ideas and
thereby contributes to well-rounded career preparation. Both investigators
encourage women to enter scientific careers which contributes to a more diverse
scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laura Gagliardi and Donald G.
Truhlar are developing Multi-Configuration Pair-Density Functional Theory (MC-
PDFT), a recent method for inherently multiconfigurational systems, that
combines DFT with multiconfiguration wave functions. Their work is extending the
theory in three directions. First, they are developing methods to calculate
analytic gradients for state-averaged calculations, a feature that is important
to enable exploration of excited states. Second, they are developing a state
interaction method for treating multiple electronic states in regions near
conical intersections. Third, they are incorporating MC-PDFT into additional
software and are applying the methods to transition metal systems and excited
states. One broader impact of this proposal is to combine the expertise of two
investigators to allow students to benefit from a wide range of ideas, thereby
contributing to well-rounded career preparation. Other important broader impacts
stem from the technological importance of the research subjects chosen,
especially for health, the material needs of society, industrial
competitiveness, and defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.