* 1764398
* Discretizing Manifolds with the Help of Riesz Kernels
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Aleksandr Reznikov, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 135,179.00

If we observe a soccer ball, we will see twenty hexagons and twelve pentagons.
Mathematically speaking, these hexagons and pentagons can be viewed as the so-
called "Voronoi cells" of their centers. From the mathematical perspective,
these cells look very nice, in particular, they are all at almost the same
width. It is an important and a computationally hard problem to produce points
on a given shape whose "Voronoi cells" look that uniform. If we now show to a
stranger only the vertices of the mentioned hexagons and pentagons, this
stranger will likely think about a ball. This means that these vertices
represent a ball well enough. The objective of this project is to prove that
certain concrete algorithms are able to produce many points on a given shape so
that if we look only at these points, we can recover the shape well enough. Such
problems are of great interest and have applications to physics and chemistry,
statistics and numerical integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
assume many particles are placed on a given manifold (shape), and it is known
that these particles repel each other according to some potential. From physics,
it is known that these particles will move around the manifold trying to
minimize their potential energy. As soon as they minimize the energy, they will
stop moving. One would like to observe their locations at that time. It is
conjectured (and in some cases proved) that for so-called s-Riesz potentials,
these particles will fill the manifold uniformly in many senses (e.g., with
respect to the limiting measure, separation and covering properties). One goal
of this project is to prove a conjecture on separation distance for weaker
(i.e., superharmonic) s-Riesz potentials and a suitable class of manifolds. It
is anticipated that this will require developing a new approach to superharmonic
potentials, as the current approaches do not work in this case. The principal
investigator will further consider the somewhat dual "Chebyshev problem", which
can be viewed as follows: one wants to place radioactive seeds in a tumor so
that every point of the tumor receives some required amount of radiation. How
many seeds, and at which locations, should they be injected in order to destroy
the whole tumor? The second goal is to prove the uniformness properties (in
terms of the limiting measure) for the specified locations, when the tumor is a
"d-rectifiable" set. Since there is a lack of smoothness, the principal
investigator intends to use methods from the geometric measure theory to
approximate d-rectifiable sets by smooth sets. Finally, the third goal of the
project is to compare the distributions of the deterministic configurations
mentioned above to the distributions of random configurations. For uniformly and
independently distributed points this has already been done by the principal
investigator. Here it is proposed to work with so-called "determinantal point
processes", which are random point configurations that arise from random
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.