* 1764238
* Doctoral  Dissertation Research:  Urbanization, Development, and Labor Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 14,805.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates how state development
initiatives in non-liberal political contexts shape labor migration and
urbanization. Urban populations now account for over half of the world's
population, with the proportion projected to grow to two-thirds by the mid-21st
century. Of this increase, 90% is expected to take place in developing
countries, including those with authoritarian governments. This research project
investigates how urban labor migration, a key driver of this projected
urbanization, can be catalyzed by development projects that may seem to have
little to do with migration, such as those that subsidize rural house
construction. It analyzes how these development projects shape ideas about
modernity and how these in turn encourage migration. It also investigates how
urban migration shapes senses of self and identity, and how these work with or
against states' attempts to govern their populations. The project's findings
will be widely disseminated via academic and non-academic outlets. Results are
relevant to policy-makers, NGOs, and development organizations concerned with
the social impacts of rapid urbanization throughout the developing world.

Using qualitative (participant observation, semi-structured interviews, surveys,
and textual and discourse analysis) field-gathered data, this project examines
the relationship between development as a rationale of rule and its actual
accomplishment, and how state power (re)shapes desires vis-a-vis housing as a
form of development. The project contributes to the field of development
geography through its investigation of governmentality and modernity in an
authoritarian, non-Western context. It also contributes to the geography of
migration by analyzing how cultural politics and political-economic factors come
together in producing labor migration, and how the experience of labor migration
shapes migrant and urban subjectivities. This study investigates these broad
questions by asking how and why villagers make the decisions they do with
respect to accepting and spending on housing projects; how and why they make
decisions about labor migration; and how urban living experiences change their
aspirations and identities. Although this project uses a case study of Tibetans
in Qinghai province, China, its approach and findings has applicability in many
other places experiencing rapid urbanization. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will also provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.