* 1764103
* Research: Invisible Gendered Experiences in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Michelle Bothwell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2024
* USD 349,311.00

Existing research shows that a student's experience in higher education is
shaped by one's gender. This has been shown to be particularly true in
engineering, where some students face additional barriers to their success based
on their gender. This project will investigate gender through collaborative,
community-engaged research methodologies. In particular, researchers will work
with undergraduate engineering students to document engineering-specific
experiences. Researchers will prioritize collaboration; together with the
students, they will identify strategies which foster positive educational
outcomes and share these with engineering departments, faculty and
administrators towards the end of advancing the success of students in
engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has three
objectives: (i) to infuse critical theory and methodologies into engineering
education research; (ii) to record, examine, and share how undergraduate
engineering students of different genders find belonging and success; and (iii)
to collaborate with research participants to generate recommendations toward
transforming engineering programs into more inclusive and just spaces. Analysis
will inform understandings of resiliency in the face of gender marginalization
as well as potential subjugation linked to other intersecting identities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates critical collaborative ethnography
and research justice methodologies, which centralize the principle of the
research population being the foremost experts on their own experiences. Power
is shifted to the subject community through involving them in knowledge
production, analysis, and distribution. Three phases of research include an
outreach questionnaire to identify participants and emerging themes, personal
interviews, and on-site collaborative ethnographic observation. The initial
outreach questionnaire will be distributed nationally through campus cultural
groups and other campus communities, peer-to-peer communication, and through
engineering departments. A subset (n=20) of the respondents who indicate an
interest in further collaboration will be invited to participate in
phenomenological interviews that will explore students' experiences of gender in
engineering, and experiences with supportive structures that provoke resiliency.
Five of these students will then be invited to participate in a five-day site
visit. During this period, the student will collaboratively engage with the
researchers in ethnographic observation of the student's campus community and
support network. In addition, an online community which prioritizes
confidentiality and identity protection will be created and all students who
completed the initial questionnaire will be invited to join. Here, the student
community and the researchers will work together to analyze data, to document
community-identified sources of success and perseverance, and to develop
recommendations of effective practices, policies and norms that contribute to
inclusive, equitable and just learning environments. This project is of
significant intellectual importance because it provides a broader contemporary
framing of gender and how these identities affect the professional formation of
engineers, an area that has received very little attention to-
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.