* 1764365
* The Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Intersystem-Crossing in Solution and at Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Joseph Subotnik, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Joseph Subotnik of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by an award from
the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division
to develop new computational and theoretical techniques for uncovering when and
how molecules change spin state and potentially emit light in the form of
phosphorescence (which is commonly observed). Subotnik is also exploring how the
presence of a metal surface affects changes in spin state. The software tools
developed by this proposal are being released on the PI's github page and in
modern electronic structure packages, e.g. Q-Chem. The outreach activities of
this proposal include an annual conference in theoretical chemistry (the Penn
Conference in Theoretical Chemistry) which is very inexpensive for the public
(and often free) and which also offers exceptional graduate students and
postdocs the chance to speak. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, Subotnik and
his research group are developing computational tools in both electronic
structure and dynamics for quantifying spin crossovers, so that one can monitor
the flow of energy and population in the condensed phase. On the electronic
structure side, they are calculating energies, gradients and derivative
couplings that are consistent with most nonadiabatic dynamics algorithms. On the
dynamics side, Subotnik and coworkers are formulating a theory of the electronic
friction tensor at a metal surface that is consistent with spin-orbit coupling,
so that the effects of spin changes near a metal surface can be estimated and
the branching of triplet states can be quantified. The Subotnik group is also
investigating how spin effects enter into semiclassical electrodynamics, beyond
mean-field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.