* 1764025
* CSR:SmartChainDB - Enabling Smart Marketplaces With A Scalable Semantically-Enhanced Blockchain Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,773.00

Production of goods and services is becoming increasingly distributed and
decentralized, with organizations often requiring partnerships with other
organizations to achieve their goals. However, in some domains such as digital
manufacturing, stakes can be very high (e.g. aircraft manufacturing).
Consequently, rapid and organic formation of partnerships is often not possible
because the process of establishing trust between partners is laborious, time-
consuming and expensive - the so-called "trust tax". In this environment,
overcoming the trust-tax barrier is a significant impediment to market
participation for newer or smaller organizations. The SmartChainDB project will
investigate the foundations and implementation of middleware for achieving the
vision of "smart digital marketplaces" where partnerships between service
organizations are brokered digitally rather than with physical interactions. It
aligns with the NSF Harnessing Data for 21st Century Science and Engineering Big
Ideas vision and can serve to improve US competitiveness in advanced
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision is to build on the
general properties of the present-day technology of trust (blockchains) and
develop necessary extensions for enabling (i) declarative descriptions of both
service provider capabilities and service requestor needs; (ii) a data-driven
trust model based on data and metadata about organizations, their assets,
capabilities and performance records; (iii) automatic matching and trust-based
validation of service providers' bids to requests for service; and (iv)
confidentiality and privacy of sensitive parts of partner transactions and
collaborations. Key design challenges will be supporting these goals while
achieving scalability, performance, and quality. The SmartChainDB project will
deepen our insights in the area of software systems for digital trust. It will
provide inter-disciplinary training opportunities for the next-generation of
computer scientists and industrial systems engineers. It also has the potential
to broaden market participation in various industries by significantly reducing
the trust-tax burden, ensuring a more level playing field for smaller and
startup organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.