* 1764181
* Metal Complexes of Donor-Bridge Acceptor Biradical Ligands: Testing Models for Electron Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Shultz, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 446,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David A. Shultz of the Department
of Chemistry at North Carolina State University is studying detailed
relationships between a molecule's structure and its capacity to transport
electrons in molecule-based electronic devices. The goal of this research is to
develop lucid connections between a molecule's shape/structure and its ability
to transport electrons in an electrical circuit. The results could have
application in the next generation of molecular electronics and "spintronics"
(electron spin-based electronics). The project requires detailed studies of
molecular synthesis, structure determination, spectroscopy, theory, and is well-
suited to the education of scientists. The Shultz group has extensive experience
in training scientists (including undergraduates and those from underrepresented
groups) who go on to careers in academia, government laboratories, industry, and
entrepreneurship. Outreach activities include hosting and training undergraduate
summer researchers from Shaw University, a local Historically Black University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron donor-acceptor interactions control electron
transfer and transport at the molecular level. They are crucial, foundational
elements in biological and artificial electron transfer and photosynthesis,
solar energy conversion and molecular electronics/spintronics (electron spin-
based electronics). The research continues the efforts toward an elucidation of
electronic coupling in Donor-Bridge-Acceptor systems in which the donor fragment
is a metal-semiquinone and the acceptor is a nitronylnitroxide radical, and the
magnetic electron spin-spin exchange coupling between the two is directly
proportional to the square of the Donor-Acceptor electronic coupling. The focus
is on elucidating factors affecting molecular current rectification, and
molecular design elements that might serve as tunnel junctions in molecular
current rectifiers (e.g., cross-conjugation and non-alternate
hydrocarbons).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.