* 1764153
* Equivariant Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Anne Schilling, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 120,001.00

The term "Equivariant Combinatorics" was coined at a summer 2017 conference in
Montreal. An equivariant map is a map that intertwines with symmetries. In
combinatorics, which is the study of discrete objects, it can also mean that the
map intertwines certain statistics on combinatorial objects or the
representations associated to them. Broadly, it describes profound interactions
between algebraic combinatorics, algebraic geometry, algebraic topology,
representation theory, and theoretical physics because these subjects are wedded
to the study of symmetries in nature and mathematics. The phrase therefore also
encompasses ties to probability and semigroup theory through representation
theory. The main premise of this project is the exploration and further
development of these new relationships. This project also has a substantial
computational component (contributing to and using the rapidly growing open
source mathematical software SageMath).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
aimed at solving five open equivariant combinatorics problems. They will be
attacked with various teams of collaborators and include: (1) The study of a
crystal basis explaining the plethysm in the character theory of the general
linear group. This has applications to physics, invariant theory and complexity
theory. (2) A combinatorial analysis of LLT polynomials, which are important
symmetric functions in combinatorics and geometry. This involves new statistics
on the underlying combinatorial objects. (3) A proof of the Shimozono-Weyman
conjecture. This relies on a sign-reversing involution compatible with
katabolism. (4) Crystals associated to Lie superalgebras. This requires
developing the theory of irreducible crystals for Lie superalgebras that
originated in string theory. (5) A unified theory of Tsetlin libraries. This is
a new approach to the theory of Markov chains associated to
semigroups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.