* 1764307
* RUI: Phosphine-Directed Carbon-Hydrogen Borylation to Access Ambiphilic Phosphine Boronates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Timothy Clark, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 262,321.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Timothy Clark of the University of San Diego is developing metal-catalyzed
reactions that convert a carbon-hydrogen ("C-H") bond to a carbon-boron bond.
These reactions are "directed" by a phosphorus atom (called a "phosphine") on
the target molecule. This chemical reaction is unusual as C-H bonds are rather
unreactive and will not undergo this change without the phosphine. The focus of
this project is on using the phosphine to direct the metal catalyst to a
particular C-H bond in the molecule, providing compounds that have a specific
spatial relationships. By incorporating boronates into these phosphines, new
reactions are developed that leverage the complementary reactivity of the
phosphine and boronates. The Clark group is accessing a large variety of
phosphine boronates and applying them to reactions in organic chemistry that can
facilitate the synthesis of organic molecules, including those of relevance to
medicinal or energy-related applications. Dr. Clark works primarily with
undergraduate students. This project provide undergraduate students with
research experiences, preparing them for careers in STEM fields. This research
also advances the national interest by providing innovation in chemical
synthesis and pharmaceutical design and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Timothy Clark is developing phosphine-directed C-H borylation reactions and
using the resulting ambiphilic phosphine boronates toward new organic and
organometallic transformations. The C-H borylation reaction uses a unique
cationic iridium system to catalyze the directed C-H functionalization. A
detailed mechanistic study is underway to further understand the catalytic cycle
and improve the system. The phosphine substrates utilized in this transformation
are being expanded to include sp3-hybridized C-H bonds and to access chiral
phosphine boronates. The resulting phosphine boronates are being examined as
ambiphilic ligands in challenging catalytic transformations. Further
functionalization of the C-B bond is also being explored to access highly-
functionalized phosphines as ligands in catalysis. In addition to developing
high-impact processes in the area of catalysis, a primary focus of this grant is
on mentoring undergraduate students in metal-catalyzed reactions, improving the
pipeline of future STEM scientists in this important area of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.