* 1764383
* Enhancing Aquaculture: Education for Underserved Alaskan Communities to Promote Workforce Development in Fisheries Industries
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joel Markis, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 567,326.00

This project builds on the University of Alaska Fisheries, Seafood, and Maritime
Initiative to develop a strong and sustainable workforce particularly in
Alaska's coastal communities. A Gap Analysis performed for the Initiative
identified the following as needs for Alaskan fisheries industries: 1) grow
career awareness; 2) develop career pathways; 3) improve access to employment;
4) educate Alaskans for fisheries, seafood, and maritime employment; and 5)
improve industry engagement and accountability. This project will develop a
semester intensive program to increase the labor pool available for aquaculture
facilities, while supporting student employment opportunities following a short
educational intervention. This model of offering short, intensive programs that
support gains in knowledge and relevant skills may apply to other aspects of the
Fisheries Technology program, such as fisheries management, as well as other
university programs that educate technicians. All seven of the aquaculture
associations in Alaska, accounting for 25 hatcheries, have offered space, time,
and mentorship to support this proposal. This inclusive collaboration for
technician training in aquaculture is unprecedented in
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alaska Southeast Fisheries
Technology program will offer a hands-on, semester-intensive program for entry
level aquaculture/hatchery technicians. During this semester-long program,
students will take 12 industry endorsed university credits over a four-month
period that will give them the knowledge and skills needed to start work in the
fisheries industry. This semester-intensive program was designed in response to
a needs assessment completed by members from 16 hatchery organizations, which
defined the need for hands-on, short-duration education programs in basic
aquaculture education. This program will include basic aquaculture techniques
used in Alaska salmon hatcheries, hatchery design and function, species biology,
production processes, skiff operation, and outboard engine troubleshooting. The
program will be based out of Sitka, Alaska, which is the headquarters of a
regional Aquaculture Association, three unique hatcheries, and the University of
Alaska Sitka campus. Students will complete an internship during the semester,
to reinforce what they have learned, and will visit at least two other
facilities around the state, thus exposing them to a variety of operations and
explore life at remote sites. Graduates from this program will have a solid
knowledge base and skill set that many salmon enhancement sectors need for
entry-level technicians and will gain the experience working alongside
professionals in the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.