* 1764406
* NSF-Simons Southeast Center for Mathematics and Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Christine Heitsch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

This award promotes the mathematics of complex biosystems by establishing the
NSF-Simons Southeast Center for Mathematics and Biology (SCMB) at the Georgia
Institute of Technology. The SCMB is a regional center with national impact
whose defining mission is connecting mathematical theory with biosystems data.
The core Center activity is catalyzing new research collaborations at the
mathematics-biology interface with a collective focus on understanding emergent
properties at critical genome-to-phenome junctures. This is complemented by a
strong interdisciplinary training component, with an emphasis on enabling
trainees to initiate new transdisciplinary collaborations as they progress in
their research careers, and is supplemented by educational outreach and
convening research activities. In these ways, SCMB is addressing the challenge
of building research capacity at the mathematics-biology interface by driving
discoveries that propel both fields forward into new
territory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-Simons Southeast Center for Mathematics
and Biology recognizes that diverse sources of data require diverse theoretical
approaches and that novel data structures acquired from biological systems spur
mathematical growth. Moreover, the Center has identified its fundamental
challenge as developing mathematics-biology research collaborations that advance
the frontiers of both disciplines. The Center is structured around a collection
of seed projects defined by research questions of interest to both
interdisciplinary mathematicians and biosystems experimentalists that address
critical aspects of emergence between genetic information and phenotypic traits.
Participating biosystems faculty have research interests ranging from molecular
cell biology to behavioral dynamics, and they bring substantial quantitative
modeling and computational analysis expertise to the Center. Participating
mathematicians have prior interdisciplinary experience and many research
interests in common, including foundational areas with considerable untapped
potential in biosystems applications. By actively matching experimentalists and
mathematicians, SCMB is catalyzing new mathematics-biology collaborations. These
novel interdisciplinary teams will mentor trainees with an emphasis on building
interactional expertise. Educational outreach will build workforce capacity by
priming the mathematics-biology pipeline, and convening activities will
establish a national center of gravity in the Southeast for the mathematics of
complex biosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.