* 1764252
* Collaborative Research: Structure Sensitive Surface Chemistry - Enantioselectivity on Chiral Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Andrew Gellman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 10/31/2021
* USD 344,536.00

Enantiomers are two molecules that have the same arrangement of chemical bonds,
but have three-dimensional structures that are mirror images of each other, like
left and right hands. These 'chiral' chemicals play a central role in living-
organisms, where only the left- or right-handed forms are present; but not both.
As a result, most biologically active molecules, such as pharmaceuticals, must
also be chiral molecules, and they must match the handedness of the biochemicals
found in life. However, producing enantiomerically pure forms of molecules is a
challenging problem. In this collaborative research project funded by the
Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism A (CSDM-A) program of the National
Science Foundation Division of Chemistry, Professors Andrew Gellman (Carnegie
Mellon University) and Charles Sykes (Tufts University) are studying the
chemistry of chiral molecules adsorbed on metal surfaces where the atomic
structure also has a specific handedness. Working with their students,
Professors Gellman and Sykes are developing curved metal surfaces that present a
systematic variation in chiral structures. The designed surfaces enable the
study of many atomic configurations with a single sample. Sophisticated
spectroscopies map the chemical reactivity across the surface, while isolated
chemical reactions are observed using a high-resolution microscope that can map
the positions of individual atoms. In addition to providing training
opportunities for future scientists, insights gained from the project could
guide the design of surfaces for enantiospecific production of chiral chemicals
in the pharmaceutical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research targets the
surface chemistry of two chiral compounds, tartaric acid (TA) and aspartic acid
(Asp), on chiral Cu(hkl) surfaces. Single crystal Cu surfaces are polished into
spherical shapes such that each point on the surface of the sphere exposes a
plane with a different atomic structure. This makes it very efficient to study
the adsorption and surface reactions of TA and Asp on all possible structures of
a Cu surface; i.e. all possible Miller indices (hkl). The atomic structures of
these surfaces are imaged with and without adsorbed TA and Asp using scanning
tunneling microscopy. Independent measurements of TA and Asp decomposition
kinetics are made on hundreds of different Cu(hkl) surfaces, all on a single
sample. These data elucidate surface reaction rate constants as a function of
surface orientation, ks(hkl), and hence enable an understanding of the effect of
surface structure on chemical and enantiospecific reactivity. Combined, these
data are used to identify those surface orientations with the highest
enantioselectivities towards decomposition of the two enantiomers of TA and Asp.
Imaging with the scanning tunneling microscope is then used to determine the
atomic structure of the surfaces having greatest
enantioselectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.