* 1764285
* Regularization Properties of Nonstandard Diffusions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Luis Silvestre, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The process of diffusion makes a distribution in space become more regular as
time goes by. There are many systems that exhibit this behavior. The values of
the temperature throughout an object, the concentration of some chemical, or the
population density in migration are some examples of quantities that show
diffusive behavior. In mathematical analysis, the prime example of a diffusive
equation is the heat equation, or the more general family of parabolic partial
differential equations. The purpose of this research project is to study non-
standard diffusion. The project explores regularization effects in nonlinear
equations that are outside the classical framework of parabolic equations. The
research studies non-local equations, where the evolution of the value at any
point depends on the global picture, and applies those methods in equations from
statistical mechanics modeling the density of particles in a dilute gas. The
project also studies conservation law equations, a fundamental class of partial
differential equation, and aims to explicate regularization properties there as
well. The project will involve graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
the research. Results will be disseminated through publications, conferences,
and summer schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of non-local equations, and
more precisely integro-differential equations, is a very active area of
research. Recent work indicates that some of the ideas and methods developed in
that area can be used to obtain regularity estimates for the Boltzmann equation
from statistical mechanics. This research project aims at proving that if the
solution of the Boltzmann equation ever develops a singularity, then some
hydrodynamic quantity must be unbounded. These hydrodynamic quantities are the
mass, energy, and entropy density, which correspond to physically meaningful
properties of the fluid. Thus, the project aims to establish that if there is a
singularity in the mesoscopic description of the fluid given by the Boltzmann
equation, it must be apparent macroscopically. The Boltzmann equation can be
rewritten as a parabolic integro-differential equation, and the restriction on
its hydrodynamic quantities determines the non-degeneracy of the corresponding
kernel. This connection between integro-differential equations and the Boltzmann
equation is also useful as a guide for further development of the former
subject. The study of regularization mechanisms using methods from parabolic
equations applied to conservation law equations is arguably even more
surprising. In scalar conservation laws, the solution is transported following a
velocity that depends on the value at every point. Shock singularities are
unavoidable for smooth initial data; however, the same shock mechanism forces
some self-organization that translates into a regularization effect when
starting from very rough initial data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.