* 1764166
* Collaborative HSI Conference: Co-designing an engineering education research agenda
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Ines Basalo, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 12/31/2018
* USD 26,187.00

The National Science Foundation Dear Colleague letter NSF 17-092: Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) calls for
conference proposals that will help identify challenges and opportunities in
STEM education at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs). Given the lack of
resources that many engineering educators face attending conferences, this
proposal consists of a series of traveling workshops that target engineering
educators from HSIs. The focus on these workshops is to leverage design thinking
methodologies to better understand the HSI institutional context and co-develop
research need with educators through an iterative and emergent analysis process.

The two-day workshops will take place at the University of Texas at El Paso (PI
institution) and the University of Miami (Coral Gables, FL). Texas and Florida
have some of the highest concentration of HSIs in the country, and both
locations are within a short driving distance to several 2-year and 4-year
institutions considered HSIs. Pre-workshop activities will help participants
establish a baseline understanding of the needs, values, cultures, and
characteristics of participants and their home institutions. During the
workshop, participants will be introduced to three educational approaches that
will help them examine their own beliefs and contexts and develop initial
questions of interest about their institution, their students, and themselves as
it relates to positively impacting the educational experiences of their
students. The three approaches are Design Thinking, Intrinsic Motivation, and
students as Empowered Agents. Using these ideas, participants will also develop
a prototype of something they can try upon returning to their institution, and,
through this prototyping process, they will continue to record emerging research
questions and needs. A follow-up workshop at the ASEE Conference in June of 2018
will allow participants to share their reactions to their prototype experience.
This workshop will also serve to disseminate and refine the resulting research
agenda. The expected outcomes of this proposal are to produce (1) a set of
research questions and needs to support the National Science Foundation's
development of an HSI-focused research agenda, (2) educational experiments and
prototypes for dissemination within the conference community and (3) a
conference-design framework for identifying non-obvious research needs and
engaging educators in the engineering education research and scholarship
process.