* 1764353
* Closing the solar fuel cycle: Investigating organic amines and water as reversible electron donors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Stefan Bernhard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 495,367.00

This award in the Catalysis program supports the work of Professor Stefan
Bernhard at Carnegie Mellon University. This project focuses on the development
of light rechargeable batteries as a cheap, practical way to capture and store
the sun's energy for powering common electronic devices. The batteries are
inspired by photosynthesis in plants which drives a fuel producing reaction
called reduction via oxygen generation. For functional batteries to be produced,
both of these types of reactions must be optimized and then combined with
forward reactions representing charging, while the back reaction of the products
serves as the discharge cycle. Possible reduction reactions targeted here
produce hydrogen and metal products or compounds produced from carbon dioxide.
To optimize the reduction, new catalysts and light absorbers are being designed
to push the limits of performance and stability. On the oxidation side, the same
kind of oxygen evolution in plants has already been widely studied, but here,
work looks at a different chemistry, amine oxidation, as a potentially more
practical alternative for use in a battery. This unexplored process can be
established as a new tool for solar energy storage. Because this research
project is aimed at a critical societal challenge, it inspires students to gain
chemical knowledge and to become involved in chemical research. Moreover, the
Bernhard laboratory continues to reach out to and involve researchers from
underrepresented groups in the fields of science, technology and engineering.
Educational activities at the undergraduate and graduate student level focus on
the theme of renewable energy while outreach activities for non-scientists both
educate the public on energy issues and instill excitement for science in
general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light to chemical energy conversion systems
commonly comprise of a light-absorbing chromophore, a catalytic cycle producing
reduced fuel, and a complementary oxidative cycle. Work proposed here aims to
optimize these elements for unification in a solar rechargeable battery which
can serve as a cheap, practical means of simultaneously capturing and storing
the sun's energy. Such batteries would charge through solar driven forward
reduction and oxidation while back reaction of the products would enable
discharge. Work towards new batteries builds upon previous efforts in the
Bernhard lab which have pioneered the use of Ir(III)-based chromophores as
highly efficient drivers for photo-induced water and metal ion reduction. In the
established schemes, these chromophores pass excited electrons to a reduction
catalyst or substrate while receiving electrons from a sacrificial amine. This
amine then undergoes irreversible C-N bond dissociation prohibiting any back
electron transfer. However, translating this system to a rechargeable battery
means that the amine donor must be designed to not suffer oxidation-induced
degradation while still preventing back reaction. To this end, amines are being
pursued with reversible electrochemistry as well as an oxidized form which is
heavily stabilized via deprotonation and aromatization for prevention of back
electron transfer. Initial electrochemical studies on amines pinpoint promising
structures with suitable oxidation potentials. Subsequent studies in a galvanic
cell then insure that the stable oxidized form of the amines can be reduced back
to their original structures. Champion donors are ultimately utilized in systems
where their oxidation is unified with a photo-induced reduction reaction
producing metal or hydrogen fuel. Nuclear magnetic resonance and Raman
spectroscopy are used to carefully monitor the fate of the amine upon
illumination. While ongoing efforts are largely focused on amine oxidation,
water oxidation is still a desirable counterpart for reductions in solar fuel
schemes. Thus, some work is aimed at developing families of Ir(III) catalysts
for water oxidation. The oxygen product of this reaction is a strong oxidant, so
catalysts are being designed specifically to resist ligand oxidation for a
longer lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.