* 1764454
* Problems Related to Fourier Restriction Estimates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Yumeng Ou, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2018
* USD 170,685.00

This project revolves around several fundamental questions in harmonic analysis,
which is a field stemming from the study of Fourier series and Fourier transform
and is closely connected with partial differential equations, number theory,
geometric measure theory, and real life applications such as signal processing
and compressed sensing. The Fourier transform decomposes a function of time into
different frequency components, similarly to how a music chord can be expressed
as the pitches of its constituent notes. Harmonic analysis studies how the time
information and the frequency information interact with each other. A
fundamental question (i.e. Fourier restriction problem) that has been studied
for decades is how the geometry of the frequency support of the Fourier
transform dictates the size of the original function in time. Various
quantifications of such relations are referred to as Fourier restriction
estimates and turn out to be extremely challenging to study. Even for the
simplest geometric objects such as spheres and paraboloids, many questions are
still wide open. Restriction estimates are interesting also due to their
connection with many other problems, within or outside analysis. It is well
known that restriction estimates can be applied to study the Kakeya conjecture
(on the minimum area of a set containing a unit line segment in each direction),
the existence and growth of solutions to Schrödinger and wave equations, and the
number of solutions to Diophantine equations in number theory.

This project studies several problems related to Fourier restriction estimates.
First, the principal investigator intends to further the investigation of the
Fourier restriction conjecture for the paraboloid and the cone via the
polynomial method. This method explores the algebraic structure of the time-
frequency decomposition of the function, and has shown to be extremely powerful
in obtaining many state-of-the-art results in the theory. Second, the principal
investigator proposes to continue the study of weighted restriction estimates
(i.e. when the Lebesgue measure is replaced with a fractal measure) and apply
them to estimate divergence sets of the Schrödinger or wave equations and to
distance set problems (on how the size of a set dictates the size of its
distance set). The major difficulty in this direction is the lack of a crucial
tool (orthogonality) caused by the presence of the fractal measure. Here an
interesting approach will attack the distance set problems directly by studying
the behavior of the fractal measure. Last, the principal investigator wants to
explore the role in restriction theory of a recently developed tool called
sparse domination. This method, arising from singular integral theory, is a way
to reduce the study of the original continuous, spread out operator to that of a
class of much simpler dyadic, positive, local operators. This method has shown
to be extremely useful in singular integral theory and has become a modern view
of point in describing operators. The principal investigator plans to further
the study of sparse bounds of operators related to restriction estimates and
with a Kakeya nature, such as the Bochner-Riesz multipliers, singular integrals
along manifolds, directional maximal operators, and multi-parameter singular
integral operators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.