* 1764209
* Methods for Simulating Nonadiabatic Dynamics with Trajectories
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Craig Martens, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Craig C. Martens of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational methods to simulate quantum
processes in molecular systems. Ordinary Newtonian or classical mechanics is
used to understand the motion of everyday objects such as golf balls or
airplanes. Very light particles such as electrons, however, must be described
using quantum mechanics. The motion of atoms and electrons that accompany
chemical reactions falls in the frontier separating classical and quantum
mechanical descriptions of matter. Martens and his research group explore this
frontier by incorporating quantum effects into the conceptually intuitive and
computationally efficient framework of classical mechanics. They focus on
nonadiabatic dynamics of molecules, where quantum electronic transitions
accompany the nearly classical vibrations and chemical rearrangements of the
constituent atoms. Martens' goal is to gain an understanding of the nature of
quantum mechanics at a fundamental level while at the same time developing
methods that are more efficient and accurate than existing approaches. Their
research activities are paralleled by an outreach program that includes
mentoring undergraduate and high school students to write educational computer
games that add quantum effects to familiar but inherently classical gameplay to
illustrate quantum mechanics in a manner that is accessible to nonscientists,
and even to children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Martens and his group are developing
a new stochastic surface hopping approach that captures quantum nonlocality and
coherence fully and accurately in a classical trajectory context. Unlike current
methodology, the novel approach describes quantum properties of the system such
as the populations, coherence, and the partitioning of energy collectively
through interrelationships between the trajectories of the ensemble taken as a
whole. Martens and coworkers aim to achieve a quantitatively accurate
trajectory-based method for simulating molecular dynamics with electronic
transitions within this framework, both as a fundamental achievement and as a
benchmark for the introduction of further approximations. Ultimately, they seek
accurate but economical and efficient methodologies based on well-understood and
tested compromises rather than ad hoc simplifications. They are constructing an
independent trajectory approach incorporating rigorously derived quantum
generalized forces that avoid ad hoc features of standard methodology with the
goal of broader applicability while being roughly equal in cost. The Martens
group is pursuing extensions to multidimensional systems, where energy
partitioning and geometric phase effects provide challenging tests of the new
approach. In addition, Martens is implementing an outreach program that bridges
the gap between performing arts and science, with the goals of enhancing the
image and accessibility of science as a career. He is also mentoring
undergraduate and high school students in the development of video games that
illustrate the fundamentals of quantum mechanics to youth and
nonscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.