* 1764138
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Investigating the Social and Technological Implications of Mass-Capture Fishing
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Ginessa Mahar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 27,978.00

Archaeological research provides a unique, long-term perspective on the dynamics
among society, culture, technology and environment. Accordingly, archaeological
studies of maritime adaptations have traditionally focused on long-term
processes, broadening understanding of general trends such as resource
depletion, often glossing over the consequences of specific events. This study
focuses on a particular case of social and economic reorganization in order to
illuminate the impact of innovation during times of punctuated social and
political change. Just as industrialization has had a huge impact on fishing
operations, fishing communities and fisheries populations in recent times,
changes in fishing technology and resource use among pre-capitalist societies
were closely tied to social, political, and economic reorganization. This
project presents a rare opportunity to connect archaeological data that
stretches back millennia to historical and modern day fisheries data in order to
better understand the factors that promote continuity and the forces that
generate abrupt and lasting change. The results of this research will be shared
globally, and will provide a deep-time perspective on fishery sustainability.
Student participants in this research will receive training and experience in
archaeological laboratory methods, faunal analysis and specimen curation.

University of Florida doctoral student Ginessa Mahar, supervised by Dr. Neill
Wallis, will investigate how changing social, political, and economic
circumstances among coastal fisher-hunter-gatherer societies affected
subsistence practices and technological innovation. During the Woodland era of
the Southeastern USA, the appearance of complex civic-ceremonial centers
indicates political, economic, and social reorganization on the part of formerly
small-scale dispersed societies. Such developments likely required a complete
reorganization of subsistence practices to facilitate these unprecedented large
gatherings. This study investigates the traditional fishing practices of Early
Woodland (500 B.C. - A.D. 200) coastal communities along the northern Gulf Coast
of Florida and how they were affected by the intensification of ritual practices
after A.D. 200, when complex civic-ceremonial centers were constructed and
inhabited. Specifically, this study asks if traditional fishing protocols were
expanded to facilitate such gatherings as well as daily consumption at civic-
ceremonial centers, or if innovative practices were developed and executed.
Archaeological samples will be analyzed from multiple sites that date prior to,
during, and after the onset of these centers. Fish bones from these
archaeological contexts will be used to assess the type and scale of technology
used to facilitate the changing needs of these coastal communities. Fish size is
critical to the assessment of resource acquisition, timing, and resource
sustainability, thus allometric formulae will be generated using modern
specimens from the Gulf of Mexico provided by the Florida Fish and Wildlife
Conservation Commission. This project also incorporates the results of
previously conducted research including ethnographic fieldwork, experimental
fish capture, and archaeological material culture analysis. The data generated
by this project will benefit not only archaeological studies within the region
but also multi-disciplinary, long-term fisheries projects worldwide.