* 1764329
* Constructing Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonds for Dehydrogenation and Dehydrocoupling Reactions Involving Volatile Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Daniel Mindiola, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, the research
team of Dr. Daniel Mindiola at the University of Pennsylvania is investigating
the synthesis of earth-abundant (i.e., "base") metal complexes containing
titanium, niobium, and vanadium. The complexes are studied for their ability to
convert, catalytically and under mild conditions, alkanes into alkenes (i.e.,
compounds with carbon-carbon double bonds). Alkenes are building blocks in
industry and are useful in the construction of polymers or other commodity
chemicals indispensable to pharmaceuticals and petrochemicals. The research team
is also investigating how to convert natural gas or volatile natural resources
into liquid fuels since these are much easier to transport and store. The team
is also investigating ways to convert nitrogen from our atmosphere into chemical
fuels and important reagents such as ammonia or ammonium salts. This is done
under mild conditions, also using well defined base metal catalysts. The
catalysts that the team is synthesizing function under conditions that are
milder (70-80 degree C) than cracking conditions used in the petrochemical
industry (>800 degree C). Dr. Mindiola has been active with the ACS (American
Chemical Society) serving as Chair of the ACS Scholars Program Subcommittee on
Minority Affairs among many other activities to promote diversity in the
physical sciences. He is actively involved in promoting science at the
university level as well as in elementary and middle schools in the region by
conducting demonstrations aimed at understanding natural resources such as
nitrogen and natural gas.

Dr. Mindiola is investigating how base, early transition metals such as Ti, V,
and Nb can promote the transfer dehydrogenation of volatile and linear
hydrocarbons, selectively, into olefins and terminal olefins in the case of C4
and above. The research team is investigating mild conditions to perform such
transformations by taking advantage of the reactive nature of metal-carbon
multiple bonds. Through synthetic and mechanistic studies, the team is exploring
optimization of conditions for higher catalytic turnover and selectivity. One
particular reaction is the room temperature conversion of methane into an olefin
using a well-defined Ti alkylidene or robust dinuclear systems. Dr. Mindiola is
also exploring the catalytic room temperature conversion of atmospheric nitrogen
into ammonia and ammonium salts using base metal niobium precursors that are
simple to prepare and handle, and which have yielded intermediates that provide
clues into how these systems bind, activate, and split the N-N triple bond. Dr.
Mindiola is heavily involved with the American Chemical Society through
committees and subcommittees aimed at promoting diversity in the physical
sciences. He is also actively involved at the university level and in his
community promoting science and educating society about natural gas and other
greenhouse gases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.