* 1764310
* Base Metal Rich Pd-Bi Ordered Intermetallics for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Anthony Shoji Hall, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 389,969.00

The development of efficient renewable energy conversion and storage devices is
one of the most important challenges of this century. However, renewable energy
sources, such as solar and wind, are intermittent. This means that energy
derived from those sources needs to be stored in an energy dense medium for use
at night, or when the wind is not blowing. Energy-dense chemical fuels have
emerged as an important means of storing renewable energy. When renewable energy
is not available, the energy dense-chemical fuel can be electrolyzed to produce
electricity on demand in a fuel cell device. Currently, platinum, an expensive
precious metal, is used to convert the fuel to electricity. Prof. Anthony Shoji
Hall of Johns Hopkins University is developing high-performing catalysts with
reduced amounts of precious metal, allowing electricity to be produced from
chemical fuels more cheaply, but without sacrificing performance. Dr. Hall's
laboratory also actively engages in outreach at inner city Baltimore high
schools. This activity will allow a female minority high school student to study
in his laboratory to learn about renewable energy science, and will support the
performance of demonstrations for a high school student group at an inner city
Baltimore school on the topic of renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is funding
Prof. Anthony Shoji Hall of Johns Hopkins University to investigate the oxygen
reduction reaction on palladium-bismuth (Pd-Bi) ordered intermetallic
nanoparticles synthesized at low temperature. Recently, ordered intermetallic
materials have attracted significant attention as high performance
electrocatalysts in comparison to disordered alloys. However, these materials
often require high temperatures to form, making it difficult to control the size
and shapes of the particles. Dr. Hall has recently found that various phases of
Pd-Bi ordered intermetallics can be synthesized at more moderate temperatures,
allowing access to these materials via low temperature colloidal synthesis.
Preliminary results indicate that Pd-Bi ordered intermetallics possess
unprecedented catalytic activity, and stability for the Oxygen Reduction
Reaction (ORR), suggesting that Bi can modify the properties of Pd, facilitating
enhanced catalytic activity. To understand the origin of high catalytic
activity, electro-kinetic and in-situ spectroscopic studies are performed, a
mechanistic pathway is proposed, and catalyst performance and stability is
evaluated. The goal of these studies is to gain understanding of why Pd-Bi
intermetallics are excellent catalysts for ORR, and how to grow ordered
intermetallic nanoparticles with controlled sizes, shapes, and compositions.
This knowledge facilitates the integration of these materials into advanced fuel
cell devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.