* 1764240
* Development of New Strategies for Complex Molecule Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* John Wood, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This project is funded by the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division. Dr.
John L. Wood of Baylor University is developing new methods and strategies for
transforming readily accessible chemicals into complex molecules that are
similar, and sometimes identical, to those that have been discovered in nature.
These molecules are being studied because of their complex structure and
important physiological properties. The new methods and strategies being
developed are applicable to the preparation of molecules used in the discovery
of new medicines, agrochemicals, insecticides, materials, flavors, and
fragrances. The broader impacts of this research include advancing our ability
to prepare complex molecules. Students are engaged in research and acquire
skills that enable them to pursue STEM careers in both academics and industry.
Dr. Wood's research team continues to be comprised of individuals with varied
educational levels, ethnicities and genders who move on to positions where they
continue to have a strong positive impact on science and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wood is developing new methods and strategies
for the synthesis of physiologically important natural products. The natural
products targeted in this study possess complex structures and include congeners
of the naturally occurring alkaloids tetrapetalone A and aspergilline A and the
naturally occurring antifungal agent hippolachnin A. Within the context of these
synthetic efforts, strategies are being pursued that advance understanding and
expand the scope of intramolecular furan Diels-Alder reactions, and the
cycloaddition chemistry of cyclopropenone and quadricyclane. The latter strained
ring systems hold promise as cycloaddition substrates capable of delivering a
variety of stereochemically rich aliphatic and heterocyclic products. Nitrogen-
and oxygen-containing heterocycles are ubiquitous among molecules useful in the
development of new materials, medicines, agrochemicals, insecticides, flavors
and fragrances. Dr. Wood has continually assembled a research team comprised of
individuals with varied educational levels, ethnicities and genders and pursues
outreach endeavors designed to foster STEM education among middle and high
school level youth groups. The training and skillsets developed in the students
involved this project will enable them to have a lasting impact on science and
society during the pursuit of their respective STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.