* 1764239
* Conference on Nonparametric Statistics
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Caesar Jackson, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 04/30/2020
* USD 26,620.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences that seek to increase the research capacity of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty at HBCUs. North Carolina
Central University will collaborate with the University of North Carolina -
Chapel Hill to host a Conference on Nonparametric Statistics at the Hill Alumni
Center, Chapel Hill, NC, on October 16-17, 2018. About eighty faculty and
students from North Carolina Central University will attend this conference.

Data in biomedical sciences, the social sciences, and other fields often involve
non-standard designs and very high dimensions with relatively small sample sizes
with complex dependency structure. Standard models and associated statistical
packages, mostly based on parametric statistics, are often of limited scope in
these complex set-ups. For such models, nonparametric approaches would apply.
This conference is to bring together scholars, researchers, educators, students
and professionals who are interested in this important area of statistics. A key
objective is to provide researchers and students from North Carolina Central
University with the opportunity to interact with a group of researchers and to
strengthen capacity in this area of statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.