* 1764081
* Arithmetic Combinatorics and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mei-Chu Chang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,995.00

The research area of the project is arithmetic combinatorics. This has become an
interdisciplinary field of research with many new emerging applications to
analytic number theory, Fourier analysis, probability, computer science (e.g.
elliptic curve cryptography, and pseudorandom number generators), and even
theoretical physics (e.g. solid state physics). While certain themes in
arithmetic combinatorics are classical in number theory, there is also focus on
new structural questions that turned out to be important. Some of the useful
tools (e.g. exponential sum and character sum estimates) are themselves
attractive to researchers. Combinatorial problems in finite fields continue to
offer many challenges, in particular questions involving orders of points on
varieties over finite fields (e.g. recent developments related to the Markoff
surface). This research involves different groups of people and the interaction
of various branches of mathematics, with the potential of making progress on
some well-known unsolved problems. The principal investigator will run a weekly
seminar at graduate level on basic methods in analysis and combinatorics through
explanation of research in combinatorial number theory. Special efforts would be
made to attract first-generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to continue research on universality for nodal intersections,
arithmetic progressions in multiplicative groups of finite fields, non-linear
Roth type theorem, orders and density of points, on varieties over finite
fields, and the theory of incomplete and short character sums. Besides the usual
tools in (discrete) Fourier analysis and probability, techniques from arithmetic
combinatorics were used, particularly, various versions of factorization in
generalized arithmetic progressions and quantitative Nullstellensatz, sum-
product theory for the exponential sum and character sum estimates, (including
mixed character sums, character sums over very short intervals, and these sums
with various moduli or arguments). It turns out that results from sum-product in
various settings are of interest in their own right as well as they lead to new
results in analytic number theory and some of the problems
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.