* 1764404
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP - ACCEYSS: Association of Collaborative Communities Equipping Youth for STEM Success
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Kristy Daniel, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 11/30/2020
* USD 314,535.00

The ACCEYSS (Association of Collaborative Communities Equipping Youth for STEM
Success) Network and Model project, an NSF INCLUDES Design and Development
Launch Pilot, at Texas State University is forming a university-community
partnership between interdisciplinary researchers (ACCEYSS research team), faith
leaders and other community partners to implement an innovative model that
prepares underrepresented and underserved youth to pursue undergraduate science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) degrees. The inaugural ACCEYSS
network will include Texas State University, San Marcos Consolidated Independent
School District, San Marcos Youth Service Bureau, City of San Marcos-Office of
the City Manager, Hays County Youth Initiative, the Calaboose African American
History Museum, and several local faith-based organizations. Many historic
advancements have been made through the efforts and activities of faith and
community leaders uniquely poised to motivate and galvanize community-based
action. A collaboration among these academic institutions, social/cultural
organizations, and faith partners to work with the families and youth of
underrepresented/underserved populations will be an essential asset for
generating new perspectives and ideas for improving STEM academic and career
outcomes related to broadening participation in the scientific enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this launch pilot, the ACCEYSS research team and
network will collaborate to design and develop the ACCEYSS model as a
culturally-relevant, blended-learning strategy that integrates online and in-
person STEM enrichment activities (e.g., summer institute, afterschool clubs)
that are aligned with the Science and Engineering Practices and Disciplinary
Core Ideas Dimensions of the K-12 Next Generation Science Education Standards.
The collective impact framework will be used to build diverse capacity, leverage
asset-based community development, and sustain mutually reinforcing non-
exclusive policies and practices for STEM diversity and inclusion. Additionally,
in this launch pilot, a multifaceted design-based research approach will be
utilized to support middle and high school students' interest in and pursuit of
STEM studies.