* 1764358
* Critical Nonlinear Dispersive Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Benjamin Dodson, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 182,588.00

This project considers the behavior of solutions of different types of wave
equations, including the ultra-hyperbolic Schrodinger equation, the Schrodinger
map problem, the Hartree equation, the Skyrme model, and the Einstein wave map
system. These equations are widely separated in their physical and historical
origins, however, the relevant mathematics is closely related, and techniques
and insights in various areas of mathematics may be synthesized in fruitful
ways. Solutions to these equations exist at least for a short time, but beyond
that, can either reach a singularity at some finite time, or extend to all time
in which case they are called global solutions. For singular solutions, the
central questions are to find the mechanisms for the breakdown of the solutions
and the structure of the solutions as time evolves toward the singularity. For
global solutions, the goal is to catalogue the different possible behaviors of
the solution as time extends to infinity, which can include dispersion, the
production of cohesive static waveforms or concentrating waveforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical analysis of these equations applies
techniques from geometry, Fourier analysis, and spectral theory. For some of the
equations, the local in time theory is very well understood and is set in a
scale-invariant function space that plays a crucial role in the long time
analysis of solutions as well. Despite numerous advances in the last several
decades, in many cases it remains an open problem whether a certain initial
condition will produce a solution that is singular or global. It is expected
that the solution will behave like a perturbation of a linearized version of the
equation in many cases, although there are other known phenomena which occur.
Some of the analytical techniques common to these problems, or which one hopes
to apply to these problems, include Morawetz estimates and energy
estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.