* 1764380
* New Tools for Absolute Molecular Structure Assignment
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Scott Rychnovsky, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2022
* USD 478,405.00

The Rychnovsky lab is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program in the
Chemistry Division to develop a new strategy to assign the absolute
configuration of molecules. Molecules may exist in two possible mirror-image
forms, which are commonly described as right-handed and left-handed molecules.
The new strategy involves testing the molecule in question by reacting it with
two mirror-image reagents specially chosen to differentiate right-handed and
left-handed molecules. Determining the more reactive reagent leads to
identification of the handedness (configuration) of the molecule in question.
Two mirror-image molecules interact with proteins, carbohydrates and other
biological molecules differently, with one of the mirror-image molecules often
having more favorable properties than the other. Most modern pharmaceutical
drugs are composed of only a single mirror image molecule as often only one of
the two forms are beneficial to human health. Assigning molecules to the correct
mirror-image structure (configuration) is an important step in the developing
new pharmaceutical agents, studying new natural product molecules, and in
understanding their interactions with cells, animals, humans and other living
creatures. Undergraduate and graduate students carry out the research for this
project. UC Irvine is a Hispanic Serving Institution, which provides ample
opportunities to recruit talented Hispanic (and other minority) students to
participate in this project. Professor Rychnovsky works with the faculty at
Santiago Community College providing their students with an avenue to develop
their research skills and expertise. This project benefits society by advancing
human health as well as improving student training/employment in the
pharmaceutical industries and medical sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
supports development of the Competing Enantioselective Conversion (CEC) strategy
for assigning the configuration of molecules. The new molecule is evaluated by
measuring rates of reaction against two enantiomeric (mirror image) catalysts or
reagents. Kinetic resolution catalysts are ideal because they react with high
enantioselectivity, showing significant rate differences between a matched case
and a mismatched case. By measuring the rate or conversion of an enantiopure
molecule against the two enantiomers of the reagent, the fast-reacting reagent
can be identified. Comparison with known examples allow the absolute
configuration of the molecule to be assigned. The program focuses on developing
new reagents for differentiating alkenes and dienes with adjacent stereogenic
centers. The method for assigning secondary alcohol configuration is being
adapted to identify a wider variety of structures. The research is well suited
for the training of new undergraduate scientists, and students with diverse
backgrounds are recruited to participate in this project. Santiago Community
College has many students who transfer to the UC system, but they rarely have
the opportunity to participate in research projects. Professor Rychnovsky works
with the faculty there to recruit summer students to take part in this research
program, thus providing an avenue for community college students to develop
research skills and experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.