* 1764338
* Synthesis of New Precursors for Vapor Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Luke Davis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 340,768.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project
led by Professor Roy Gordon. Professor Gordon is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Harvard University. In this project, he is
discovering new compounds that contain important metals for the fabrication of
faster and more energy-efficient computers and enable the transmission of
electrical energy over longer distances, as required for using more clean and
renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power. The goal is to
make the new compounds so that they are suitable for depositing the metals onto
heated surfaces so that they can then be used in the construction of new
devices. At the current time, none of the known compounds that contain these
metals have the properties needed for this effort. The project employs
techniques from organic, inorganic, and materials chemistry. Professor Gordon
trains a wide range of students, including those from groups currently
underrepresented in science, and he participates in a range of outreach
activities that include the design of new exhibits at the Boston Museum of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is synthesizing novel divalent and
trivalent metals of groups 4, 5, and 6 supported by amidinate, guanidinate, and
cyclopentadienyl ligands. Initial targets are relatives of known Ti(III) and
V(III) amidinates, followed by more ambitious targets, including compounds of
Ti(II), Zr(III), Hf(III), Nb(II), Nb(III), and Mo(III). The fundamental
knowledge gained in the project may help to solve important technological
problems, including deposition of smaller interconnects for computers, and
making superconducting wires for the long-distance transmission of electricity.
Particularly important targets are Ti(II) compounds, for which no examples are
known with the desired combination of properties: volatility, thermal stability,
and high reactivity. The chosen ligands combine steric and electronic properties
expected to stabilize highly reactive Ti(II) compounds. Similar strategies are
being explored for Zr, Hf, V, Nb and Mo, for which only a few compounds even
come close to combining all of these desired properties. The project also
provides technical input toward the design of new museum exhibits on
sustainability, energy conservation, and renewable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.