* 1764231
* Operator Theory and Matrix Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Scott McCullough, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 96,078.00

Many practical and mathematical problems can be described by polynomial
inequalities. These are algebraic inequalities whose variables (unknowns)
represent numbers. Because their importance, polynomial inequalities have been
studied intensely for many centuries. Matrix inequalities, algebraic equations
whose variables are matrices, also appear in many applied areas, such as linear
systems engineering, and mathematical fields. A key difference between
polynomial and matrix inequalities is that for matrices X and Y, unlike real
numbers, it can happen that XY and YX are not the same and if X and Y are
"positive", XY need not be "positive". A major theme of this project is the
development of a mathematical theory of matrix inequalities with an emphasis on
convexity. A set is convex if the line segment joining any two points in the set
lies entirely in the set. While it is easy to draw pictures of convex sets in
two variables, the notion makes sense and is immensely important in the cases
where there are a large number of variables, for instance minimizing cost or in
design problems where it is crucial to identifying worst case performance. In
many settings, when searching over a convex set, there is a unique minimum (or
worst case) and there are very reliable computer algorithms to find the minimum.
On the other hand, when searching for a minimum over a set that is not convex it
is difficult to be certain that the minimum, and not a value that is simply
smaller than those nearby, has been found. The solution set of a linear matrix
inequality is convex, but in general solution sets to matrix inequalities are
not. A goal of the principal investigator and his collaborators is to determine
when the solution set of a matrix inequality is convex, can be converted in a
tractable way to, or approximated reasonably by, a convex set described in some
fashion by a linear matrix inequality.

This project will contribute to the mathematical foundations of convex matrix
inequalities, developing the subject both in parallel to semialgebraic geometry
and as a non-linear version of the theory of operator systems and spaces and
completely positive/contractive maps. Motivation flows from the deep scientific
interactions with applications such as engineering systems theory. It will
advances the understanding of both linear matrix inequalities, now standard
tools in science and engineering, and matrix inequalities that arise in systems
engineering problems, particular for many of those that arise from a signal flow
diagram. An important aim is to determine and automate the identification of
matrix inequalities with convex solution sets, mapping a non-convex solution set
to a convex one (currently done on an ad-hoc basis for some special cases in the
systems engineering literature), and otherwise approximating non-convex solution
sets by convex ones. The methods employed involve ideas from functional
analysis, operator theory, complex analysis and several complex variables,
operator systems and spaces, completely positive maps, semidefinite programming
and semialgebraic geometry. Conversely, a significant aspect of this proposal is
the development of techniques and results that contribute to the theories of
operator systems, spaces and algebras and completely positive maps and of
(freely) noncommutative analogs of the theory of analytic functions in one and
several variables. In another direction, the distinction between positive and
completely positive maps on natural operator algebras of functions arising in
one and several complex variables will be investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.