* 2300947
* Pathways to Conceptual Knowledge of Decimals
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Jing Tian, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 10/31/2023
* USD 536,912.00

Mathematics proficiency is essential for success in STEM fields, but remains a
challenge for many US students, particularly proficiency in understanding
decimals and decimal arithmetic. The project aims to test whether optimizing
practice problems can improve students’ competency with and understanding of
decimals. Currently, students receive certain types of practice problems more
frequently than other types of practice problems, an occurrence that may limit
as well as interfere with students’ development a robust understanding of
decimals. This project investigates whether providing balanced distributions of
practice problems with immediate feedback can improve students’ knowledge of
decimals and decimal arithmetic in middle school.

The project includes three short-term intervention studies with 6th and 7th
grade students. Study 1 will focus on decimal arithmetic and test whether
completing balanced practice problems with immediate feedback will improve
students’ procedural knowledge. The researchers will compare the effectiveness
of balanced decimal arithmetic practice problems with immediate feedback,
unbalanced practice problems that reflect typical practice problems presented in
textbooks, and business-as-usual activities. Study 2 will focus on decimal
magnitude knowledge and test whether procedural knowledge developed from
balanced practice with immediate feedback will further improve conceptual
knowledge, and whether additional scaffolding is needed. The researchers will
compare effects of balanced practice with accuracy feedback, balanced practice
with accuracy feedback and conceptual prompts, and balanced practice with no
feedback. Study 3 will combine the interventions from Studies 1 and 2 to examine
whether boosting students’ conceptual knowledge of decimal magnitudes leads to
greater benefits from a subsequent decimal arithmetic intervention involving
balanced practice problems with immediate feedback. Together, these studies will
provide insight into the cognitive processes involved in developing decimal
knowledge through balanced practice problem distributions. Further, the findings
promise to set the foundation for large-scale school-based interventions aimed
at improving children’s mathematical outcomes via an easily malleable factor in
instructional materials – distributions of practice problems.

This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.