* 2300365
* Research Initiative Award: The Dark Side of Light: Gestational and Generational Impact of Light Pollution on Brain Development and Fecundity
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Carmel Martin-Fairey, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,959.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Harris-Stowe State University supports faculty and
undergraduate research experiences in their efforts to determine the impact of
light exposure on chrono-disruption during pregnancy in off-spring. Given that
light provides much of the information that enables organisms to adapt to their
environment, it is important that efforts are made to understand the adverse and
deleterious effects of light pollution in mammalian fetal programming, serving
as a foundational study to preserving biodiversity.

The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the epigenetic and hormonal
mechanisms during pregnancy and the relationship with offspring brain
development and fecundity. It is hypothesized that mistimed gestational light is
a modifiable factor that desynchronizes maternal-fetal epigenetic and hormonal
signaling across both nocturnal and diurnal mammals, which predisposes adult
offspring to poor cognitive and reproductive health. Thus, utilizing diurnal
grass rat and nocturnal rodent models, transcriptional analyses will be
conducted to identify hippocampal, behavioral, and reproductive neurodevelopment
in utero. The project also aims to identify the molecular basis to reset
epigenetic and hormonal impairments by restoring melatonin and corticosterone
rhythm during gestation. It is anticipated that the proposed studies will
generate new knowledge regarding the underpinnings of neurological and
reproductive system development as affected by light during gestation. The
engagement of undergraduate students in this project, coupled with efforts to
organize student-involved and community organization workshops aimed at raising
awareness of the impact of light pollution, are likely to enhance the
institutional prominence of Harris-Stowe State University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.