* 2300420
* Creating an Agriculture Workforce Pipeline of STEM Technicians Trained in Water Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Bradley Rose, Illinois Central College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,397.00

Illinois is an agricultural state with related commodities generating billions
of dollars annually. The economic plan of the Illinois Department of Commerce
and Economic Opportunity (DCEO) emphasizes investing in research and innovation
as one of its guiding priorities, with a focus on agriculture and agri-business.
STEM technicians trained in water quality analysis and who can provide vital
information to Illinois farmers are in high demand, and this demand is expected
to continue. A consequence of large-scale agricultural production, however, is
field nutrient loss as rain carries fertilizer run-off into local waterways,
contributing to hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico. The NSF ATE project at Illinois
Central College (ICC) is designed to grow the Illinois economy and workforce
while addressing environmental and health concerns generated by farmland
nutrient loss. This project will create a pipeline of STEM technicians to meet
the demands of regional employers, as well as contribute to scientific research
by generating data for the Illinois’ Nutrient Loss Reduction Strategy (INLRS) to
measure nitrogen and phosphorous field runoff. ICC’s project will accomplish
these goals by: 1) improving student proficiency in conducting scientific
experimentation and increasing student awareness of STEM technician careers; and
2) generating and sharing scientific data and agricultural strategies to support
conservation and water quality.

This project will provide students with hands-on experience in conducting
scientific experimentation and will better prepare them to enter the STEM
technician workforce via enhanced course curricula and work-based learning
activities. Over three years, 55 students will successfully utilize
instrumentation for water sample analysis with 20 of those students
demonstrating increased awareness of the INLRS and the health and environmental
impacts of nutrient loss. As part of the project, selected students will
participate in internships with industry partners, and it is anticipated that a
subset of students will secure employment in STEM technician jobs within six
months of associate degree completion. Additionally, this project will increase
awareness of STEM and agriculture education and career opportunities for
students by: 1) engaging approximately 200 high school students and teachers
annually through an Agricultural Showcase and Field Day; 2) delivering
professional development to high school teachers and college faculty on STEM
teaching-learning strategies; and 3) providing STEM-focused professional
development to guidance counselors, advisors, and career counselors at ICC.
External evaluators will assess student preparedness as entry-level STEM
technicians as well as the scientific efficacy of specific agricultural
conservation practices. Results and data from this project will be disseminated
regionally through the Illinois Sustainable Ag Partnership, the Illinois Corn
Growers Association, the INLRS, and will be presented at the Illinois
Association of Vocational Agricultural Teachers conference. Project results will
be nationally disseminated through the Community College Alliance for
Agricultural Advancement and through NSF ATE conferences. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.