* 2300914
* Competency-Based Education for Automation Technologies to Improve Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ashlee Spannagel, Southeastern Community College Burlington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 07/31/2026
* USD 649,499.00

Manufacturing is the largest in-demand industry sector for skilled workers in
southeast Iowa and is also the source of the most high-paying jobs in the
region. Skilled technicians are needed who can successfully troubleshoot,
repair, and maintain the machinery and equipment that powers the various
manufacturing processes in operation at manufacturing facilities. The existing
Industrial Controls, Automation, and Robotics Technology technician degree
program currently has low retention and graduation rates, some of which is due
to the variability of studentsâ€™ technical skills on entry to the program.
Industry stakeholders would like to see students completing the program sooner,
with credential-earning opportunities, and in a manner where they can
demonstrate their mastery of skill competencies. Competency-Based Education has
shown promise in providing a learning environment in which students with
different learning abilities can learn and demonstrate competency for a set of
specific skills. A competency-based curriculum will allow students to work at
their own pace asynchronously through structured competencies allowing them to
master each competency prior to moving to the next one. This project will
transform courses in the current degree program into a Competency-Based
Education model to improve the retention and persistence rates of students.
Recruiting activities will focus on increasing the number of students from
disadvantaged socio-economic groups in the program.

The goals of this project are to: 1) increase the number of graduates for a
degree program in automation technologies; 2) create a flexible learning lab to
increase student accessibility to hands-on learning experiences; 3) increase the
number of high school students in dual enrollment courses; and 4) expand
industry involvement to promote career paths for students. To achieve these
goals, this project will redesign the courses in the current degree program
using a Competency-Based Education modality which will include alignment to
industry-recognized credentials and course-level competencies and the
development of skills assessments and master course shells. High school students
will have the opportunity to take dual enrollment courses that will decrease the
time to graduation and increase student awareness of career opportunities. A
Teacher Academy and externships in industry will provide high school teachers
with the opportunity to learn about careers within the manufacturing sector
involving automation technologies. A mixed methods approach to data collection
and analysis will be used to assess the impact of the project on student
enrollment, retention, and persistence. Project results will be disseminated to
the technician education community through a project website, an annual report,
conference presentations, and professional publications. This project will build
upon the body of knowledge related to: innovative course delivery approaches;
K-14 career pathways to increase student enrollment, retention, and completion;
flexible learning labs to meet student needs; and expanded industry involvement
to promote career paths for students. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.