* 2300974
* Advancing Progress in Industrial BioManufacturing to Accelerate Workforce Readiness
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Amanda Rosenzweig, BIOINDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING AND DESIGN ECOSYSTEM
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 510,430.00

The rapidly expanding sector of biotechnology requires a workforce trained in
all aspects of biomanufacturing. This project, in particular, is leading the
development of workforce programming designed to increase career readiness and
occupational competencies in the emerging space of bioindustrial manufacturing.
While existing programs that lead to degrees and credentials in biotechnology
provide critical core skills, they fall short of meeting the industry benchmarks
for the skills and competencies in demand for industrial scale bioprocessing.
New curricula are needed to teach critical engineering principles such as
analysis, design, development, scale-up, and commercialization of bio-based
processes and products. Expansion of the talent pool to leverage the existing
biotechnology program infrastructure in our Nationâ€™s community colleges will
require the development and adoption of new curricular materials to integrate
key benchmarks for bioprocess engineering. Instructional modules created as part
of this project will guide other colleges with materials adaptation and course
integration during the scale-out phase of the project.

Three goals guide this project's collaboration between Delgado Community College
(DCC) and Bioindustrial Manufacturing and Design Ecosystem (BioMADE). First is
to formalize a Community of Practice (CoP) for workforce agencies, academic
institutions, and industry/commercial entities to inform local, regional, and
national workforce efforts in bioindustrial manufacturing. Second is to develop,
test, and finalize key bioprocessing concept education modules that meet
performance benchmarks for bioindustrial manufacturing. Third is to increase
capacity of a diverse and inclusive workforce ecosystem as well as career entry
through the deployment of curricular materials and dissemination efforts, such
as industry-driven workshops, government interagency collaboration, and expanded
community and technical college curriculum adoption. This project will fill
knowledge gaps related to bioprocessing for careers in bioindustrial
manufacturing. These efforts will contribute to a well-prepared, industry-
qualified, and diverse biomanufacturing workforce. Not only will the proposed
BioMADE project produce resources that will address skills and advancement
opportunities for high-skilled technicians in the bioindustrial manufacturing
industry, but it will ensure that that industry has the talent it needs to drive
innovation and regional bioeconomic security. This project will increase the
number and diversity of students who enter the bioindustrial manufacturing
workforce in the deep South of the United States, but the resources generated
will enhance existing biotechnology workforce programs more widely. BioMADE will
disseminate these resources broadly through channels that impact our active and
veteran military, existing biotechnology education programs, local workforce
development agencies, and interagency/cross-government agency networks. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.