* 2300322
* Collaborative Research: Unpacking Computational Thinking for Elementary Teachers and Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Jennifer Albert, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,275,263.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the integration of computational
thinking (CT) into elementary school curricula by studying how teachers develop
expertise in integrating CT activities that align with interdisciplinary
standards and existing curricula. This project addresses the critical need for
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) literacy by
investigating effective models of professional development (PD) that improve
STEM teaching and learning. Leveraging an asset-based approach, the project will
provide opportunities to broaden participation in computer science education
through building a community of practice for teachers and designing CT-infused
curricula. To ensure that all teachers have the necessary support to participate
in new pedagogical practices of increasing complexity, the project will utilize
a collaborative teacher PD and mentorship structure in which teachers will work
closely with peers and project team members to prepare, teach, and reflect upon
lessons through multi-year participation. The research will document how
teachers come to understand CT and take up these practices in their classrooms.
The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of STEM by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

Over four years, this project will directly impact 135 teachers in multi-year
participation in professional development and approximately 12,000 students
indirectly in their classrooms. This project will initially focus on schools in
South Carolina, especially in rural districts. The project will be guided by
three primary research questions: 1) How do preK-5 teachers integrate CT into
their disciplinary teaching?; 2) What are the personal learning trajectories
that teachers move through as they work towards CT integration?; 3) What are the
barriers and accelerators for teachers’ implementation of CT-infused lessons?
This project is grounded in the idea that incremental, sustainable, and
substantial teacher learning comes when teachers are fully invested in the cycle
of learning and have opportunities to build and strengthen their communities of
practice. In reflective PD sessions held throughout the academic year and
summer, teachers will explore, co-design, implement, and refine student learning
activities that integrate CT into existing content area standards and curricula.
The CT activities, which will include standards-based lesson plans, assessments,
and supplemental resources, will offer both plugged and unplugged components, so
that students and teachers have opportunities to understand the conceptual
underpinnings of computational thinking with and without computers. A minimum of
120 lessons and related pedagogical materials mapped to core-content standards
will be developed and made freely available to the public on the project
website. Using a mixed methods approach, this study will document the
trajectories through which elementary teachers move as they begin to integrate
CT into disciplinary teaching, as well as barriers and accelerators faced as
they integrate CT into disciplinary teaching. Quantitative survey methodologies
and multimodal analysis of narrative interviews, classroom video, teacher
reflections, and pedagogical artifacts will be used to analyze teachers’ sense
making about CT over time and the uptake of new pedagogical approaches in their
teaching. Ultimately, this study will produce a set of empirically-tested
learning trajectories that can be used to support teachers in integrating CT
into their classrooms. As a means of expanding the community of practice,
sharing resources, and disseminating project findings to a nationwide audience,
the project also incorporates a virtual PD component to support PD access to
elementary school teachers from underrepresented and underserved schools across
the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.