* 2300340
* EAGER: PUF-based Probe Design for Secure Access to DNA Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

A functioning economy depends on the reliability of the goods and services being
offered. Consumer goods from prescription or over-the-counter drugs to
computers, automobiles, and appliances, all have unique individual or batch
numbers. Raw materials used in every industry have similar identification
labeling. As the bioeconomy develops, it will be necessary to uniquely identify
all organisms in use. This will be important to establish strict biosafety and
biosecurity protocols. This project will investigate a strategy to uniquely
label individual strains of cells that will be inherited but not able to be
replicated or read by a third party. This could help ensure the safety and
security of a robust bioeconomy.

The project will investigate the use of DNA as the core of an addressable,
secure data storage system. Towards that end, the project team will pursue two
aims. Aim 1 involves the use of CRISPR-technology to perform genome editing of
cell lines for distributed information storage. They propose to investigate the
properties of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) in a library of cell lines
and characterize different genomic locations and assess the off-target effects
of CRISPR editing. The second aim is to develop a prototype on-chip PUF probe.
This probe will help determine whether a PUF key array can be implemented
effectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.