* 2300505
* Research Initiation Award:Transcriptome Analysis of Microtubule Actin Crosslinking Factor 1 (MACF1) Stage-Specific oocytes in Zebrafish
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dondra Bailey, Coppin State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 291,745.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Coppin State University provides an opportunity to
establish a zebrafish laboratory that investigates the mechanisms underlying
oogenesis. Specifically, the project aims to examine the function of Microtubule
Actin Crosslinking Factor 1 (MACF1) in Balbiani body (Bb) disassembly. With this
award, efforts also include the training of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students, thereby contributing to the next generation of scientists who
can contribute to scientific innovation, creativity and productivity.

The embryonic axis is first determined during oogenesis by polarity cues
established in the oocyte, preceding embryonic genome activation. This distinct
asymmetry is determined from a vegetally localized structure, called the
Balbiani body (Bb). The Bb is conserved in oocytes from vertebrates to
invertebrates and is composed of an aggregation of organelles and proteins
including RNA-binding proteins. However, the mechanism by which the Bb
establishes polarity during oogenesis and disassembles is unknown. There is
evidence to demonstrate that a magellan (mgn) mutant causes an egg polarity
defect and is characterized by an enlarged Bb and a mis-localized nucleus. The
mgn mutant specifically, disrupts the microtubule actin crosslinking factor
(macf1a) gene, known to function in other polarized cells. The goal of the
proposed study will focus on the earliest stages of oogenesis that result in a
mature and viable oocyte for successful fertilization. To address Bb disassembly
and the interaction with MACF1a this study will 1) employ Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS) technology to measure differential expression of transcripts in
macf1a stage-specific oocytes, and 2) visualize MACF1a protein in combination
with the Bb at the ultrastructural level. The proposed project will uncover for
the first time the transcriptome of a zebrafish maternal effect mutant (macf1)
which may lead to greater insight into the genes controlling polarity while
providing high-resolution characterization of the MACF1 protein/Balbiani body.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.