* 2300967
* Pathways for a Process Operations Technology Education Program for the Liquefied Natural Gas Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Nicholas Cram, Texas State Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 05/31/2026
* USD 637,016.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and implementing
an updated Process Operations Technology (PRO) program to prepare students for
high-demand technical careers in the Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) industry.
Targeted occupations include petroleum pump system operator, refinery operator,
chemical plant and system operators, refrigeration specialists and gas plant
operators. Texas is home to seven LNG export facilities that are in use, under
construction, or in the planning stages and will eventually support 70,000 jobs
in the region. Importantly, this project will build on prior work to redesign
the PRO program into a flexible and accessible statewide model to address the
needs of industry and employers in the East Texas region. This approach will
provide students with increasingly flexible opportunities and pathways to obtain
the necessary training to enter and be successful in the LNG industry.
Ultimately, this project intends to contribute to the training of a highly
skilled workforce for this rapidly growing industry and serve as a model in the
region for how to develop flexible technical education pathways that meet
student needs.

Texas State Technical College will collaborate with local industry to achieve
the primary goal of increasing the quality and number of highly skilled
technicians in the LNG industry through the implementation of an innovative and
flexible Process Operations Technology (PRO) program. This will be accomplished
through the following activities: 1) partnering with industry to undergo a
statewide curriculum alignment process of the PRO program courses to standardize
curriculum and learning outcomes, 2) upgrading of instructional equipment to
provide flexible, and accessible training in an open lab environment, and 3)
combining a performance-based online instructional model with an innovative
flexible career pathway approach featuring multiple entry/multiple exit (MEME)
points. The project team aims to enroll a minimum of one hundred students over
the three-year project period of which fifty students will graduate with either
an AAS degree or an industry recognized certificate. A formal evaluation will be
conducted to assess project activities and outcomes with a focus on contributing
to the body of knowledge on flexible technical education pathways for preparing
skilled technicians to be successful in the science and engineering technical
workforce. As a result, this project has the potential to provide a model for
the technical education community for how to transition from the traditional
didactic contact hour format to a flexible career pathway format with a stair-
step approach that promotes student retention and career-placement success. The
team aims to immediately expand the project to other campuses located in the
Dallas/Fort Worth area, the Texas Gulf Coast, West Texas, and the Rio Grande
Valley through hybrid courses and other targeted dissemination efforts. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.