* 2300064
* PFI-TT:  Point-of-Care Sensor Based on Electric Fields and Machine Learning for the  Detection of Circulating MicroRNA to Identify Early Stage Pancreatic Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2024
* USD 221,180.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a point of care biosensor
device for early detection of pancreatic cancer. Currently, it is difficult to
detect early-stage pancreatic cancers, therefore 5-year survival rates are less
than 5%. If pancreatic cancer is detected early, 5-year survival rate can be
over 90%. The proposed biosensor seeks to efficiently and accurately detect the
expression levels of circulating blood microRNA biomarkers recently suggested to
indicate early pancreatic cancers. The proposed biosensor is a disposable device
that uses electric fields and fluorescence for detection of microRNA biomarkers.
If successful, these sensors may detect pancreatic cancer biomarkers rapidly.
The commercial impact of the project is potentially high as this project
addresses a critical need in healthcare with a practical technological solution.
The proposed training on entrepreneurship will involve training students on
intellectual property procedures, the analysis of the commercialization
potential of a product, and start-up development. The outreach program is aimed
at introducing the basic concepts of innovation and entrepreneurship to
underrepresented groups in the region.

The proposed project will study microRNA and DNA hybridization, and use machine
learning based regression methods for the estimation of concentrations of
microRNA biomarker molecules. Currently, high temperature-based microRNA and DNA
hybridization is used but it takes time to perform and is prone to produce false
positives. To address these issues, a novel approach will be developed to
potentially produce microRNA and DNA hybridization assays with fewer false
positives. Automated detection of microRNA is needed in point of care as there
is no technical expertise to perform manual microRNA detection. These proposed
studies in machine learning will investigate regression methods for accurately
estimating the concentrations of microRNA biomarkers. Finally, proposed microRNA
detection will be automated to be useful in point of care applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.