* 2300369
* Research Initiation Award: A Deeper Look at Transmembrane Permeability in Plants and its Implications to Food Security
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Majid Bagheri, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,828.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Savannah State University supports faculty and
undergraduate research experiences to develop tools that will predict a plant’s
ability to transport contaminants from the soil and subsequent translocation
throughout the plant. Specifically, utilizing computer simulations and
biological validation techniques, the project may reveal mechanistic insights in
plant biology. Furthermore, uptake of environmental contaminants by plant roots
and their subsequent translocation to the edible parts may have serious
implications to the food security.

Plants provide a fundamental fraction of the human food and are the primary
source of nutrition for livestock. This research project advances the
fundamental knowledge of plant uptake and translocation of emerging contaminants
by considering the role of physicochemical properties and fundamental plant
materials. The project offers new approaches for assessing root-water
partitioning and transmembrane permeability at molecular and large scales. At
the molecular level, the interactions of contaminants with plant roots will be
examined using molecular dynamics simulation. At the large level, artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) techniques will be used to determine
the uptake variability in different plant species based on transmembrane
permeability. Neural networks, fuzzy logic, and clustering algorithms are some
of the AI/ML techniques that will be employed to perform the simulations. The
plant species with potential for phytoremediation and plant species with higher
possibility of contamination in their edible tissues will be determined using
these analyses. A tiny machine learning (TinyML) system will be developed to
detect emerging contaminants in plants through image processing. This system
uses a computer vision model to find plants impacted by emerging contaminants.
This project has the potential to provide an easy-to-use tool to analyze crop
contamination and plant uptake of the emerging contaminants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.