* 2300609
* Collaborative Research: Mobilizing Physics Teachers to Promote Inclusive and Communal Classroom Cultures through Everyday Actions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2027
* USD 249,966.00

The project addresses the historic marginalization of women and minoritized
racial/ethnic (MRE) groups in physics. The aim of the project is to co-design,
test, and disseminate professional learning (PL) for high school physics
teachers, specifically targeting the implementation of inclusive and equitable
practices that support physics identity development and persistence of women and
MRE groups. The project leverages the existing national network of over 1,800
high school physics teachers established by the project, which is called STEP
UP. Teachers play a crucial role in students' transition to college and their
decisions regarding what to study. STEP UP challenges prevailing narratives
about who can do physics and what constitutes physics, along with the Everyday
Actions Guide (EAG) for inclusion and equity, Research has shown positive
effects on the physics identity of women and MRE. However, teachers have
expressed a continuous need for additional professional learning (PL) to
effectively implement the EAG. In response, the project will co-design a PL
program with teachers, testing its impact on teacher and student outcomes
through design-based research (DBR) and an experimental study, and propagating
the evidence-based PL program to hundreds of high school physics teachers.
Overall, the project aims to support high school physics teachers across the
nation in implementing and enhancing their inclusive practices. The project will
ultimately impact over 10,000 students.

The project aims to deepen physics teachers' engagement with inclusive and
equitable practices, foster communal classroom cultures, and promote physics
identity development for women and MRE. It also seeks to understand how the
propagation of these practices can be effectively implemented at a larger scale
to support positive teacher and student outcomes. After collaborating with
teachers in the co-design of the PL program, the project will implement an
experimental design involving 120 physics teachers, with treatment groups
receiving the PL facilitated by trained teachers, and control groups not
receiving the PL. The effects of the PL on teacher and student outcomes will be
examined. In the final phase, the PL program will be implemented on a larger
scale, involving 400 in-service and 100 pre-service physics teachers. using a
train-the-trainer model. The impact of the PL will be assessed through a survey
study. The use of an evidence-based model and a community-engaged train-the-
trainer approach will have broader implications for other professional learning
projects, as well as the ongoing success of the STEP UP program. The commitment
of two national societies, which will continue the professional learning for via
their extensive teacher networks, ensuring the project's sustainability and
long-term impact.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.