* 2300937
* Reasoning about Spatial Relations and Distributions: Supporting STEM Learning in Early Adolescence
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Nora Newcombe, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2028
* USD 696,781.00

Spatial thinking is related to success in STEM disciplines. However, existing
research has largely focused on small-scale spatial skills, such as mentally
rotating objects. There is a critical need for research on how large-scale
spatial skills, such as navigation and mapping, are related to success in STEM
success, especially in the formative period of late childhood and early
adolescence. This project will develop, implement, and evaluate a set of new
tools and will gather new knowledge regarding reasoning about spatial relations
and early STEM instruction. The research team will evaluate several virtual
navigation measures to understand how they relate to real-life navigation for
children, they will develop and validate an assessment instrument that measures
geographic and spatial thinking in middle schoolers, and they will teach
weeklong workshops on STEM topics and examine how comprehension and learning are
related to the spatial skills, and whether these skills improve with
instruction. Findings from this project will inform and enhance instruction in
STEM at this age. This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This project studies spatial skills and reasoning and their relevance for STEM
education in late childhood and early adolescence, which is a crucial formative
period for mapping skills useful in STEM fields. The project will be conducted
in three related streams of work. First, the researchers will develop and
validate assessment measures to evaluate navigation, map use and geographic
thinking and reasoning in late childhood and early adolescence. They will obtain
reliability information on existing virtual environment paradigms, evaluate how
data derived from various virtual large-scale measures compare, validate
assessments of navigation in a virtual world against real-life navigation
skills, and examine the relations of the various navigation measures to a test
of map reading skills. They will develop and validate an assessment instrument
that measures geographic and spatial perspective use in middle schoolers. The
items will be developed based on released National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP) geography assessment questions for 8th grade and examined for
construct relevance using expert ratings and Item Response Theory (IRT)
statistics. The instrument will measure the ability of middle schoolers to
observe and comprehend information, to explain geographic patterns and
processes, to analyze geospatial problems and formulate appropriate solutions
and alternatives, and to make use of different geographic tools and skills.
Second, the research team will devise and refine these measures to study
relations among large- and small-scale spatial skills in middle school children.
Lastly, the team will determine how large-scale spatial skills relate to
spatially oriented learning outcomes concerning STEM topics by teaching weeklong
units on STEM topics that require thinking about distributions and ordered
relations. They will look at the relationship between adolescents' large- and
small-scale spatial skills and their geospatial analysis and geospatial
reasoning skills assessed during the workshops to understand if students who
have better baseline large- and small-scale spatial performance also have better
engagement and performance in spatial workshops and how the skills improve given
instruction. The activities will be multi-disciplinary and involve decision-
making based on the analysis of georeferenced geospatial data. This work will
broaden the understanding of the relation between spatial skills and STEM to
encompass reasoning about spatial distributions, an essential component in
scientific education and discovery. It will also build on the literature on the
relationship between large- and small-scale spatial ability and will provide
insights into the developmental linkages between large- and small-scale spatial
skills for late childhood and early adolescence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.