* 2300555
* High school climate education for a resilient future
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jessica Bean, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 449,885.00

In California, there is an urgent need for high school standards-aligned
materials that support the integration of climate science and strategies for
mitigation and adaptation. This exploratory study aims to design, implement, and
test climate science and history professional learning materials and experiences
for high school teachers. By leveraging existing science and history-social
science materials from the Understanding Global Change Project and the
California History-Social Science Project (CHSSP), the program will develop
curricular planning tools and lessons to help teachers integrate climate
literacy into their instructional units. The goal is to provide students with
the knowledge to understand and respond to the social and environmental issues
associated with the climate crisis. The project team, consisting of scientists,
historians, and educators, will work in regions facing droughts, wildfires,
rising temperatures, and the related social, economic, and health challenges.
This project will co-design the curriculum and professional development (PD),
involving 70 high school teachers and a Professional Learning Community, under
the supervision of a diverse advisory board, developing materials and planning
tools for science and history-social science climate change learning
experiences. The project builds upon existing research suggesting that teaching
the history of science and using a socio-scientific perspective can engage
students in meaningful learning experiences related to local issues. PD
workshops will be conducted in school districts serving low-income and
traditionally underrepresented students from rural and urban communities in the
San Francisco Bay Area. The resulting instructional materials and PD recordings
will be made accessible online to teachers nationwide.

Currently, climate change is often taught as a separate topic within K-12
education, rather than being integrated throughout year-long learning to reflect
its interconnectedness with ecosystems and human society. The primary question
this study seeks to answer is: How can interdisciplinary science and history
climate change PD support teachers in connecting content standards to climate
change caused by human activities and the need for societal action, integrating
climate change learning throughout the academic year? Building on project co-
design with teachers, the study will use assessment and survey tools to
determine teacher knowledge and attitudes about the climate crisis, systems
thinking, and the nature of science. This work will expand the use of various
existing assessment and survey tools to determine teacher knowledge of and
attitudes about the climate crisis, systems thinking, and the nature of science.
The findings will provide guidance to curriculum designers and professional
development providers on how to support teachers in embedding climate change
across science and history instruction.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.