* 2300459
* Fostering STEM Engagement from Parent-Child Interaction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Sobel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2026
* USD 528,233.00

Children’s engagement and learning in STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) is fundamental to developing a more scientifically literate
society. The ways parents and children interact around STEM activities sets the
stage for how children might become engaged in STEM. This project will
investigate the relation between the ways parents and children interact during
at-home STEM activities, children’s understanding of their interaction, and
children’s engagement with and learning around that activity. The team will
study at-home STEM activities for parents and children between the ages of 3 and
8, looking particularly at the way parent-child interaction relates to
children’s persistence with challenging tasks. The main hypothesis of the study
is that the more parents set goals for the interaction with their children, the
less autonomy children believe they have in performing the activity, resulting
in lower levels of child engagement.

This research involves two phases of experimental studies with parent-child
dyads randomly assigned to different conditions. The first set of studies will
look at naturalistic interactions between 360 dyads during an at-home STEM
activity about the surface tension of water. The team will investigate the ways
children reflect on their participation, to consider how their understanding of
their own autonomy relates to their engagement with water-based activities, such
as washing their hands. A second set of experimental studies expands these ideas
to a new group of 360 dyads, to examine persistence with challenging, structured
activities around specific engineering concepts. Children will then be given
age-appropriate challenging problems related to those activities. Researchers
will study the extent to which the autonomy communicated by parents during the
activity, and children’s metacognitive understanding of their participation
relates to their engagement and persistence with those challenging tasks.
Moreover, in both lines of studies, the team will examine whether nudging
parents to communicate more autonomy to their children during the interaction
promotes further persistence or engagement. Observational data will be coded and
analyzed using generalized linear models to control for relevant factors related
to age and child characteristics. Taken together, these studies advance
understanding of how naturalistic parent-child interaction during informal
learning at home relates to children’s engagement with STEM.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.