* 2300933
* STTR Phase I:  Cardiotropic Atorvastatin Liposomes for Myocardial Reperfusion Injury
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Vibhudutta Awasthi, HEXAKIT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project pertains to the critical need for pharmacologic
treatments in large populations that suffer from coronary artery disease and
that are subjected to procedures such as angioplasty or bypass surgery. While
effective in correcting the reduced flow of blood to the heart tissue, these
interventions also cause tissue damage categorized as ischemia reperfusion
injury (IRI). A pharmacologic treatment is critically needed to address this
residual injury that is a major cause of rehospitalization, prolonged hospital-
stay, heart failure, and mortality. By deploying the proposed technology of
heart-targeted vehicle for drug delivery, it will be possible to achieve
effective cardioprotection, which will reduce patient distress and economic
burden on the healthcare system for patients undergoing reperfusion procedures.
This disruptive technology will impact myocardial reperfusion injury market
worth $1.6 billion and influence the standard of care for over 1 million
coronary artery disease patients that are treated by angioplasty or bypass
surgery each year in the United States.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
Cardiotropic Atorvastatin Liposomes (CATLIP) to deliver cardioprotective
benefits of atorvastatin to the heart, safely and effectively. The innovative
CATLIP technology will deliver therapeutic amounts of atorvastatin to the heart
tissue for treatment of IRI. Current methods of administration are inadequate in
reaching the drug concentration needed for clinical efficacy. Serving a long-
term goal of developing a myocardia-targeted treatment to mitigate IRI, the
research objective of this proof-of-principle project is to attain effective
delivery of atorvastatin in the heart tissue. CATLIPâ€™s targeting approach is
based on a small molecule targeting vector that selectively binds to the
cardiomyosin exposed in the injured heart tissue. The research team will prepare
and characterize liposomes loaded with atorvastatin and modified on the surface
with the cardiotropic targeting vector. This preparation will be tested in an
animal model of myocardial infraction to determine atorvastatin delivery in the
heart tissue. Successful implementation of this project will create a
proprietary product for treatment of IRI of the heart and demonstrate the
potential of a targeting technology for application with other drugs for the
same medical condition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.