* 2300188
* National Information Technology Innovation Center (NITIC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Diane Meza, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2028
* USD 7,475,000.00

The Information Technology (IT) industry is continuing to experience shortages
of skilled workers, and COVID-19 has further exacerbated the sense of urgency
and need for an IT skilled technical workforce. According to CompTIA’s 2022
Workforce and Learning Trends report, U.S. tech employment will grow an
estimated 12.4 million net jobs in 2022 alone. Over the next ten years,
technology occupations are expected to grow at twice the rate of overall
employment. Yet the high demand for skilled workers is confounded by workers
leaving the field. According to Microsoft’s 2021 Work Trends Index, more than
40% of employees were considering a job change, and 46% planned to make a
significant career move or transition. While traditional areas of technology are
experiencing an increasing demand, there are also emerging job clusters. These
include, but are not limited to, the following fields: Artificial Intelligence
(AI), Machine Learning (ML), IT Automation, Quantum Computing, DevOps, FinTech,
Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), Encryption Technologies, IoT/Edge
Computing, 5G, and Blockchain Technology. Nationally, there are diversity gaps
in the IT industry. Underserved and disadvantaged students are not well
represented in pathways for careers in IT which often discourages these
individuals from pursuing these career pathways. This project will bring
together an experienced consortium of community colleges leaders in information
technology collaborating with industry partners to create the National
Information Technology Innovation Center (NITIC).

The Center will create a future-focused community of practice with diverse
perspectives and geographic distribution. NITIC will focus on emerging
technologies while strengthening and promoting proven best practices from prior
ATE IT centers. NITIC will create new deliverables that develop high-quality
educational materials, curricula, pedagogy, and teaching resources while
consolidating access for existing materials across broad areas of information
technology. The center will leverage a mix of experienced and emerging community
college partners to serve as leaders within their technology clusters to expand
collaboration and develop future leadership for the ATE community. The Center
will produce, implement, assess impact, and broadly share the following: 1)
Innovation clearinghouse to encourage new emerging IT curriculum and materials
driven by a Business & Industry Leadership Team (BILT) Model for high employer
engagement; 2) A Community of Practice: IT Innovation Network (ITIN) to promote
sharing and problem-solving; 3) Faculty Professional Development Model – Working
Connections Virtual and In-Person Workshops to address continuing learning needs
for faculty as technologies emerge; and 4) Dedicated models for increasing
diversity and underserved population representation in IT, including veterans,
women, and underserved student populations in STEM. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.