* 2300863
* Molecular Interrogation of Coupled Electron- and Phase-Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gregory Voth, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Rodrigo Noriega of the University of Utah
along with Henry White from the University of Utah and Gregory Voth from the
University of Chicago will study coupled electron and phase transfer processes.
These reactions, where electron transfer occurs alongside the transport of ions
or neutral molecules across a phase boundary, are present in a wide variety of
industrial processes and energy storage technologies. Understanding these
reactions is challenging due to the lack of molecular-scale understanding of
intermediates at critical steps in these multistep processes. Dr. Noriega and
his team will integrate ultrafast spectroscopy and electrochemistry experiments
on well-defined molecular systems with computational methods to study coupled
electron and phase transfer reactions independently. The resulting insight into
these reactions has the potential to impact energy storage and rare metal ion
separations. In addition to training students in research, the team will
organize an annual workshop that includes lab demonstrations and professional
development opportunities.

Probe reactions at complex interfaces, whereby redox-active analytes undergo
electron transfer with an electrode while also transferring between two
immiscible phases due to the differential solubility of their oxidation states,
will be studied with voltammetry at three-phase interfaces, as well as by
ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, and multiscale electrochemical
molecular dynamics simulations. To inform and test new models that capture
molecular-scale dynamics and macroscopic outcomes, a hierarchical framework that
combines computation with spectroscopic and electrochemical observation spanning
orders of magnitude in time and length will be employed. The energetics and
dynamics of solvation shell exchange, including the role of fluctuations at the
interface, will be determined by correlating phase-specific electrochemical
responses, time-resolved absorption and emission measurements at phase
boundaries under controlled electrostatic conditions, and multiscale molecular
dynamics simulations. Independently monitoring the ion- and electron-transfer
currents at well-defined interfaces while systematically altering their electric
double layer structure, along with efficient constant-potential electrochemical
simulation, will identify the role of molecular structure of relevant coupled
electron and phase transfer reactions at three-phase interfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.