* 2300876
* Building Connections to Meet Biotechnology Industry Demands through Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lauren Kinkead, Des Moines Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 350,000.00

The growing demand for skilled bioscience lab technicians is important to the
future economic success of Iowa. Increasing the biotechnology workforce is also
recognized as a vital factor in the U.S. economy and national interests. The
need for qualified, entry-level biotechnology laboratory technicians is expected
to continue to grow through the upcoming decade. In order to meet the evolving
needs of the biotechnology industry, it is important to inform high-school
students about the many opportunities available to them within this field of
study. One of the most effective methods for introducing high-school students to
a career field and keeping them engaged in the pursuit of education is direct
interaction with professionals in the industry. This three-year project from Des
Moines Area Community College (DMACC) will provide a Science Academy
opportunity, allowing for high-school students to interact directly with
biotechnology industry professionals through classroom visits, career fairs, and
on-site tours, thus exposing students to the many career options available
within the field. This method is especially effective for reaching populations
who have been underrepresented in their pursuit of careers in biotechnology.
Additionally, a Summer Workshop will be developed to educate high-school
teachers on the use of biotechnology methods and bioinformatics in the
classroom. The workshop will also provide opportunities for teachers to learn
about the biotechnology industry through on-site tours and talks with industry
professionals. Alongside high school outreach activities, a Business and
Industry Leadership Team will be established to evaluate and modify DMACC’s
biotechnology curriculum. This team will ensure that students completing the
AS/Biotechnology Laboratory Methods Certificate receive high-quality, hands-on
technical training that is directly applicable to entry level careers in
biotechnology, and that students develop an educational foundation to support
future growth in their roles within the biotechnology industry. As part of the
DMACC Biotechnology Program curriculum updates, an introductory scientific
computing course will be developed and equipment will be updated to align with
industry standards. Integrating industry partners, secondary and postsecondary
educators, and biotechnical professionals to learn and participate in growing
programs such as this through academies, workshops, and conferences is designed
to advance the STEM workforce and increase equity in opportunities in the field.

The project goal is to increase the overall number of students entering the
biotechnology workforce pathway and to ensure that biotechnology educational
experiences align with industry needs. Approximately 75 high school students are
expected to participate in the Science Academy throughout the duration of this
three-year project, and an anticipated 48 teachers will receive instruction,
networking with industry partners, and biotechnology activity materials during
the Summer Workshop, to replicate these experiences for students at their
schools. As a result of outreach and education provided through these grant
activities, 85 students are expected to complete DMACC’s AS/Biotechnology
Laboratory Methods Certificate combination degree. In order to ensure that the
Biotechnology program remains astride with evolving industry, project faculty
will receive training in cutting edge techniques and equipment, as directed by
the advisory Business and Industry Leadership Team. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.