* 2300744
* Creating Advanced Manufacturing Pathways Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Ken Beach, Arkansas State University - Newport
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 347,969.00

In an effort to address the growing regional need for a skilled technical
workforce, Arkansas State University Newport (ASUN), a comprehensive two-year
community college with three campuses in northeastern Arkansas, will consolidate
current insights from employers, ongoing research in career and technical
education, and an established credentialing program to strengthen their advanced
manufacturing program. The ASUN Creating Advanced Manufacturing Pathways Program
(CAMPP) seeks to realign the existing ASUN advanced manufacturing program to
meet the current and emerging needs of regional industry. This includes the need
to increase the diversity of the regional advanced manufacturing workforce to
include students from underrepresented demographic groups. Finally, ASUN will
provide reskilling and upskilling opportunities in new technologies for
incumbent workers in advanced manufacturing.

The plan to realign ASUN’s advanced manufacturing program with the needs of
regional industry was partially informed by a survey conducted by the program’s
faculty and advisory board. Roughly half the respondents felt that there were
educational gaps for new employees, and there was insufficient support for on-
the-job training. To address these concerns, ASUN faculty will work with the
advanced manufacturing advisory board to identify opportunities for curricular
enhancements with a focus on incorporating training on contemporary tools in
American manufacturing. To recruit a diverse population of new students, ASUN
will integrate an extensive outreach effort to area middle and high schools
through invitations to events such as the industry-sponsored annual
Manufacturing Day festivities and focused efforts to recruit, mentor, and train
students underrepresented in the manufacturing workforce. ASUN will also work
with incumbent workers to participate in relevant and convenient courses on
topics ranging from automation and robotics to 3D printing and additive
manufacturing. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.