* 2300725
* Broadening Narratives about Math Majors: Investigating the Needs and Experiences of Community College Mathematics Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Barry Cherkas, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2028
* USD 936,805.00

This project will directly investigate which factors impact student decisions to
enroll and persist in mathematics majors in the two-year college context. There
is a well-documented need to increase the diversity of the STEM and mathematics
workforce, including increasing the number of students from marginalized groups
who enroll in and complete mathematics degrees. Given the fact that half of all
mathematics majors are enrolled at two-year colleges, if we hope to address
long-standing issues with diversity in the mathematics and STEM pipeline, two-
year colleges are a critical place to start. Two-year colleges have
significantly more students from marginalized groups; as such, they are a
natural place from which to recruit and support diverse groups of mathematics
and STEM majors. It is particularly critical to study mathematics majors at two-
year colleges as a specific subpopulation, because the experiences of two-year
college students are often significantly different from university students.
Thus, retention models that have been developed with four-year students are
unlikely to translate directly to the two-year college context without
significant modification. This project aims to identify factors that influence
student retention among two-year colleges and to develop a model of retention in
the two-year context, contributing to the field’s understanding of retention
among this important population of students.

In particular, this study has several aims: 1) to analyze trajectories that
mathematics majors at two-year colleges have taken, in order to describe for the
first time the diversity of paths students take to complete the major, as well
as different paths that students make have taken before leaving the major; 2) to
uncover various factors that have influenced the decisions of students at two-
year colleges to choose mathematics majors and/or to remain in the major from
term to term; and 3) to paint a robust and nuanced picture of the experiences of
two-year college mathematics majors, both to develop for the first time a model
of mathematics major retention in the two-year context, as well as to provide
critical counter-narratives to many of the deficit characterizations of these
students in the research and practice discourse. This research will include
extensive quantitative analysis of existing data, qualitative analysis of in-
depth longitudinal interviews, and both quantitative and qualitative analysis of
longitudinal survey data, at one of the largest and most diverse urban
university systems in the US: the City University of New York. This will fill a
critical gap in the existing literature and pave the way for future studies and
interventions aimed specifically at recruiting and retaining mathematics majors
from the two-year college population. In particular, we aim to approach this
research from an anti-deficit lens, focusing on the resources and strengths that
two-year college mathematics majors bring to college regardless of their access
to prior high-quality mathematics educational experiences; and eliciting two-
year college mathematics majors’ perspectives on the ways that existing
instruction, college culture, and institutional structures do or do not provide
them the resources needed to obtain a mathematics degree. This project is
supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.