* 2300390
* Excellence in Research: Developmental regulation of WDR77 coordinates prostate growth and differentiation during the development through puberty
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Zhengxin Wang, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2027
* USD 914,016.00

This research will address how altered male hormone levels during development
through puberty affect growth and differentiation of the prostate gland. The
project will first determine whether male hormone at lower levels (during
puberty) leads to growth of the prostate gland and, in contrast, if higher
levels of the male hormone (post-puberty) promote the prostate’s
differentiation. The research will then investigate how the male hormone’s
action is switched during prostate development throughout puberty. The proposed
research represents a novel study concept that relates to the basic biology of
prostate development. The various age-related diseases in older adult prostate
reflect the loss of developmental coordination of cell proliferation and
differentiation. Therefore, the research may also help to understand the
development of various prostatic diseases in older men. The project will also
directly support graduate and undergraduate student training and promote
scientific research in a minority population at this HBCU.

The mammalian prostate gland passes through several phases of rapid growth and
differentiation during development. The molecular mechanisms that determine
growth and differentiation stages, as well as coordinating these two processes
are less defined. This research will address these critical questions. The goal
of the project is to study molecular events and mechanisms that coordinate cell
growth and differentiation during prostate development from adolescent
(proliferating) to young adult (quiescent/differentiated) stage. The research
will first investigate the androgen function in a dosage-dependent manner to
control growth and differentiation of the prostate during mouse development
through puberty. A concentration threshold at which the androgen action is
switched from growth promotion to growth inhibition/differentiation will be
determined. Previous studies have identified the WDR77 protein localized in the
cytoplasm at the early (during puberty, proliferating) stage of the prostate
development drives cell proliferation. In adult (post-puberty,
quiescent/differentiated) prostate, the protein in the nucleus functions as an
androgen receptor cofactor to promote cell differentiation. The research will
then investigate whether WDR77 mediates the androgen’s role to coordinate growth
and differentiation during the prostate development. How change of androgen
levels alters epigenetic modifications, leading to altered expression of AR-
target genes as well as WDR77 subcellular localization will be studied using
chromatin immunoprecipitation and gene promoter mapping.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.