* 2300631
* Collaborative Research: Engaging Blind and Visually Impaired Youth in Computer Science through Music Programming
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 05/31/2026
* USD 2,124,522.00

Many digital platforms for learning computer science have been designed for
sighted people, resulting in a limited number of accessible opportunities for
blind and visually impaired youth to learn computer science. This project will
address this opportunity gap when blind and visually impaired youth, their
caregivers, their educators, and software developers iteratively co-design and
evaluate a digital learning environment that teaches computer science through
music programming. In this learning environment, youth (ages 12-17) will write
code to compose music and to remix music samples from popular contemporary
artists. Specifically, this project will result in a more accessible version of
EarSketch, a widely-used online platform for learning to code through music
programming. This project will also result in associated professional learning
and teaching materials for educators of blind and visually impaired youth.
Research will explore whether and how the digital learning environment results
in numerous positive outcomes among the youth who use it. Ultimately, this
project is likely to address the underrepresentation of blind and visually
impaired people in computing fields through resulting in an accessible,
engaging, freely-available, widely-disseminated platform for learning to code
through auditory mediums.

Blind and visually impaired youth, their families, educators, educational
researchers, software developers, and music programmers will be involved in the
iterative co-design and evaluation of an accessible digital learning environment
that teaches coding through music programming. Participatory design studies will
explore the elements of the digital learning environment that afford music
programming and computing education for learners who are blind or visually
impaired. These design studies will entail thematic analyses of interviews,
focus groups, and concurrent protocols with educators at schools for the blind,
blind or visually impaired youth in middle or high schools, and their
caregivers. Observation studies of blind or visually impaired software
developers and music programmers will provide further information about elements
of accessible coding platforms. Additionally, mixed methods research will
explore whether and how the digital learning environment fostered content
knowledge gain, interest development, feelings of belonging, and intent to
persist in computer science among middle and high school students who are blind
or visually impaired. Analyses of validated pre- and post-surveys, as well as
student interaction logs and interviews, will provide information relative to
whether and how the learning environment fostered positive outcomes in these
domains. The no-cost, field-tested, empirically based learning environment will
be widely disseminated through numerous professional networks for researchers
and practitioners. Additionally, teachers from schools for the blind across the
country will have opportunities to participate in professional learning sessions
on how to use the learning environment and its associated curricular materials.

This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 (DRK-12) program, which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students
and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings
of practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to
increasing students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.

This project is co-funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program. This
program aims to provide all U.S. students with meaningful opportunities to
participate in computer science education in their schools at the Prek-12
levels. Computer science, in this program, includes use of computational tools,
but also the broad range of understandings, competencies, and skills needed to
apply computation in our digital world. These are often referred to as
computational literacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.