* 2300081
* Investigating the metabolic cooperation between a phototrophic bacterium and a methanogenic archaeon
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Arpita Bose, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas and methanogenic archaea are important
microbial contributors to biological methane production. Methane produced by
some methanogenic archaea is facilitated by interactions with other
microorganisms. The goal of this project is to use a model microbial community
to better understand not only these interactions, but also how microbial
organisms contribute to methane found in the environment. This project will be
the inspiration for educational modules for undergraduate and high school
students and for a workshop for local high school teachers.

This project seeks to understand the metabolic cooperation or “syntrophy”
between a phototrophic bacterium and a methanogenic archaeon to shed light on
this interaction’s potential role in carbon and energy flow in anoxic (lacking
oxygen) environments, and to develop it for light-dependent methane production.
The research will investigate how this process influences the nitrogen cycle via
nitrogen fixation. The work will test the hypothesis that phototrophs and
methanogens interact in anoxic ecosystems and that this syntrophy can be
harnessed for light-driven methanogenesis from CO2 and/or other waste organic
carbon sources. Studying the syntrophy between a phototrophic bacterium and a
methanogenic archaeon is important for two interconnected reasons. First, a
detailed understanding of this growth strategy, co-metabolic activity, and
interspecies electron transfer mechanisms would shed light on how these features
contribute to carbon and electron flow in marine anoxic settings. Second, the
studies will set the stage for creating and optimizing engineered communities
for applications such as CO2 sequestration, and sustainable light-dependent
bioproduction of methane. Anticipated scientific impacts will be to expand the
fundamental understanding of both phototroph-methanogen interactions and light-
driven methanogenesis from CO2 and organic carbon.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.