* 2300123
* NSF-BSF: Synthetic mycorrhizal community and parasitism management in rhizosphere ecosystems guided by systems biology of mycoparasitism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeffrey Townsend, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,051,699.00

Fungi are organisms that are present in almost every conceivable ecological
niche and play significant roles in natural carbon and nitrogen turnover. In
most natural environments, fungi reside, function and interact with other
organisms. They can be beneficial symbionts or exhibit pathogenic behavior in
plant and animal hosts. One area of high plant-fungal interactions is the
rhizosphere, the root ecosystem in which root secretions affect the composition
and activity of a plant-associated microbial community. This microbial community
can include a variety of fungi, ranging from those that have a mutually-
beneficial symbiotic relationship with the plant (mycorrhizae) to fungal species
that can be detrimental to the plant (pathogens) and fungi that can interact
among themselves. One such group of fungi can attack other fungi and are
referred to as mycoparasites. Some mycoparasites belonging to the genus
Trichoderma have been used to control fungal plant pathogens. However, the
organismal regulatory networks that govern these genetic and environmental
interactions are not well understood. This project addresses fundamental
questions to better understand mycoparasitism and interactions among members of
the rhizosphere fungal community. The researchers will study the nature and
dynamic changes of networks that regulate mycoparasitism, which are crucial to
understanding how ecological diversity and associated interactions evolved in
fungi. The broader impacts of this project include professional training for
college students and postdocs. This research will also provide training to local
high school students and teachers about the importance of fungi in agriculture
and forestry.

The research will primarily focus on the interactions between mycorrhizae
revealed by laboratory co-cultivation of mycorrhizal fungi Pisolithus and
Laccaria with mycoparasitic Trichoderma fungi, along with a non-rhizosphere
fungus (Neurospora) as a control, with the intention of deciphering the genetic
networks that regulate mycoparasitic interactions. Once key components of the
regulatory network are identified, the researchers will inactivate genes that
are involved in mycoparasitism to determine the nature of their involvement in
the process (e.g., at what stage the process is affected, and to what extent
these effects have consequences on other morphological or nutritional traits of
the fungus). Lastly, the researchers will engineer the mycorrhizal components of
the interaction to silence relevant genes in the mycoparasite, with the
intention of conferring a higher degree of tolerance to the beneficial fungal
component of the rhizosphere when mycorrhizae and mycoparasites are in close
physical proximity. This silencing will be performed by constructing strains
that secrete RNA molecules that can, through molecular processes, inactivate the
relevant corresponding traits of the mycoparasite. The project will improve
understanding of genetic basis of interspecies recognition and parasitism and
will empower applied research on utilization of fungi in forestry, industry, and
agriculture toward the maintenance of a healthy and sustainable environment and
for plant disease control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.