* 2300532
* Improving Rural Middle Grades Mathematics Instruction through a Statewide Teacher-Researcher Alliance
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Michele Carney, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,448,831.00

This project establishes a statewide teacher-researcher alliance of mathematics
teachers and teacher-leaders in Idaho, who will work with teacher educators at
two universities with expertise in professional development and school-based
research. The research focuses on two research-based strategies for improving
students’ mathematics achievement. The first, Explicit Attention to Concepts,
draws students’ attention specifically to the meaning of mathematical ideas
while making connections between different ways to represent the content. The
second, Students’ Opportunities to Struggle, helps students make sense of
graspable new concepts through supported problem solving with peers,
highlighting ways to overcome confusion, stimulate personal sense-making, build
perseverance, and promote openness to challenge. The work builds on prior
investigations of how the two instructional strategies can be sequenced to
promote student learning in middle grades mathematics, and an experimental
research design will be used to compare outcomes of two promising professional
development models for supporting rural teachers’ adoption and adaptation of
instructional strategies for their classrooms.

The project has five key features for building scientific understanding of
effective mathematics instruction in rural settings. First, the project brings
together rural teachers to foster authentic community around shared work of
improving student learning. Second, professional learning and instructional
support for teachers promote adoption and implementation of effective
instructional practices in the crucial settings of grades 6-8 mathematics
classrooms. Third, the project centers shared responsibility and autonomy
through a statewide teacher-researcher alliance structure. Fourth, the project
studies two high quality math professional development structures at scale for
rural teachers: at-a-distance professional development facilitated by a
centralized specialist, and in-person professional development facilitated by a
local teacher-leader. Finally, the nested mixed methods research design compares
the two professional development approaches across a range of outcomes including
teachers’ beliefs and instructional practices, as well as growth in their
students’ engagement and learning in mathematics. The experiment includes
randomized assignment of middle grades mathematics teachers (N = 90 teachers,
20,000 students) to professional development conditions, with control procedures
for sampling, quality of professional development, and cycles of classroom-based
instructional improvement. Dissemination will reach local, state, and national
teacher education communities, and materials and findings will support future
adoption of assets-based, teacher-centered research and development
partnerships. The project is supported by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.