* 2300650
* Preparing Manufacturing Technicians for the Challenges of Industry 4.0
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Doug Parrish, Edgecombe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 306,236.00

Due to the fast pace of technological advancements in the manufacturing
industry, employers have identified a need for more highly-trained manufacturing
technicians. Desired skills for manufacturing technicians now include data
acquisition, computer integration, machine maintenance, and troubleshooting.
This project from Edgecombe Community College (ECC) will align the existing
Manufacturing Technology degree and Electrical Systems Technology diploma with
the current and emerging Industry 4.0 needs of local manufacturing employers in
Edgecombe County and an adjacent jurisdiction, Nash County. Over this three-year
project, ECC plans to recruit and enroll up to twenty students who will be on
track to complete these programs, and obtain industry recognized credentials
along the way. ECC faculty will participate in certified professional
development from the Manufacturing Skill Standards Council (MSSC) to better
prepare them to enhance the curriculum at ECC. Through continuing education
classes, ECC will engage with incumbent manufacturing technicians who are in
need of re-skilling. To address the under- and unemployment of populations in
Edgecombe and Nash counties who are underrepresented in their pursuit of careers
in manufacturing, the college will collaborate with the Tar River Area Boys and
Girls Club to actively recruit teens with an aptitude towards technical and
science topics, specifically Black male teens, and on-site mentoring with peer
student mentors.

The overall goal of this project is to meet the needs of manufacturing employers
in Edgecombe and Nash counties with respect to emerging workforce skills in
maintenance and troubleshooting. ECC intends to grow the skilled technical
workforce with recruitment efforts that will include under-employed incumbent
manufacturing workers and high school graduates. These students will benefit
from a focused STEM curriculum tailored towards the data-intensive needs of
Industry 4.0 which relies increasingly on smart sensors, cloud computing, data
acquisition, and cloud analytics. ECC intends to enroll forty to sixty
individuals over three years and engage ECC faculty to complete the training
necessary to deliver this curriculum. Each cohort of high school students and
incumbent workers will be able to complete five courses in the first year of
this project, which can ultimately result in a Manufacturing Technology degree.
Students may gain additional relevant experience as they participate in
available internships. Initial course completers may be eligible to enter the
workforce or continue to complete the Manufacturing Technology or Electrical
Systems Technology degree program. Through an actively engaged Advisory Board,
ECC faculty and administration will pursue additional workforce engagement
opportunities to ultimately improve employment outcomes for ECC students. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education Program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive
the nationâ€™s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.