* 2300453
* Surfactant-Assisted on-Acid Interfacial Polymerization of Porous Polymer Membranes for Organic Solvent Nanofiltration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Lei Fang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 366,553.00

The industrial processes used to manufacture fuels and chemicals often include
many energy-intensive separation steps to recover valuable products from the
output streams. Current estimates of the energy required to perform these
industrial separations range from 10 to 15% of total domestic energy
consumption. Replacing conventional separation technologies like distillation
with membrane-based filtration processes will reduce industrial energy demand
and improve the sustainability of fuel and chemical purification processes.
However, relatively few membranes can withstand exposure to harsh organic
solutions and high operating temperatures. Existing methods for fabricating
polymeric membrane materials have limited ability to produce the types of
chemical structures and materials properties needed for organic solvent
nanofiltration (OSN) applications. This project will explore a novel strategy to
fabricate robust polymer membranes that can be used to reduce the carbon
footprint of some of today’s most important and challenging industrial
processes, including separating mixtures of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and
xylenes (BTEX) and hydrocarbon fractionations. The project will provide
opportunities to share the scientific concepts of membrane filtration with
members of the College Station, TX, community through the university’s
“Chemistry Open House” event. The investigator will also organize a four-day
summer camp for regional high school students, where they will learn about the
fundamental chemistry and physics of membrane materials.

The central project goal is to develop a new strategy to fabricate crosslinked
polymer membranes on nonaqueous acid interfaces. This goal will be achieved by
elucidating the fundamental mechanism of the surfactant-assisted on-acid
interfacial polymerization (SAAIP) reaction, and by addressing the technical
challenges associated with fabricating high-quality membranes on nonaqueous acid
interfaces. The research plan is motivated by the hypothesis that self-assembled
surfactants on an acid interface can promote interfacial polymerization by
enhancing local monomer concentration near the interface via electrostatic
interactions. This hypothesis will be tested over three research objectives: (1)
elucidating the electrostatic interaction-centered mechanism of SAAIP by varying
key factors such as acidity, surface tension, self-assembly, and electrostatic
interaction; (2) tailoring the kinetics and autonomously optimizing the reaction
conditions for SAAIP to access defect-free, ultrathin membranes possessing the
desired properties for nanofiltration applications; and (3) demonstrating the
SAAIP-enabled unconventional nanofiltration performance for BTEX separation and
petroleum fractionation. Successfully developing this on-acid interfacial
polymerization strategy will expand the available chemical space for interfacial
membrane synthesis beyond the current state-of-the-art aqueous interfacial
reactions. As a result, membrane materials with new functionalities, enhanced
stability, and the precise molecular selectivity required for OSN will be made
possible. This project is supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems’s Interfacial Engineering program and the
Division of Materials Research’s Polymers program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.