* 2300433
* Biomimicry as an authentic anchor: Giving teachers the tools to adapt an interdisciplinary middle school curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Cassidy, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2026
* USD 978,215.00

Integrating STEM subjects in middle school is beneficial for student learning
and can help prepare students for the STEM workplace. This project builds
capacity for middle school teachers to enact and adapt integrated STEM
curriculum units with their students. The units will focus on biomimicry -
examining structures and functions found in nature and applying these to solve
human problems, which combines science, engineering, and technology. The use of
biology as a basis for engineering design and problem-solving authentically
mirrors current practice of professional engineers and roboticists. The project
enables teachers to design activities that are personally authentic to their
students, by supporting teachers to examine their students' assets, needs, and
interests and center these during unit design. The project's modular curriculum
approach provides multiple points of entry for teachers and students in
different disciplines and allows teachers to choose the level of technological
complexity they are comfortable enacting. Providing teachers with the tools to
enact integrated STEM instruction supports learning through their engagement
with the cross-cutting concept of structure-function analysis, as well as key
practices in science, engineering, and computing as described in the Next
Generation Science Standards. This project is developing a professional
development model that supports teachers first to plan and adapt curriculum
materials that are cohesive and modular, and then to effectively use the
materials to enact integrated science and engineering lessons that are
professionally and personally authentic to their students. The researchers
expect that over time, the professional development will increase the level of
technology that teachers are comfortable integrating. The project works with 20
teachers and approximately 1000 students at school sites in Indiana, Maine, and
Massachusetts. This project employs a mixed-methods research design to build new
knowledge in the fields of science, engineering, and computing education by: (1)
identifying the skills and resources that impact middle school teachers'
planning for integrated STEM instruction; (2) characterizing how a situated and
modular approach to materials design and professional development supports
teachers' design and instructional choices over time; and (3) documenting how
the curriculum features of cohesion across disciplines and authentic learning
experiences impact student learning of content and practices in science,
engineering, and computational thinking, including the overarching concept of
structure-function analysis. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through research
and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.