* 2300606
* Making the Building Blocks of Early Math Scalable, Accessible, and Viable for All Young Children and Their Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Julie Sarama, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,719,999.00

This project will build an interactive and integrated curricular and
professional development technological system: the Building Blocks Toolset. The
BBToolset is designed to benefit all early childhood educators and their
students. Young children will learn from engaging, effective digital educational
games and face-to-face activities. Teachers will receive just-in-time
professional development related to their students' development and guidance on
curricular choices and culturally sensitive pedagogical strategies. The app
builds on the research teams' prior work on the mathematical learning
trajectories of young children. Learning trajectories are grounded in research
on children's cognition and contain three interrelated components: a learning
goal, a developmental progression of levels of thinking, and instructional
activities that correlate to each level. Research-based curricular resources and
professional development are not always available to underserved communities,
and the pandemic has only exacerbated inequities based on income and race. Thus,
all phases of research and development of the BBToolset will be conducted
collaboratively with diverse communities. The project team will ensure equitable
materials and access in three ways. First, the resources embedded in the
learning trajectories activities will include extensive guides and just-in-time
tips to promote culturally responsive enactment of digital and face-to-face
activities. Second, teaching approaches and strategies will be included that are
known to promote engagement, learning, and identification for specific
marginalized populations, including support for multilingual learners. Third,
all components are designed to be accessible using Universal Design for Learning
and incorporating adaptations for children with disabilities.

The research team will use the curriculum research framework from prior work for
the development and both formative and summative evaluation of the BBToolset,
paying particular attention to how much its use increases engagement and
learning for children and teachers. The work will also ensure that all children,
primarily from underserved populations, benefit fully. In formative phases, the
research and development will include focus groups, surveys, and system data
involving teachers and children. Analyses of detailed data from thousands of
participants will guide the ongoing refinement of the BBToolset system and the
formative assessment components of learning trajectories. The developmental
progressions will be assessed and refined, as will the instructional activities
(including digital educational games). In summative phases, the project will
utilize an experimental research design within classrooms and across the entire
project populations. Data will be analyzed with hierarchical linear modeling to
evaluate the efficacy and effectiveness of the intervention. The project will
provide teachers with a validated resource that does not require substantial
initial or additional work. The empirical work also will validate formative
assessment as a powerful element of the instructional process and provide
researchers with extensive data and a tool they could use to collect new data.
Thus, the project will contribute to advancing knowledge in cognition,
curriculum, and the scale-up of educational innovations through technology. The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.