* 2300030
* Psychosocial Interventions to Improve Postsecondary Student Mathematics Attainment: A Meta-Analysis Exploring What Works and for Whom
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Taylor Acee, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 478,385.00

Many college students have difficulty learning mathematics not because they are
unable to learn but because they often do not believe they can perform
successfully. Students’ beliefs, along with their learning-related and socially
influenced needs, perceptions, goals, and strategies, often described as
psychosocial factors, are key factors to their academic achievement. Because
such factors are malleable, many interventions targeting psychosocial factors
have been evaluated and could be implemented in college math classrooms.
However, questions remain about how effective these interventions might be and
how the effects of such interventions may vary. This project will address the
national priority to strengthen college students’ mathematics attainment by
investigating the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions. The project will
collect and assess the accumulated evidence on psychosocial interventions in
college mathematics. The findings from the project will help to improve
mathematics outcomes for students in college, providing administrators and
instructors with evidence-informed practices that can harness students’
psychosocial qualities.

The project is a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis of a large
body of studies that test interventions targeting psychosocial mechanisms to
improve postsecondary students’ mathematics attainment. The project aims to
examine published and unpublished studies that investigated the effects of
psychosocial interventions on mathematics attainment through randomized
controlled trials or high-quality quasi-experimental designs. Drawing from the
Model of Strategic Learning and related literature, interventions will be
categorized, and intervention effects aggregated, according to the psychosocial
mechanism(s) being targeted. Using a frequentist approach, the project will
answer two primary research questions: What is the overall effectiveness of
psychosocial interventions in college mathematics on students’ mathematics
attainment and psychosocial factors? What are other sources of heterogeneity
among intervention effects? This quantitative synthesis will create a rich
database of studies and their effects, providing evidence about when, and to
what degree, interventions alter students’ psychosocial qualities and impact
students’ math outcomes. A systematic analysis will be conducted using the MUTOS
framework which categorizes studies based on methods (M), units (U), treatments
(T), outcomes (O), and settings (S). These categories will serve as testable
moderators within random effects meta-regression models, assessing if the
magnitude or direction of intervention effects vary by these characteristics.
Exploring heterogeneity in treatment effects will generate insights regarding
the components of successful psychosocial interventions, extend knowledge of
psychological theories, and inform the design of evidence-based programs in
college mathematics.

This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.