* 2300932
* Drones to Avionics Pathway (DAP) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James Rowe, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 454,038.00

The US Bureau of Labor Statistics data show that Florida has the second highest
employment level in the Avionics industry of the 50 states and is in the highest
growth category for the industry. FAA’s reports show Broward College’s service
area in the highest growth category for Uncrewed Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) with new
device registrations. This project will increase access for underrepresented
populations to Avionics careers by engaging students in informal avionics
encounters and creating a new track in the Avionics AS degree program focused on
drone maintenance. The informal introduction to avionics begins the pathway of
stackable credentials including regulatory licensure, stackable credentials, AS
degrees, and BS degrees. The project will add to the body of knowledge in
effective pedagogy in avionics education resulting in increased credential
attainment. Utilizing experiential learning methods, students will demonstrate
competencies leading to stackable credentials. The effort ultimately benefits
students by increasing enrollment, retention, and credential acquisition in
avionics pathways.

The project activities, which are based on previous promising efforts at the
College, will increase depth of learning and understanding of career skills in
Avionics. These activities include: 1) Conducting an experiential learning after
school program and a summer boot camp; 2) Developing curriculum and establishing
a 9-credit drone maintenance track in the AS Avionics degree program; 3)
Establishing a firm foundation through partnerships at the secondary, community
college, university, community, and professional levels; 4) Implementing
outreach efforts that tap underserved and non- traditional populations; and 5)
Evaluating and disseminating project results, processes, and materials. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.