* 2300641
* Training Industrial Technicians for Today and Tomorrow
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bill Allison, National Park Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,892.00

As manufacturing continues its rapid evolution towards total automation,
multiple challenges have surfaced. Regionally, these challenges include emerging
and unmet industry demand for technicians skilled in multi-craft technologies,
with recruitment falling short for individuals with both the aptitude and desire
for the field. The demand for technicians continues to grow with 206 job
postings since May 2022 with an average monthly posting of 13 jobs within the
area served by National Park Community College (NPCC). This project will fill
the employment gaps that currently exist in advanced manufacturing while also
preparing students for positions currently unfilled or yet to be created. With
guidance from employers through a Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT)
this project will create stackable credentials and multiple degree paths. These
include opportunities for high school students to be introduced to the field
initially through a formal education program, then to continue as and/or
otherwise enroll new community college students in the same educational field,
and finally to integrate incumbent workers in the same skills enhancements
programming. Through this project, at least 20 students will be recruited to
participate as high school students to earn certifications and pursue
opportunities that can help them attain an associate degree. There are three
opportunity zones in the vicinity of NPCC where on average 43% of residents live
in poverty. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, only 32% of residents between
the ages of 18-24 in the county where NPCC is located have completed some level
of postsecondary education compared to the US average of 55%. Since the lack of
postsecondary educational attainment is strongly correlated with of families
living in poverty, this project offers the potential to ameliorate these
conditions by focusing on recruitment of students from these opportunity zones.

The goal of the project is to update and expand the current Industrial
Technology program to be more aligned with industry needs. The majority of the
challenges identified will be addressed and mitigated with the inclusion of
industry credentialing and laboratory upgrades that integrate relevant, emerging
technologies with the manufacturing industry. Additionally, faculty professional
development will be critical in the overall success of these steps. Lastly, this
project will also create the opportunity to incorporate alternate delivery modes
by creating work-based learning opportunities in the form of internships, pre-
apprenticeship, and apprenticeship programs. In addition to adding newly created
credentials into the secondary school sector, thus further advancing the
knowledge of high school students, multiple concentrations and “stop out points”
will be available for students enrolled in the Associate of Applied Science
(AAS) General Technology Degree. Stop out points include academic Certificates
of Proficiency (CPs) and a Technical Certificate (TC) that can be applied
towards degree attainment. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation and region’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.