* 2300400
* Collaborative Research: Accelerated Development of New, Scalable pH Sensors for Global Ocean Observational Networks
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2026
* USD 66,985.00

The DuraFET pH sensor is a key component of global observation networks through
coordinated efforts such as Biogeochemical Argo and the Global Ocean
Acidification Observation Network. These pH sensors have been deployed on
hundreds of autonomous profiling floats, underwater gliders, and moorings to
study ocean carbon cycling in environments ranging from the intertidal zone,
coral reefs, to the open ocean. Additionally, they are commonly utilized in
laboratory mesocosms to study impacts of ocean acidification. The key enabling
technology for the DuraFET is an Ion Sensitive Field Effect Transistor (ISFET)
semiconductor chip, manufactured by Honeywell Co. The Honeywell ISFET has
several unique features that give it superior performance relative to its
competitors. This in essence results in a sole-source for DuraFET pH sensors,
and represents a key vulnerability for ocean carbon monitoring. To address this,
this proposal aims to accelerate the development of alternative pH sensors that
can be scaled to fit the current needs of global ocean observational networks.

Specifically, this project will test and develop two promising pH sensor
candidates that are capable of long-term deployments (years) to 2 km depth on
autonomous platforms such as profiling floats and gliders, as well as for moored
instrumentation and laboratory mesocosm applications. First, the performance of
a commercially available optical pH optode sensor (distributed by PyroScience)
will be assessed. This is a relatively new sensor for oceanography, thus its
performance has not been thoroughly characterized to the satisfaction of
chemical oceanographers. Second, a pH sensor that utilizes an ISFET from a
different supplier will be developed. Both pH sensors that will be explored are
solid state, small, and low-power, making them good candidates for autonomous
platforms. The sensors will be thoroughly characterized in the laboratory for pH
response, long term drift, salinity, temperature, and pressure effects, response
time, and hysteresis. Both sensors will then be deployed on coastal moorings,
underwater gliders, and profiling floats to assess in situ performance across a
range of conditions over months to years. Results from this development will be
rapidly and efficiently shared with the oceanographic community through
recurring webinars, publications, and collaboration with industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.