* 2300709
* Collaborative Research: Broadening participation of marginalized scholars in STEM: The longitudinal influence of early-career climate experiences on professional pathways
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Erin Cech, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2028
* USD 750,167.00

Higher education has struggled to make meaningful progress in broadening the
participation in STEM at all levels. Person-Environment Fit (PE Fit) research
reveals that education and career outcomes are improved by having an
organizational environment that is congruent with oneâ€™s needs, skills, and
values. Because PE Fit is theorized at multiple organizational levels, this
study will examine inclusive climate at the levels of the STEM research group,
department, and academic discipline. This study will build upon the PE Fit
theory by addressing two novel aspects of environment: 1) authorship climate, in
which intellectual contributions are fully welcomed and valued throughout the
STEM research process, and 2) the COVID-19 pandemic, which created unprecedented
disruptions in the personal and professional lives of early-career STEM
scholars. The overarching goal is to increase understanding about the
longitudinal effects of early-career climates and the COVID-19 pandemic on STEM
career outcomes (productivity and attitudes) and professional pathways,
especially for scholars from marginalized groups.

This proposed research is a mixed-methods study building on prior work that
resulted in a survey of over 3500 graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and
assistant professors in biology, economics, physics, and psychology in the first
year of the COVID-19 pandemic (time 1). This project will support a longitudinal
follow-up survey (time 2) of the scholars to examine the effect of academic
climates and COVID-19 on career outcomes and pathways over time. The survey will
be complemented with in-depth interviews (at time 3) with a diverse subsample (n
= 80) of the participants. These interviews will provide insight into how
scholars make sense of, navigate, and shape academic climates, and how multiple
levels of climate interact with each other and with COVID-19 disruptions, to
affect professional pathways. Importantly, this study includes a large number of
individuals with multiple intersecting social identities which will allow for
disaggregation along many factors which will increase understanding from the
research. The focus on academic climates is based on the literature that
directly links to faculty, postdoctoral scholar, and graduate student career
outcomes including their productivity, commitment, turnover intentions, and
satisfaction. This study will help increase understanding of the impact of
climate factors in STEM education, research, and workplace environments will
contribute to improving the climate of these settings for all.

This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.