* 2300040
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Do large recent wildfires in the Yukon River Delta alter the delivery of black carbon to the Arctic Ocean?
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Robert Spencer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 22,324.00

Wildfires produce charcoal, also termed black carbon, which is resistant to
breakdown and is environmentally long-lived. A portion of this charred material
is dissolved upon interaction with water and is carried away from soils to
rivers as dissolved black carbon (DBC). A warmer and drier climate has led to
increased wildfire activity in Arctic regions and it is unknown how these
changes will affect the amount of DBC in rivers and its fate in the coastal
environment. In the summer of 2022, the Apoon Pass and East Fork Fires burned
>255,000 acres in the Yukon River Delta (Alaska, USA), part of a trend towards
larger and more frequent wildfires in the Delta in recent years. The main goal
of this project is to determine whether recent wildfire activity in the Delta
leads to increased amounts of DBC along the Yukon River and estuary to the
coastal Arctic Ocean. Results of this work will lay the groundwork for future,
large-scale studies on fire-derived carbon in vulnerable Arctic watersheds. This
project will support collaboration among two early career researchers and one
graduate student with guidance from an experienced Arctic investigator.

Pan-Arctic watersheds are experiencing increased fire activity as a result of
climate change. The cumulative effects of wildfire (charcoal production, soil
destabilization, change in hydrologic flow paths) on carbon export in major
Arctic rivers is currently unknown. This project will determine whether large,
recent wildfires within the Yukon River Delta have changed the distribution,
composition, and total export of DBC along the Yukon River-to-Arctic Ocean
continuum. To achieve this goal, new samples will be collected during the 2023
spring freshet and results compared to those obtained from archived 2019 freshet
samples. We will employ a combination of molecular marker, stable carbon
isotope, and ultrahigh resolution mass spectral techniques to evaluate wildfire-
DBC relationships in the Yukon River Delta between low-fire (2019; ~10,000 acres
burned) and high-fire (2023; >255,000 acres burned) years. This work builds upon
other efforts to predict the effects of climate change on carbon cycling in
Arctic-boreal landscapes and will assist in answering broad research questions
regarding the behavior of DBC in intermediate reservoirs and fate of terrestrial
organic matter in the coastal ocean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.