* 2300470
* Incorporating Virtual Reality into Advanced Manufacturing Technician Education at a Rural Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* feng hua, Marion Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2026
* USD 648,370.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing engineering
technology education programs through the incorporation of virtual reality
activities at a rural community college. Most significantly, this project will
increase the number of skilled technicians that are prepared to enter careers in
the advanced manufacturing industry with a specific focus on preparing students
for jobs in the growing semiconductor manufacturing industry in the region. A
significant focus of the project will be on increasing students’ and incumbent
workers’ awareness and ability to work with automation equipment used in
semiconductor manufacturing clean rooms. Further, the project will provide
training opportunities that simulate automation equipment in a factory
environment using virtual reality when physical equipment is unavailable or cost
prohibitive. The coupling of both hands-on and virtual reality training will
serve as an engaging method to cultivate rural students’ interest in the
manufacturing industry as a viable career path.

This project will build on existing engineering technology programs through the
incorporation of virtual reality into two-year college courses that are aligned
with industry needs. The specific goals of the project are to 1) increase
students’ ability to work with advanced automation equipment typically used in
semiconductor manufacturing clean rooms; 2) provide technical virtual reality
training to college and high school instructors; 3) increase program enrollment
and retention of rural students and women pursuing degrees and certificates in
engineering technology, and 4) pilot virtual reality-based advanced
manufacturing modules as a tool for workforce training. A formal evaluation will
be conducted to assess project activities and outcomes with a focus on
contributing to the body of knowledge on preparing skilled technicians to
support the advanced manufacturing industry. A targeted dissemination plan will
be carried out that shares project results including recruitment strategies,
curriculum, technology, and specialized training activities with similar two-
year colleges and with the technical education community at the national level.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.