* 2300645
* Research on Automated Formative Feedback of Problem-Solving Strategy Writing in Introductory Physics using Natural Language Processing
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Dan Goldwasser, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,815.00

Problem solving is an essential 21st century STEM workforce skill, but in most
undergraduate introductory STEM courses students use ineffective problem-solving
strategies. The pedagogical challenge is that these courses typically have very
large enrollments which prohibits instructors' providing of real-time feedback
to students on their unproductive strategies, given how labor intensive
providing such individualized feedback is. The investigators propose to use
natural language processing (NLP) to develop an automated system that will
provide personalized formative feedback to students in undergraduate physics
courses about their problem-solving strategies. There are two research
questions: (1) How accurately can an NLP classifier score such essays and how
well can it generalize across types of problems?, and (2) How well does
providing students with such feedback improve their problem-solving strategies
and actual ability to solve problems?

This project leverages existing research in STEM education that has shown that
the use of strategy writing, and real-time formative assessment can improve
students' problem-solving skills. Starting with a vast corpus of existing data,
the investigators will use state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised learning
to train a machine learning algorithm (MLA) to classify strategies articulated
by students. Their study will span three phases with increasing generalization,
first generalizing over vocabulary used by students to describe their strategies
for solving specific problems, then generalizing over sets of isomorphic
problems using the same strategies, and finally generalizing over classes of
transfer problems that have the same underlying principles but different surface
features. Their goal is to determine the accuracy with which an MLA can be
trained to provide feedback on short essays written by students describing their
strategies for solving a problem. They will also investigate the extent to which
real-time formative feedback to students, based on their own strategy essays,
can help them to refine their strategies iteratively in order to solve problems
with increasing generality. In developing and training their machine learning
algorithm, the researchers will implement proven strategies to address issues of
fairness in artificial intelligence (AI). The ultimate goal of the project is to
transform the development of expert-like problem-solving strategies in STEM
undergraduates and thereby potentially to increase their retention in STEM
majors.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.