* 2300437
* Modeling the Conceptual Dynamics of College Students' Reasoning about Natural Selection
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Julia Gouvea, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 487,810.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by better understanding how
students think about the foundational biological concept of natural selection in
undergraduate biology education. Prior work has established that student
thinking about natural selection can vary greatly depending on the specific
features of questions students are asked, such the type of organism or the trait
that is under selection. Understanding when and why this variation in student
thinking arises is important for biology educators and curriculum designers.
Using interviews and analyses of students’ written explanations, the project
team will identify which knowledge elements students use in response to
different problem contexts and prompts. This work will identify the knowledge
elements students use when thinking about natural selection, characterize the
relationships between different knowledge elements and aspects of context, and
explore the commonalities of those patterns. The results will help educators
identify various facets of student thinking and design curricula that can help
students activate and integrate their thinking, and thus improve their
understanding of natural selection.

This project will study the influence of context on undergraduate biology
students’ reasoning about natural selection by building resource-based models of
cognition. The specific objectives are to identify and characterize the
conceptual resources students use in reasoning about natural selection, to build
models that can explain why different resources are activated in different
contexts, and to test whether the aspects of context we identify can be used to
predict common patterns of reasoning. First, to identify sets of resources and
patterns of activation in students’ reasoning about natural selection, the
project team will conduct clinical interviews with introductory-level biology
students from Tufts University and Bunker Hill Community College. The interview
prompts will be designed to explore dynamics and context-sensitivities in
students’ thinking by intentionally varying and perturbing the problem contexts
to examine the dynamics of students’ moment-to-moment thinking. Case-study
analyses of interviews will be used to present novel mechanisms of resource use
and cross-case analyses of interviews will identify common patterns in students’
reasoning. Next, the project team will test the predictions of the models
developed by presenting writing prompts to a larger number of students at both
institutions and collecting written explanations. The project team will
manipulate context and information provided in prompts to examine whether
different prompts systematically elicit different patterns of reasoning. This
approach will allow the project team to test the predictive strength of the
associations they find in cross-case analyses to identify common dynamics and
stabilities. The success of the project will be evaluated by a team of
researchers who are experts in resource-based modeling and students’ reasoning
about natural selection. Project findings will be disseminated to learning
scientists as well as to educators who teach evolution at the university level.
This project has the potential to contribute to theoretical knowledge about
cognitive dynamics and the role of context in shaping cognition. It also has the
potential to change the nature of biology instruction by helping instructors
anticipate and notice the knowledge that students are likely to activate when
thinking about natural selection and through the design of curricula that
intentionally draw out and build in opportunities to integrate different facets
of students’ thinking.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.