* 2300747
* Supporting Rural STEM Middle School Teachers and Career Counselors in the Development of Effective STEM Content and Career Development Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Dodie Limberg, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,424,516.00

Rural youth, in particular, have limited opportunities to gain exposure, develop
interests, and broaden participation in the STEM workforce. While school
counselors may have extensive training in career development, STEM teachers face
many challenges effectively infusing career development into their instruction.
This project will provide rural STEM middle school teachers and career
counselors professional development and the support needed to collaborate with
each other and local community assets in designing, integrating, and
implementing effective STEM content and career development activities. Local
teams will co-develop project-based learning units that incorporate a place-
based education perspective involving STEM assets, careers, and stakeholders
from the local communities for middle school rural youth that intentionally
infuse STEM careers in their area with STEM content. Research aims of the study
seek to explore the sense of job satisfaction, isolation, and impact to STEM
practice experienced by rural teachers and counselors as a result of their
collaboration in this professional development model as well as student STEM-
relevant motivation, self-efficacy, and learning after participating in the
units. This project will examine the feasibility, acceptability, and
appropriateness of a collaborative teacher development model on both teacher and
career counselor career development, as well as student outcomes. Sixty middle
school teachers and 30 school counselors from 16 rural schools that serve over
6,000 students will participate in an intensive, multi-faceted, professional
development experience involving collaboration and curricular development.
Researchers will use surveys, interviews, and focus groups to examine the impact
of their collaboration experiences on teacher and career counselor professional
development and practice. Student outcomes will include teacher assessments of
students' deeper learning (i.e., creativity, innovation, critical thinking), the
impact of collaboration, and students' self-reports of their STEM motivation,
STEM career interests, and self-efficacy. In addition to impacts on middle
school student interest in STEM careers, the formal evaluation of the core model
will allow the research team to develop information on promising processes for
inclusive design. Examples of the learning experiences deemed to be of high
impact in the contexts in which the projects are to be carried out, enabling
others to successfully implement place-based career infused authentic STEM
problem-based learning across diverse contexts. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.