* 2300557
* EAGER: Overcoming transformation and germline expression barriers
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Lisa Timmons, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

A cell’s genome, comprised of DNA, enables cells to function and respond to
changing environments. Seminal experiments by Frederick Griffith in the 1920
revealed that some bacterial cells capture DNA from the environment (released
from dying cells). The cells incorporated the captured DNA into their genomes
where it functioned normally. Historically, this easy ability to acquire DNA has
not been observed in plant and animal cells. From this, a common view is that
plant and animal cells actively protect their genomes from invasion of foreign,
or virus-derived, DNA encountered from the environment, and many genome-
protection strategies are known. These protective mechanisms prevent the
efficient introduction of DNA into cells in the laboratory setting where
scientists might aim to correct a genetic defect or perform other genetic
manipulations in cells. The goal of this project is to investigate delivery and
intracellular trafficking routes for DNA introduced to cells from environmental
sources using the genetically tractable, multicellular organism Caenorhabditis
elegans. In addition to acquiring knowledge, new strategies for genetic
manipulation and DNA delivery are predicted outcomes from this project.
Undergraduate students will derive broader benefits from the project as
experiments will be reserved for them. Such students will include those from
groups underrepresented in STEM and from small colleges looking for summer
research opportunities.

Small amounts of various DNA fragments can be detected in the circulatory system
of animals and plants. Detection and analysis of circulating DNA (circDNA) for
the purpose of diagnosing disease, and the impact of circDNA on cell function,
is an emerging and expanding field of research. circDNA activates inflammation
responses in higher organisms and has been observed to incorporate into distant
cells. How frequently circDNA manages to gain entry into distant cells and
incorporate into that cell’s genome is a relatively unexplored question. Using
Caenorhabditis elegans, we will investigate protein-mediated delivery of circDNA
to distal cells. C. elegans lacks many inflammatory pathways found in higher
eukaryotes, such as cGAS-STING and NF-kappaB nuclear effector responses. Thus,
we can more easily and directly investigate the consequences of exposure to
circulating, extracellular DNA and the consequences of its acquisition to cells.
If successful, this EAGER project will provide new strategies for genetic
manipulation through purposeful introduction of DNA. We may also learn of
additional cell or developmental consequences to circDNA, consequences that may
be avoided due to circDNA-related inflammatory responses in higher organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.