* 2300544
* Examining relationships among teacher professional learning and associated teacher and student outcomes in math and science: A meta-analytic approach to mediation and moderation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joseph Taylor, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 996,169.00

This research synthesis study reviews the effects of professional learning
interventions and will advance STEM educators' understanding of the critically
important relationships among teacher professional learning (PL), teacher
knowledge and practice, and average student effects. Understanding these
relationships will allow the field to design better PL experiences for teachers
that truly benefit student learning. The project leverages the availability of
causal impact studies in the primary literature and advancements in meta-
analytic techniques to uncover relationships among PL features, teacher
knowledge and practice, and student outcomes in a manner that has not been done
before. To ensure that the research is as useful as possible to other
researchers, the team will publicly share our data and analysis scripts,
allowing other meta-analysts to build on our efforts. In addition, the
researchers will generate web-based data analysis tools for other primary
researchers to use to examine the data from the study, conduct a priori power
analyses, and to help primary researchers better interpret findings in the
context of research that has already been done.

This synthesis research uses meta-analysis to study the effects from studies of
PL interventions with math and science student and teacher outcomes. The
research team uses meta-regression with robust variance estimation as well as
meta-analytic structural equation modeling. Broader impacts are addressed as the
data and analyses tools can be used by many communities of researchers, higher
education faculty, and policy makers. The communities include teacher educators,
education researchers, district PL providers, STEM education policy makers,
along with math and science teachers and students.

This research project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The
ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation. The project is also funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.