* 2300902
* Training Electric Vehicle Technicians to Accelerate Massachusetts' Automotive Future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* ERIC ALMEIDA, Mount Wachusett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 350,000.00

The automotive technician career field is changing rapidly, and the U.S. is
currently in the middle of an industry transition from traditional combustion
engine vehicles to those with hybrid and battery electric vehicle (EV)
technologies. A recent survey of Massachusetts car dealers and independent
automotive repair facilities have all indicated that they are facing a shortage
of automotive technicians trained in hybrid and EV technology. This project from
Mount Wachusett Community College will address an emerging regional demand for
technicians skilled in EV technologies by developing a new Hybrid and EV
curriculum for an Advanced Automotive Technician Hybrid and EV certificate and
degree program. Throughout the project, 40 students will be recruited into this
new degree and certificate program in the repair and maintenance of electric
vehicles. The project will train faculty and provide the program with Hybrid and
EV training equipment. It will also develop a new state-of the-art industry
informed curriculum, develop a prior learning assessment framework, and tools
for incumbent workers. Finally, the project team will build internship
opportunities and employer partner relationships to foster student engagement,
and institute a recruitment and retention strategy for a diverse group of
students. The project is expected to generate new knowledge on how to augment a
traditional combustion engine automotive technician program with emerging Hybrid
and EV technologies. This project will also provide a model for engaging
incumbent workers to accelerate their progress towards a certificate or degree
in Hybrid and EV. Finally, the project will build knowledge about creating a
high school student pipeline for the Hybrid and EV technician fields, with an
additional special emphasis on recruiting females into the field. The
overarching goal of the project is to create an industry supported advanced
automotive degree and certificate program in the repair and maintenance of
Electric Vehicles that meets employer’s needs for skilled, knowledgeable, and
more diverse EV automotive technicians. Approximately 40 students are expected
to enroll in this certificate and degree program over 3 years, with an increase
of female students and an additional 40 dual enrolled high school students.
Three faculty will be trained in Hybrid and EV technology during summer learning
experiences. Students new to the field completing ten Automotive courses with EV
and Hybrid technologies embedded in them, will earn the certificate, needing
only another 7 general education classes to earn the Associate Degree.
Alternatively, incumbent workers with prior experience or completion of a prior
learning assessment test will potentially be able to receive credit for up to
seven core courses to earn their certificate and/or Associates Degree. The
Business and Industry Leadership Team will inform and enrich the curriculum by
mapping out the scope of skills and knowledge essential for Hybrid and EV
Automotive Repair and Maintenance technicians. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.