* 2300990
* Collaborative Research: Effects of instructional analogies on illusions of understanding in Introductory Geoscience
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2027
* USD 462,348.00

Analogies pervade textbooks and other teaching materials in geology and other
STEM fields. "The Earth's crust is like a multi-layered cake with many different
colors of icing." This is an example of an analogy used to teach geology.
Anaologies are widely thought to be effective teaching tools because they take
something that students are already familiar with and relate it to a new
unfamiliar concept. But this same feature could potentially lead to illusions of
understanding. Students may assume that if they understand the familiar thing
(layered cake) they understand what they need to learn about the unfamiliar
thing (strata in the Earth's crust). In contrast, the scientific concept may be
far more complex and possess features that the simple, familiar object does not.
If the limits of the analogy are not detailed for the student, they may become
overconfident in their knowledge and fail to put forth the additional effort
needed for full understanding. This would be an error in metacomprehension that
undermines self-regulated learning behaviors. The current project will study how
analogies are used in undergraduate Introductory Geology to explore their
potential negative impact on the accuracy of students' judgments about their own
knowledge and to develop lessons aimed at eliminating or reducing this negative
impact. The results will have implications beyond the field of geology, as
analogies are a pervasive aspect of learning environments across STEM fields.

The current project will involve a systemic analysis of how analogies are used
in widely adopted instructional resources in Geology and will also include a
series of experiments to be conducted within undergraduate Introductory
Geoscience classrooms whose students are primarily college freshman and
sophomores. All materials used for the experiments will be authentic classroom
materials, fully integrated into the courses' online homework activities. The
basic procedure common to these experiments is that students will read textbook
excerpts on various topics in geoscience that systematically vary in whether
they include analogies. After studying all topics, students will be asked to
judge their level of comprehension for each topic ("How many items do you think
you will get correct on a 5-item test?") and asked to identify which topics they
would choose to restudy. Students will then take a comprehension test for each
topic that requires inferential reasoning rather than just memory for words.
This procedure allows for computing how accurate students are in their judgments
of their own comprehension (i.e., metacomprehension), whether they choose to
restudy topics they need to study most, and their actual comprehension of each
topic. Student performance on course exams will be used as a more distal measure
of impact. Beyond the impact of analogies on each outcome measure, some
experiments will test whether the impact of analogies can be moderated by having
students draw sketches of the geological phenomena, and by a short online
tutorial about how to map between the familiar source and unfamiliar target
concepts of an analogy along with warnings to avoid the inflated confidence that
might occur due to the analogy source's being familiar. In addition to improving
STEM instruction, the findings will have the potential to advance the broader
literatures in metacomphrehension, science learning, and use of analogies to
convey complex concepts in STEM. This project is supported by the EDU Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.