* 2300490
* The Effects of Family Engagement on STEM Learning and Motivation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tyler Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2026
* USD 791,850.00

Families play a crucial role in supporting and enhancing children’s academic,
behavioral, and social-emotional development. Prior studies have consistently
demonstrated numerous positive associations between family engagement and
children’s learning, including minority students in urban areas, rural children,
and across gender. Despite these positive findings, most of what is known is
based on assessing the effects of family engagement (i.e., parent involvement
and family-school partnerships) on children’s broad learning (e.g., general
academic achievement). Large-scale reviews have paid little to no attention to
how family engagement can specifically be used to support critical student STEM
outcomes (e.g., STEM participation and motivation, math and science
achievement). Further, little is known regarding how, for whom, and under what
conditions family engagement interventions can be most effective. Uncovering the
effectiveness, supportive conditions, and key elements that promote family
engagement is especially timely and critical for historically marginalized
students who have experienced disproportionate setbacks in math and science
learning during the COVID-19 pandemic.

This synthesis study includes a comprehensive systematic review and meta-
analysis of research published since 2001 evaluating the impact of family
engagement interventions on student STEM outcomes. The goal of this project is
to (a) determine the effectiveness of family engagement interventions on STEM
outcomes, (b) identify practices/components within interventions that are most
effective for promoting STEM outcomes, and (c) reveal the extent to which the
effects of family engagement interventions vary as a function of study quality
and/or certain child, family, and community characteristics. This synthesis will
include studies that employ experimental group design and single-case design
research. Methods will include multivariate random-effects models with robust
variance estimation, moderation analyses, and assessments of bias and missing
data. Findings from this synthesis will create foundational knowledge, and
provide school personnel and families with evidence-based practices to support
student STEM learning and motivation. Additionally, exploring for whom and under
what conditions family engagement interventions are most effective will inform
targeted practices aimed at supporting disenfranchised students and families.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.