* 2300627
* RAPID: Critical data collection from a flash flooding event in Eastern Kentucky
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Omid Ghasemi-Fare, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 49,970.00

Kentucky and adjacent Appalachian regions suffer repeated tragic loss of life
and property damage due to flash flooding. Flash floods in eastern Kentucky are
unique with respect to the frequency, magnitude, duration, and timing of
stormwater delivery. However, the mechanisms controlling flash flood generation
are poorly understood in this region. The proposed project will inform
understanding of flash floods in eastern Kentucky and throughout Appalachia. The
data from this study will assist with understanding the watershed properties
that control the generation of flash floods and will assist with post-flood
analyses to determine the mechanisms of the July 2022 floods in eastern
Kentucky. These data will additionally improve flash flood forecasting
technology, which may assist with the mitigation of the impacts of future flash
floods.

Flash floods – defined as the swift increase in discharge caused by intense
rainfall or release of water over a small region – rank as the most destructive
weather-related hazard in many locations of the world. The July 2022 flash
flooding in Eastern Kentucky resulted in at least 37 deaths, including 4
children, with hundreds of homes destroyed. Flash flooding is not a new
phenomenon to this region. However, the July 2022 floods resulted in one of the
largest number of fatalities due to flash flooding in the US in over 45 years,
placing it as one of the deadliest flash floods on record. The objectives of
this project are to: 1) investigate the downstream impacts and behavior of flash
floods in headwater streams by gathering critical and timely data that will lead
to improved prediction and modeling of flash flood dynamics; and 2) understand
the continued impact of flash floods on water quality in headwater streams
throughout Appalachia. Three main research tasks will be performed to accomplish
the research goal: 1) collect perishable high-water mark data, 2) collect soil
samples to quantify soil-water condition and perform soil characteristic tests
to assist with hydraulic model calibration for future projects, and 3) analyze
surface water and sediment samples for stormwater indicators. Data collected
through this research will eventually be used to create hydraulic models to
understand velocities and volumes of water produced at the headwater-scale and
answer questions related to the contribution of headwaters to downstream flash
floods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.