* 2300385
* Research Initiation Award: A Statistical Approach to Measuring Frailty in African Americans with Prediabetes and Diabetes: A Latent Class Analysis
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Felicia Simpson, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 299,997.00

HBCU-UP’s Research Initiation Awards provide support for STEM faculty to pursue
research activities to further their research capabilities and effectiveness and
help enhance research and teaching at HBCUs. This award to Winston-Salem State
University (WSSU) supports research aimed at identifying latent frailty profiles
in African Americans adults with prediabetes and diabetes. This project will
support WSSU’s growing mathematics program, by expanding research opportunities
available to students and enhancing the department’s research infrastructure in
biostatistical research. This project will provide hands-on training, mentoring,
and research experiences to undergraduate students that will strengthen and
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in mathematics and
statistics and prepare students for graduate programs and careers. The project
has the potential to be a model for increasing the number of African Americans
in biostatistical sciences and support the nations efforts in building a robust
STEM workforce by engaging students early in research.

This project aims to conduct a series of secondary data analyses, using the
extensive public data resources provided by the Jackson Heart Study (JHS), to
examine frailty in African American adults with prediabetes and diabetes. Using
a latent class statistical analysis approach to measure frailty, this project’s
three aims are 1) To conduct basic research in latent profile identification of
frailty in African American adults with prediabetes and diabetes, 2) To examine
the statistical variability of the latent profiles of frailty among subgroups
and the impact of the profiles selection among covariates, and 3) To test the
predictive validity of the frailty latent class variable to predict adverse
outcomes. This proposed project will be the first study to test the predictive
validity of frailty latent classes in African Americans. This project is novel
in its use of latent class analysis to examine frailty in an African American
population with prediabetes and diabetes and advances knowledge in the field of
biostatistical and aging research by adjusting for covariates and grouping
individuals by diabetes status (prediabetes or diabetes) in the latent class
model to identify frailty profiles. Educational components of this project will
provide mentoring and research training opportunities for underrepresented
undergraduate students and increase their knowledge of biostatistical research.
This project benefits society by engaging historically marginalized groups in
biostatistics work which can impact the communities in which they originate. By
enhancing our understanding regarding the prevalence and severity of frailty and
its validity in predicting adverse outcomes in African Americans with
prediabetes and diabetes, students can serve as topic experts within their
communities and families in which diabetes or pre-diabetes may be more
prevalent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.