* 2300450
* I-Corps: A novel catheter for interventional cardiology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Lipton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a catheter that will reduce surgery time, and thereby reduce the
physicians’ and patients’ radiation exposure, and improve their long-term
health. Over one million procedures to treat cardiovascular diseases, the
leading causes of death and disability, are performed annually in the United
States. Given these procedures' life-threatening and time-sensitive nature,
there is intense pressure to reduce the procedure time and increase cardiac
catheterization lab operational efficiency to expand patient access. Currently,
physicians spend between 30 minutes to 4 hours on a patient, depending on the
complexity of the cardiovascular procedure. Existing catheterization tools offer
limited dexterity and control when navigating patient anatomy, forcing
physicians to work with multiple catheters and guidewires of different shapes
and sizes. These devices also lack distal tip control making it stressful to
predict catheter response while navigating them inside a patient's vascular
tree.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a novel metamaterial-based
catheter that easily navigates through challenging anatomies and, unlike
existing solutions, works on a beating heart. The invention involves the
development of new metamaterial structures leading to material and structural
behavior that would improve catheter navigation through tortuous patient
anatomies, with physicians having absolute control over catheter behavior in
surgeries on beating hearts. With this technology, physicians can dynamically
alter the distal tip stiffness and lock catheter shapes, which is impossible
with any existing solutions on the market. These metamaterial properties remove
the need for using multiple catheters of different shapes and sizes for a single
surgery leading to a better surgical procedure. This innovation has the
potential to advance the field of interventional cardiology by removing
procedural redundancies leading to higher efficacy and conception of novel
catheter-based surgeries for diseases where patients are rejected for specific
surgeries either due to complicated anatomies or lack of better surgical tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.