* 2300738
* Meta-Analysis of the Instructional-Relational Model of Student Engagement and Math Achievement: A Moderation and Mediation Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Ming-Te Wang, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,997.00

This research synthesis systematically reviews and meta-analyzes the evidence on
relationships between teacher support, student engagement, and mathematics
achievement in the instructional–relational model framework. The researchers
rigorously examine the consistency and variability of the relationships between
the domains and constructs across studies. The results of this comprehensive
meta-analysis inform the research community on the status of student engagement
research by identifying patterns of results among studies, identifying, and
resolving sources of disagreement among results, supporting, or rejecting the
generalization of primary evidence, and, consequently, contributing to the
direct future research in the field.

The principal investigator and her team estimate each correlation embedded
within the instructional–relational model. Specifically, they (a) meta-analyze
the bivariate relationships among teacher support, student engagement, and
mathematics achievement, (b) explore the variation or heterogeneity of the
relationships with moderators representing student sample characteristics, (c)
conduct a structural test of the model, where student engagement mediates the
associations between teacher support and mathematics achievement, and (d)
examine whether the mediational model varies for different engagement components
and different classroom and student characteristics. Taken together the
components of the research project provide an opportunity to better understand
the nature of each relationship in the instructional–relational model of
mathematics classroom learning.

This research project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The
ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.