* 2300052
* EAGER: Development and Application of Liutex and Third Generation of Vortex Definition and Identification
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Chaoqun Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 243,229.00

Vortex is intuitively recognized as a rotational/swirling motion of fluids.
Vortex is omnipresent in the universe and affects human life and the
environment. Humanity is faced with existential and catastrophic threats which
are largely caused by vortex in many cases, such as human-induced climate change
leads to extreme weather, unprecedented hurricanes, and life-threatening
tornados. In addition, pandemic and pollution-induced respiratory and heart
diseases are rampant. In many of these catastrophic events, the vortex plays a
key role. In addition, vortex controls the dynamics of turbulence and noise
generation. However, vortex had no rigorous definition, existing vortex
identification methods are not accurate and appropriate, and the demonstrated
vortex structure of turbulence is not unique. The goal of this project is to
develop a comprehensive Liutex and third generation of vortex definition and
identification.

The rigorous mathematical definition of local fluid rotation and global vortex
will be further modified to be unique, accurate and appliable to vortex science
and turbulence research. A high-order vortex identification software –
LiutexUTA, Modified Liutex-OmegaUTA, Liutex-Core-LineUTA methods – will be
developed and distributed to the turbulence research community. The 3-D Liutex
generation mechanism will be revealed, which is a key issue of the hairpin
vortex formation. The new Liutex-based Fluid Kinematics will be developed to
guide fluid dynamics in education and research. The new Liutex/Vortex dynamics
will be investigated, and the new fluid dynamics governing equations will be
revisited and new ideas will be presented based on the research progress.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.