* 2300357
* Investigating Early Elementary Students' Computational Thinking Development in Integrated Mathematics-Coding Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Jody Clarke-Midura, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2027
* USD 647,620.00

Despite growing interest in supporting the integration of computational thinking
(CT) in elementary education, there is not an agreed-upon definition of CT that
is developmentally appropriate for early childhood, nor is there a clear
understanding of how young children’s CT develops and which kinds of
instructional approaches and practices truly support the development of CT.
Children’s ideas and interpretations of situations are uniquely different from
those of adults; therefore, models of early childhood CT should reflect the
developmental understanding of their CT. Further, schools often lack the
instructional time and resources to teach CT as a separate subject, so CT is
often integrated with other disciplines such as mathematics. Early elementary
educators need feasible research-based, developmentally appropriate CT
curricula. This project will contribute to this critical STEM educational need
by working with a design team of 5 elementary teachers to develop a research-
based integrated mathematics and CT curriculum. The project will directly impact
over 300 first- and second-grade students and 9 teachers from Title I schools in
a rural setting with an aim to broaden participation by designing tasks for full
participation of underrepresented populations in STEM, specifically girls and
multilingual learners.

Using a design-based research methodology, a systematic study of children’s
developing CT and mathematics knowledge in classroom contexts will be conducted
through iterative cycles of curriculum design, enactment, and analysis using the
lens of hierarchic interactionalism. Data collection will include video
recordings of students’ activity in tasks with coding tools, design memos,
interviews, and pre-post assessments of CT, mathematics knowledge, and spatial
ability. Qualitative data will be analyzed using retrospective and interaction
analysis. Multiple regression analysis of assessment data will be used to
explore the relationship between CT, mathematics knowledge, and spatial ability.
The research will advance the field by investigating the progressions of CT
learning in early elementary grades and will empirically develop, test, and
refine these progressions along with the mathematics-integrated CT curricular
tasks and assessments. This research will provide early elementary educators and
curriculum designers with a framework for understanding children’s development
of CT and will inform future CT instruction efforts for standards, curricula,
teaching practices, and assessment. This project will also provide valuable
information about how to integrate CT into early mathematics education in
feasible and accessible ways for classrooms. The key outcomes of the project
will be a CT learning trajectory (LT) for grades 1-2 that includes: (1) a
cognitive model of CT, (2) an integrated mathematics-coding curriculum aligned
with the developmental learning progression of the CT LT, and (3) formative
assessments integral to the instructional tasks that provide feedback to
teachers on student learning. This project is funded by the Discovery Research
preK-12 (DRK-12) program, which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.