* 2300378
* Developing Computational Adversarial Thinking: Bridging Technical Skills Training and Academic Coursework
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christian Servin, El Paso County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 349,990.00

The national shortage of software developers who lack basic cybersecurity skills
is well-documented. This shortage is a result of a divergence between career
technical education and traditional academic degree paths. On the one hand, many
IT professionals understand the technical aspects of cybersecurity, from
installing firewalls to forensics, but require additional software development
skills. On the other hand, computer scientists/developers (i.e., those who have
pursued standard academic training) understand software development but lack
adversarial thinking (AT) skills. The goal of this project is to increase cyber
awareness by helping students to develop AT skills. This project will
investigate the impact of using AT in introductory computing courses for
computer science and non-computer science majors. By infusing AT education in
computing programs at the community and technical college level, this project
will enhance the first two years of education in computing and increase the
number of qualified software developers in the borderland of El Paso, Texas.
This project will address the minimal emphasis on AT knowledge and skills in the
fundamentals of computer science courses by infusing AT and analytics within the
curriculum and developing extracurricular activities to provide community
practice through experiential learning. New initiatives include the development
of a computer science course for non-majors that will introduce AT in a
multidisciplinary environment; the infusion of AT modules in the fundamentals of
computer science courses; professional development opportunities for students,
instructional assistants, and professionals to learn about AT concepts in
computing; and the development of student competitions (also known as
Hackathons). This project will provide novel pedagogical teaching based on AT
and analytics as an extension of computational thinking. Best practices and
content material will be shared in a public repository, accessible to educators
worldwide. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.