* 2300452
* SHINE: Testing Theories of Coronal Heating and Solar Wind Acceleration with Multi-Messenger Data and Four-Dimension (4D) Forward Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Steven Cranmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2026
* USD 413,817.00

Understanding the complexity and evolution of the solar corona is a necessary
precursor to being able to predict the Sun’s effects on the Earth’s local space
environment. Despite many years of study, the basic physical processes
responsible for heating the solar corona and accelerating the solar wind are
still not known. This project combines numerical simulations and data analysis
to better understand these processes. A graduate student and undergraduate
students will be supported and mentored.

The goal of the proposed investigation is to substantially narrow down the list
of processes that have been suggested for energizing plasma along both closed
and open magnetic field lines in the outer solar atmosphere. This work designs a
forward-modeling framework that includes as many of the processes as possible,
all on equal footing and takes advantage of the available “multi-messenger” data
(i.e., both remote-sensing and in situ) to put constraints on the relative
contributions of the physical processes responsible for coronal heating and
solar wind acceleration. Specifically, the investigation consists of four core
tasks: (1) Constructing line-of-sight forward models of EUV and X-ray emission
for the low corona, corresponding to as broad a range of proposed heating
theories as possible. (2) Implementing six different field-line extrapolation
models to compute the coronal magnetic field from photospheric lower boundary
conditions. (3) Determining what levels of coronal flux-tube structure can
survive to be detectable in interplanetary space, through high-resolution
simulations of the formation of corotating interaction regions (CIRs) and
turbulent field-line random walk. (4) Self-consistent modeling of coronal
heating and solar wind acceleration along open flux tubes using a new generation
of an existing code that now includes both wave/turbulence and interchange
reconnection physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.