* 2300915
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACE GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Characterizing iron-binding organic ligands in the Southern Ocean and implications for iron cycling in the global ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kristen Buck, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,803.00

Iron is an essential element for life and plays an important role in defining
how much atmospheric carbon dioxide is taken up into the ocean by phytoplankton.
However, iron cycling is closely governed by the chemistry of seawater; nearly
all iron in seawater is associated with various unknown organic compounds,
called iron-binding ligands, which impact whether and how iron is utilized by
organisms and the distribution of iron throughout the ocean. Detail
understanding of the cycling of organic iron-binding ligands is necessary to
understand iron cycling in the oceans and the connections between iron cycling
and atmospheric carbon. The proposed research will be carried out as a part of
US GEOTRACES expedition to test the hypothesis that the Southern Ocean is a
globally significant source of iron-binding organic ligands, and that different
sources of these organic molecules lead to different iron-ligand
characteristics. The US GEOTRACES program is a large collaborative effort to
sample ocean systems at high resolution for a suite of key trace elements and
isotopes. The South Pacific and Southern Ocean regions targeted by the upcoming
US GEOTRACES GP17 cruises are important locations of water mass formation and
the subsequent transport of carbon and nutrients to the global ocean. Organic
ligands produced in these regions thus have important implications for the
stabilization, reactivity, and residence time of iron along the path of global
water mass circulation and could impact the global oceanic inventory of
dissolved iron.

This project will measure the distribution of iron-binding organic ligands, and
identify specific organic molecules that comprise these ligands, in field and
experimental samples collected on upcoming US GEOTRACES cruises in the South
Pacific (GP17-OCE) and Southern Ocean (GP17-ANT). These datasets will be
utilized to conduct the first extensive intercalibration of the two most widely
used approaches for characterizing iron-binding organic ligands, providing
important insight into these datasets and how they can be synthesized to improve
understanding of iron cycling in the oceans. All data from this project will be
made publicly available. Project activities will provide educational and
training opportunities for middle school, high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, and results will be shared with the public through the
development of virtual reality modules and via local outreach events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.