* 2300867
* Cyber Data Analytics Education, Curriculum, and Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Thomas Blamey, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 648,169.00

This project will help to address the Nation’s need for skilled cybersecurity
professionals by developing a Cyber Data Analytics technician workforce
development program. This program will deliver a blended education of
cybersecurity and data science that will cover the risks, threats, and
vulnerabilities faced by small businesses. The project will focus on associate
degree students and will extend Cyber Data Analytics across multiple
disciplines, by offering industry relevant courses to students from degree
programs in business, healthcare, accounting, electronics, and criminal justice.
A novel component of this project is the creation of culturally responsive
curriculum content that will be localized for Hawaiian traditions and customs.
This project will produce evidence-based modules for teaching Cyber Data
Analytics that can be incorporated into existing curriculum in community
colleges.

The project will add to the knowledge base for technician education by studying
the impact of this program on teachers and students. Moreover, the research will
examine what aspects of the program increase student completion and job
placement. Four objectives will guide the work of the project team. First is to
create four new courses and a new online Certificate for Cyber Data Analytics.
Second is to provide opportunities for students in non-computing associate
degree programs to be introduced to field of Cyber Data Analytics. Third is to
train faculty in community colleges in the use of the curriculum modules.
Fourth, and finally, is to engage high school teachers in STEM CTE, high school
counselors, and students from underrepresented groups such as women and
minorities, to participate in entrepreneurship project-based learning
opportunities. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.