* 2300060
* Investigating terpene metabolism in Medicago truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Sibongile Mafu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2027
* USD 625,487.00

The focus of this research is to understand how plants produce chemicals in
response to different environmental cues. The knowledge attained will augment
basic understanding of the biosynthetic pathways for plant specialized
metabolites which have important functions in plant communication and defense.
It therefore also has the potential to improve crop resilience and agricultural
productivity. Legumes are important crops providing a significant portion of
protein in human and animal diets and are also essential in cropping systems
contributing to sustainability. This project examines how legumes, in particular
the model legume Medicago truncatula produces terpenoids, important chemicals
that respond to diverse environmental stresses. To accomplish this goal a team
of students comprised of undergraduates, doctoral students and postdoctoral
scholars will be trained to carry out projects centered on discovery and
biochemical analysis of genes involved in the building blocks of terpenoids.
Concurrently, the researchers will generate genetic lines that are no longer
capable of producing select terpenes to probe the direct eco-physiological
importance of these chemicals. This work will provide an informative resource
for research in crop legumes. Topics related to the research area are
incorporated into an undergraduate biochemistry laboratory class as well as a
short module focused on visualizing chemicals targeted at middle and high school
students.

Legumes are important crops because of their agronomic, nutritional and
environmental benefits. It is imperative to understand factors that influence
their yield and quality. Plants produce a diverse array of specialized
metabolites to ensure adaptation to their ecological niche. Terpenoids, a major
class of specialized metabolites, play an important role in gene-by-environment
interactions, as demonstrated in agricultural crops such as rice and maize.
However, terpenoid diversity, evolution and possible ecophysiological
significance remains relatively unknown in legumes. Specifically, this project
focuses on the experimental definition of gene to metabolite relationship of the
terpenome through phylogenetic and biochemical analysis. It also examines the
importance of terpenes in response to environmental stress through assessment of
the effect of (a)biotic stresses in select genetic knockouts. Improved knowledge
of the terpenome will give insights to molecular determinants of chemical
responses which are an avenue for insight into improving crop resilience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.