* 2300961
* SHINE: Analysis of Ion Kinetic Instabilities in the Solar Wind Observed Near the Sun with Hybrid Modeling and Machine Learning
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Leon Ofman, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2026
* USD 598,925.00

The solar wind includes charged particles and magnetic fields emanating from the
Sun’s outer layers. Space weather results from interactions between the solar
wind and the Earth’s geomagnetic field. Therefore, it is important to understand
the detailed processes that occur within the solar wind. This project explores
the physics of the solar wind through analysis of satellite observations and
development of machine learning models. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained in interdisciplinary research including space plasma physics and
machine learning techniques. Also, an early career post-doctoral researcher will
be supported. This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to
support AI/ML advancement in the geosciences.

Motivated by new observations with NASA’s Parker Solar Probe (PSP) mission, the
science objective of this project is to investigate the heating and acceleration
of the solar wind plasma associated with proton and alpha particle temperature
anisotropy evolution, their relative drift and beaming velocities, and the
associated ion kinetic instabilities. The work will focus on the effects of
proton beams, detected by PSP/SPAN-I on the nonlinear evolution of the
magnetosonic instability. The magnetic wave spectra and energy partition between
the ions and the electromagnetic fields will be determined focusing on ion
kinetic scales. The team will analyze the PSP/SPAN-I data of the proton and
alpha particle velocity distribution functions (VDFs) with beams during
perihelia encounters, as well as plasma moments such as density, anisotropic
temperature, and alpha relative abundance data. The FIELDS instrument will
provide the corresponding kinetic wave activity magnitude, spectra, and
polarizations. Guided by the observations, the team will use 2.5D and 3D hybrid-
particle-in-cell (hybrid-PIC) models of kinetic protons and alpha particles with
background electron fluid in an expanding box model to study the kinetic
instabilities driven by initially unstable non- Maxwellian VDFs such as super-
Alfvénic beams and ion relative drifts in the inner solar wind. The models will
be used to calculate the physical properties and nonlinear evolution of the
proton and alpha particle populations in the expanding solar wind, such as the
ion drift speeds, anisotropic temperatures, magnetic energy and spectra, and the
associated plasma heating processes. They will develop Artificial Intelligence
Machine Learning (AI/ML) methods to automate the detection of unstable VDFs and
classification of the kinetic instabilities using semi-supervised (i.e.,
labeled, and unlabeled data) and supervised (i.e., labeled data) ML methods such
as multi-layered (i.e., deep) neural networks (DNNs).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.