* 2300117
* Building an Academic Pathway for Advanced Air Mobility Aircraft Maintenance Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joseph Riehle, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by training the next generation
of aircraft maintenance technicians to service and maintain Unmanned Aerial
Systems (UAS) and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) aircraft, thus safeguarding the
nation’s position at the forefront of the global aerospace industry. The
aerospace industry is shifting toward increased reliance on semi- or fully
autonomous electric or hybrid aircraft, which will soon be used more frequently
and in expanded roles. At the same time, upcoming additions and changes to
federal regulations will require that these new aircraft types are regularly
serviced to ensure their airworthiness and safety of operations in the National
Airspace System (NAS). To support the domestic growth of the industry and to
keep the expanding fleet of UAS and AAM aircraft performing at its full
potential while remaining in compliance with federal regulations, the nation
will require a sufficient number of aviation maintenance technicians. These
technicians will need to have the skills to maintain these aircraft and to
diagnose and repair any problems with inherent advanced technologies including
sensors, avionics, communications, electric propulsion, and battery systems.
This project will help address this need by enabling access to training and
resources to develop these skill sets for both incumbent aviation maintenance
workers and individuals who are new to the aviation field.

This project will develop educational pathways by which a diverse pool of
technicians will be trained to maintain and repair UAS and AAM aircraft. It will
also advance a shared understanding of the skills and competencies needed to
fill such roles and embed these skills into a post-secondary short-term
technical certificate curriculum. The development of this curriculum will be
undertaken in coordination with partners having regional and national reach,
validated by industry representatives, and widely disseminated and replicated at
colleges across the country. These efforts will be key to addressing the
projected workforce shortage of technicians capable of servicing these new types
of aircraft. Training workshops will be developed for current aviation
maintenance workers exploring the innovations in UAS and AAM and orienting them
to the skills needed to service these aircraft. Additionally, to develop the
recruitment pipeline for future UAS and AAM maintenance technicians, the project
will develop high school STEM content and train-the-teacher modules. Further,
the project will conduct workshops to provide high school teachers with
innovative curriculum, multimedia, and learning activities introducing the AAM
paradigm, the components of UAS technologies, and opportunities for aviation
maintenance technicians. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.