* 2300950
* Towards an Electric Vehicle Service Technology Certificate:  Building Career Pathways by Implementing a Hybrid Curriculum in Electric Vehicle Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* William King, Piedmont Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 335,707.00

The growing demand for Electric Vehicle (EV) technicians in the burgeoning South
Carolina Automotive industry has created a need for career pathways for
automotive technology students and corresponding professional development for
their instructors. This project will develop both a pathway for students and
training resources for instructors offering the coursework leading to the
Electric Vehicle Service and Repair certificate. Over the three-year project, 50
students will be recruited to complete credit bearing courses that will result
in an EV Service and Repair certificate enabling them to work in the ever-
growing EV repair field. Also, professional development for faculty addressing
the new EV curricula will be provided. With mentorship from the CA2VES ATE
Center (Center for Aviation and Automotive Technological Education Using Virtual
E-Schools), and advisement from EV consortia members, this project will create
equitable opportunities for underserved populations in South Carolina to
progress to two- and four-year institutions and to the workplace. The project
will integrate classroom and virtual learning to increase and diversify the pool
of EV service technicians. This will be accomplished by implementing practices
to support participation and persistence in EV service technician education for
students including those who are rural, underserved, and/or underrepresented in
the EV industry. The flexible hybrid approach allows for personalized learning
to support students with different backgrounds to achieve proficiency in a
shorter time period and attain certification. The assessment of the
effectiveness of this hybrid approach regarding creativity and innovation in
teaching and learning, digital learning technology, and workforce development
will advance ATE knowledge.

The overall goal of this project is to better prepare diverse students to enter
the EV workforce or continued education through implementing a hybrid curriculum
and providing training for faculty. Working closely with NSF-funded EV
consortia, the project will refine and deploy an innovative, creative, and
informed EV service industry technician education hybrid curriculum
incorporating classroom and virtual learning to augment Automotive Service
Excellence (ASE) certification courses and complement existing advanced
manufacturing research. Additionally, this project will provide professional
development for faculty and trainers addressing the augmented EV curricula and
create a novel "Train the Trainer" program to ensure widespread use. Finally,
the project will recruit, retain, and graduate students from EV technician
education programs, build career pathways and address South Carolina’s need to
build capacity and diversity in the EV maintenance workforce. Fifty students are
expected to enroll over three years, and at least twenty-five instructors will
be impacted as the "Train the Trainer" program is established. Students will
participate in in-person and on-line synchronous and asynchronous lectures with
in-person labs for all EV Service Technician courses starting with Engine
Fundamentals in their first year. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program focusing on the education of technicians for the
advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.