* 2300152
* Nonlocal Terahertz Nanospectroscopy and Nanoimaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

In many emerging material systems which will be important for future device
applications, the propagation of charges at the material surface can be the key
determining factor in device performance. For example, devices based on gallium
nitride, which includes most blue LEDs and blue diode lasers, are often limited
in their performance by crystalline defects at their surfaces or interfaces,
which perturb the transport of electrons between adjacent layers of the
materials. In another example, the boundaries between crystalline micro-grains
in a polycrystalline film of light-harvesting materials used in solar cells can
strongly influence the speed at which charges created by absorbed sunlight are
collected, ultimately setting a limit on the device efficiency. This project
seeks to develop a suite of new experimental techniques to study such issues,
with both high spatial and temporal resolution. These techniques rely on the
very strong interaction between the charges moving in the material and
electromagnetic radiation in the terahertz spectral range. In some cases, these
moving charges can radiate an ultrashort burst of terahertz radiation, which
contains important signatures of the charge carrier dynamics. In other cases, a
short terahertz pulse reflected from the material surface can be used to
characterize the properties of the mobile charges, with temporal resolution on
the scale of a picosecond. Our work will extend these ideas to the nanoscale
realm, allowing us to study the charge transport using terahertz techniques with
spatial resolution of only a few tens of nanometers.

The aim of this research program is to demonstrate revolutionary new measurement
techniques in terahertz nanoscopy, and use them to glean new information about
dynamical processes in materials. In particular, we will establish the idea of
non-local THz nanoscopy, by developing a suite of methods such as non-local
optical-pump THz-probe nanoscopy and non-local THz emission nanoscopy. We will
then use these new experimental techniques in studies of several material
systems of current technological relevance. We will initiate collaborations to
leverage the expertise of colleagues in sample preparation and calculations of
THz material properties. The proposed research will significantly advance the
field of terahertz nanoscience by bringing the power of nonlinear optics to the
nanoscale with sub-picosecond temporal resolution and nanoscale spatial
resolution. Unlike traditional nanoscopy techniques, our new methods will reveal
information about lateral charge transport, rather than vertical transport. We
will study the transport of polaritons across an individual step edge in a
multi-layer graphene film, and probe the effects of an individual grain boundary
on charge transport in a polycrystalline perovskite thin film. We will also
couple these new ideas to cutting-edge results in terahertz vibrational
spectroscopy, by studying the effects of local nanoscale defects on vibrational
modes with mesoscopic coherence lengths, and by observing the influence of
nanoscale excitations on simple chemical reactions mediated by terahertz
vibrations. These measurements will open up new possibilities for the study of
nanoscale phenomena in materials, revealing important information that cannot be
obtained using other methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.