* 2300556
* Fostering Systems Thinking in High School Environmental Engineering through Engagement of Coastal Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Rossella Santagata, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,291,591.00

This project is an innovative exploratory research study focused on developing a
high school environmental engineering curriculum that addresses the challenges
posed by climate change. The curriculum follows a model-validate-iterate design
paradigm, where students model dynamic real-world systems, validate their models
using data, and create multiple iterations to explore changes in the system over
time. The project aims to cultivate a new generation of environmental engineers
who possess the necessary skills to analyze complex systems, collaborate with
diverse communities, and develop creative solutions. By integrating systems
thinking (ST) and critical science agency (CSA), the curriculum will bridge the
gap between classroom learning and real-world applications. Through
collaborative efforts with students-largely from minoritized backgrounds-,
teachers, and community partners, the project will create an engaging and
participatory STEM learning experience. The outcomes of this project will
contribute to the national interest by preparing students for environmental
engineering careers and empowering them to address climate change-related
challenges with creativity, effectiveness, equity, and justice.

Using a design-based implementation research approach, the interdisciplinary
research team--including the University of California-Irvine's Schools of
Education, Engineering, and Biological Sciences--will partner with informal
science educators from the Orange County Department of Education, teachers from
a local school district and students from minoritized communities, and non-
profit and community partners to co-design the curriculum. The project will
investigate coastal changes as well as flooding concerns along the Santa Ana
River in Orange County, CA. The curriculum will be tested with three classes
(approximately 100 students) from underrepresented minority groups and low
socio-economic backgrounds. Research questions will explore the design process
and learning process and related student outcomes: 1. How can an environmental
engineering curriculum and learning activities be designed to integrate a focus
on ST and CSA in a way that is impactful? How do different stakeholders (i.e.,
researchers; informal science educators; high-school students; community
members) participate and contribute their perspectives and expertise to the
design process? 2. How do participating students from diverse backgrounds engage
in co-designed learning activities? To what extent do they develop ST and CSA?
The project will be structured in three phases: participatory co-design in Year
1, a curriculum testing in Year 2, and data analysis in Year 3. Data sources
will include interviews with community members, recordings of design sessions,
fieldnotes, and design artifacts, pre/post engineering ST measures, lesson
recordings and interviews with a sub-sample of students and a student feedback
survey. A mixed-method approach will be employed to analyze the design process
through equity-centered participatory research perspectives and to examine
students' learning process and development of CSA. Regression analysis will be
employed to examine student learning outcomes. Findings will be disseminated
through publications in peer-reviewed scholarly journals and practitioner-
oriented conferences. Participating high-school students will be invited to
present to their community and share with peer networks. The curriculum will be
made available to teachers and informal educators for free through the project
website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.