* 2300775
* Map Your Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tamara Biegas, Harford Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2026
* USD 427,181.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing pathways into its
geospatial technology (GST) associate of applied science (A.A.S.) and for-credit
certificate programs at Harford Community College (HCC). As GST is woven into
government and industry applications, employers in the Mid-Atlantic and beyond
increasingly need a workforce with the technical skills to create, develop, use,
and analyze mapping and surveying technologies and products. Within GST, there
has also been a call for research to better understand how to equip educators,
build relevant curricula, and engage future GST learners. As one- and two-year
GST training programs structured for nontraditional students can effectively
move workers from entry-level, low-wage jobs into well-paying careers the
project’s significance includes supporting students’ career advancement and
financial security. Through the Map Your Success project’s diverse connections
to schools, public and private employers, and communities where workforce
development is needed, HCC expects to demonstrate the high value and relevance
of GST careers. The project aligns with NSF’s mission and draws on Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) scholarship, including the work of the ATE-
supported GeoTech Center, to advance understanding of how GST programs integrate
traditional STEM skills with social and behavioral sciences. The project will
support the GST program to train in the competencies employers seek and can
effectively open a new pipeline into GST jobs for community college students.

HCC’s goals are to increase GST A.A.S. enrollment from 9 students to 20 students
per year and enroll an annual average of 20 GST certificate students by the end
of the project period. Project objectives are to (1) enhance the GST A.A.S. and
certificate programs to align with workforce needs; (2) enroll an average of 20
GST A.A.S. students and 20 GST certificate students annually, reaching
approximately 100 students over the three-year ATE project period, by engaging
secondary educators, high school students, and current HCC students in GST
outreach and education opportunities; and (3) retain and graduate an average of
80% of students in each program and support their advancement into relevant
technical careers. HCC will learn from and partner with the GeoTech Center and
the Maryland Geographic Alliance at Towson University to develop statewide
professional training opportunities for secondary educators; create a new
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles course; expand the existing GST Advisory Board;
strengthen GST internships; hold annual International GIS Day events; and reach
out to local high schools and underserved communities. Through Map Your Success
project evaluation, HCC will investigate, generate new knowledge about, and
disseminate findings on the pathways into GST careers from diverse entry points,
as well as the benefits of effective partnerships in training the next
generation of technically skilled mapping and GIS technicians. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.