* 2300448
* Research Initiation Award: Analysis of Glycoprotein Composition and Function of PGE2 EP Receptors in Mammary-derived Cells
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jocelyn Reader, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,997.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to the University of Maryland Eastern Short supports
faculty, undergraduate and graduate student research experiences as they seek to
elucidate the role of glycosylation on the function and subcellular localization
of PGE2 receptors in mammary epithelial cells and characterize their
intracellular glycosylation profile. Glycosylation is one of the most important
protein post-translational modifications, and this project aims to advance
knowledge to this end utilizing a combination of glycoproteomic, molecular
cloning, site directed mutagenesis and immunocytochemistry approaches.

The primary focus of this project is PGE2, one of the most abundant bio-active
lipid molecules involved in both physiological and pathophysiological processes
and mediates its effects by binding to G-protein-coupled-receptors (GPCRs).
Given the importance of glycosylation in intracellular molecular mechanisms,
this project describes efforts to 1) analyze the glycan heterogeneity in mammary
epithelial cells using glycomic and glycoproteomic techniques; 2) use site-
directed mutagenesis to determine the effect of glycosylation on EP receptor
function; and 3) use confocal microscopy to analyze the effect of glycosylation
on subcellular localization of PGE2-EP1, EP1v and EP4 receptors. This project
has the potential to advance knowledge on the role of glycosylation in
regulating intracellular calcium and cAMP signaling, which are key secondary
messengers in many biological systems. In addition, these research endeavors are
likely to expand the research capacity of the institution and contribute to
future students on the cellular and molecular mechanistic understanding of the
PGE2 EP1/EP4 signaling axis both in mammary cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.