* 2300619
* Collaborative Research: Hearing Each Other's Voices: Community Models for Professional Learning for Teachers, STEM Coaches, and Researchers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Judith Fusco, Digital Promise Global
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 626,452.00

A long-standing challenge for education and learning sciences is sharing the
distinct knowledge bases of researchers and teachers with each other. The goal
of this project is to support teachers, STEM coaches, and researchers in sharing
that knowledge so that they can learn from one another. The STEM coaches work
with teachers and are focused on science and technology in the schools. They
will also serve to connect K-12 schools and researchers, and will play a
critical role in bridging between the teachers and researchers. Ultimately, a
professional learning community will be created to bring the three groups
together. One purpose of the learning community will be to select and adapt
research-based practices that address local changes. The learning community will
also work together to create research-practice briefs that are short written
summaries of research that provides useable knowledge and guidance for teaching
and learning. An important contribution is creating research-practice briefs
that summarize research with input from both researchers and practitioners so
that principled adaptations can be applied more easily in practice.

The project takes a sociocultural perspective using cultural historical activity
theory to analyze the interactions that will occur between researchers,
teachers, and STEM coaches. The research questions are as follows. First, how
can researchers and STEM coaches jointly construct products that support their
learning and knowledge diffusion? Second, how do STEM coaches help teachers
adapt practices to their classrooms? Third, what contextual factors support or
impede the adoption of research-based practices? While answering these
questions, the project will incorporate the perspectives of STEM coaches,
teachers, and researchers and work to understand how this new professional
learning community model can work within school and district contexts. The
research and development plan will use a mixed methods approach using
observational data (e.g., field notes, video), written artifacts, and interviews
to understand the different interacting systems within the new expansive
learning community.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.