* 2300785
* Enhancing STEM Success: A Multi-modal Investigating of Spatial Reasoning and Training in Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Melissa Beck, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 518,564.00

Despite the growing demand for STEM professionals, many students face challenges
in completing STEM degree programs due to difficulties in mastering the content.
One crucial predictor of success in STEM disciplines is spatial reasoning
ability, which involves mentally manipulating and representing objects in space.
However, STEM courses often neglect the purposeful development of spatial
reasoning skills, and limited knowledge exists on effective training methods.
This project aims to address this gap by: 1) identifying neural and cognitive
processes associated with successful mental rotation, a fundamental aspect of
spatial reasoning; 2) assessing the responsiveness of these processes to
training; and 3) measuring the transfer of training effects to real-world STEM
problems, specifically focusing on introductory chemistry.

To develop effective cognitive training protocols, a comprehensive understanding
of the cognitive factors supporting optimal performance is necessary. This
project involves a large-scale cross-sectional study utilizing eye movement
tracking, brain activity measurement, and response time analysis during mental
rotation tasks. Multivariate analysis techniques will identify latent variables
that explain performance variability. Additionally, a validated randomized
controlled training protocol, including an active control group, will monitor
changes in measures as mental rotation performance improves through training.
Comparing longitudinal training effects to performance determinants observed in
the cross-sectional study will identify the most responsive neural and cognitive
processes for targeted interventions. Moreover, the project will examine the
extent of transferability of training-induced improvements to real-world STEM
spatial reasoning tasks, such as molecular symmetry determination. By developing
guidelines for effective mental rotation skill development, this research has
the potential to increase success, retention, and diversity in STEM disciplines,
thereby enhancing the quality and availability of the US STEM workforce.

This project is funded by the EDU Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development as well as the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12). The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.