* 2300734
* Intelligent Science Stations: Developing Adaptive Mixed-Reality Technology to Enhance Inquiry-based  STEM Learning in Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2027
* USD 648,696.00

The project aims to develop and research Intelligent Science Stations, a new
genre of interactive science experiences. The motivation behind this project is
the need for engaging, inquiry-based science learning opportunities for young
children in the classroom, to sustain early interest in science. The Intelligent
Science Stations will provide students in kindergarten to 4th grade with hands-
on science experiences, augmented by an intelligent agent that offers feedback
based on artificial intelligence (AI) computer vision. These Intelligent Science
Stations incorporate scientific apparatuses such as earthquake tables or balance
scales, and students' actions are observed and evaluated by the intelligent
agent. The agent appears as an animated character on a screen and provides
interactive feedback to guide students through scientific inquiry. This
innovative approach offers evidence-based, personalized support and feedback to
children, while also assisting teachers in integrating more inquiry-based
science learning into their classrooms. By modeling behaviors like asking
questions, making predictions, and explaining scientific phenomena, the
interactive AI system helps teachers enhance their classroom experiences. The
project aims to develop four Intelligent Science Stations, each accompanied by
lesson plans, teacher professional development, and online resources such as
video demonstrations and learning materials. The science content covered
includes Early Physics, Balance and Stability, Forces and Motion, Forces and
Interactions, Inquiry, and Engineering Design. The development and research will
take place in multiple schools with students from diverse backgrounds, targeting
an estimated 3,000 students per school year over a three-year period.

The evaluation and research components of the project have two main objectives.
First, it seeks to advance scientific understanding by investigating the
learning support features that effectively engage children in sustained learning
experiences involving scientific inquiry and engineering design in school
settings. Second, it aims to determine the curricular and language supports
necessary to foster engagement and enhance science learning for children with
different backgrounds, academic strengths, and needs. User-centered iterative
design research, formative evaluation, and classroom observations will be
employed to design mixed-reality systems that best cater to student and teacher
learning needs in formal learning environments. Through classroom observations
and controlled experiments, the project will compare "business as usual"
conditions with the use of Intelligent Science Stations, providing insights into
student inquiry processes, science conversations, student engagement, and
science inquiry processes. The project also intends to share its findings
through peer-reviewed publications targeted at researchers and developers, as
well as provide extensive professional development resources and video
demonstrations to teachers and educators via social media and the project
website.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.