* 2300024
* Science Sprouts 2.0: Extending and replicating a longitudinal investigation of the roots of scientific literacy and interests
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Amy Booth, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2027
* USD 444,697.00

Sociodemographic disparities in science-related opportunities and achievement
emerge in early childhood, and likely contribute to long-term engagement and
representation in STEM fields. With these realities as a backdrop, this project
aims to better understand the origins and development of scientific literacy and
interests. Children's experiences at home, their early attunement to cause and
effect, and the development of related cognitive skills are being evaluated
longitudinally from 3 to 13 years of age. A special emphasis is placed on low-
income and under-represented minority families in order to inform the
development of early interventions that can allay opportunity gaps and
facilitate participation and success of all children in science. The overall
strategy is to shed light on relationships between children's measured causal
stance, their scientific literacy, and their interest in science.

The project builds on previous longitudinal work establishing that variability
in preschoolers' causal stance, causal reasoning skill, and exposure to science-
related input are each predictive of subsequent scientific literacy. One core
goal is to test the strength and generalizability of these previous findings by
replicating the two earliest waves of data collection (at 3 and 4 years of age)
from a previous study. By focusing specifically on low-income families, the
majority of whom will be Black or Latine, this replication will extend
understanding to understudied populations that have historically faced limited
access to science-related enrichment and educational opportunities. It also will
support evaluation of the test-retest reliability of early measures of causal
reasoning and science-related interests. A second goal is to specify how far
early indicators can predict science outcomes by extending the original
investigation longitudinally through middle school, to age 13. This extension
also will trace relations between attitudes and achievement in science through
middle school: a period of particularly dramatic developmental change in this
domain. Together, these investigations enhance knowledge of the roots of
scientific literacy and interests and inform theoretical and practical
discussions regarding when and in what ways to expose young children to science.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.