* 2300233
* Developing an Early Mathematics Intervention for Children with Disabilities in the Home Learning Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Derek Kosty, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,310,810.00

The home mathematics environment (HME) includes characteristics of the family
and home setting that contribute to children developing mathematical
understanding and skills. Intervention studies indicate that activities
conducted in the HME are critical to the development of early mathematics skills
and can support children as they transition from informal to formal school
settings, such as from preschool to kindergarten. Although many HME
interventions have demonstrated significant and positive effects on children’s
mathematics outcomes, researchers have overwhelmingly focused on typically
developing children, often excluding students with disabilities. This is
problematic because children with disabilities often enter school with lower
mathematics skills compared to their typically developing peers and require
supplemental support in mathematics. The purpose of this project is to develop a
HME intervention for preschool-aged children with developmental delays (DD). The
project includes caregivers of children with DD as collaborators in the
iterative design process to develop feasible and sustainable HME intervention
activities.

The two aims of the project are to: (1) iteratively develop a HME intervention
targeting whole number concepts; and (2) conduct a small-scale pilot study of
the HME intervention to establish the initial promise of the HME intervention in
improving children’s mathematics achievement. To accomplish these goals the team
will use an iterative design and development process, collect multiple sources
of quantitative and qualitative data, and conduct a small pilot study with 80
caregiver-child dyads. Research questions will investigate the effect of the HME
intervention on several outcomes: child numeracy and mathematics vocabulary,
caregiver mathematics beliefs, caregiver-reported frequency of mathematics
activities, caregiver-child mathematics talk, social validity, and fidelity of
implementation. The project addresses the need for research-based HME
interventions for young children with disabilities. The HME intervention is
designed to be supplemental to and build upon the math instruction that children
receive as part of their preschool curriculum.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.