* 2300405
* Research Initiation Award: A GNN+BiMCLSTM Based Framework to Model, Predict, and Traceback Malware Strains
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Uma Kannan, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 298,652.00

HBCU-UP’s Research Initiation Awards provide support for STEM faculty to pursue
research activities to further their research capabilities and effectiveness and
help enhance research and teaching at HBCUs. This project at Alabama State
University will conduct research aimed at developing new integrated artificial
intelligence (AI)-based models to automatically detect web application logic
vulnerabilities and to protect cyberspace from ever-evolving evasive malware-
based cyberattacks. Cyberspace is now a foundation of our nation's economy and
vital to our national security. The threat posed by cyberattacks is growing and
this this initiative represents a new research area (AI-based cybersecurity) at
the institution, an HBCU with more than 92% underrepresented minority
undergraduates in STEM. This project will improve teaching and learning through
the development of innovative methods for incorporating cybersecurity and secure
software development methodologies into teaching and undergraduate research
projects across multiple STEM disciplines, including but not limited to Computer
Science, Mathematics, Biology, and Biomedical Engineering, thus having a broader
impact on the STEM majors, their professional development, and retention. This
project will expand the nation's cyber security workforce, with a focus on
engagement of students from minoritized groups.

Cybercriminals utilize polymorphic malware to avoid antivirus protection by
changing the binary code or script. They use trojanized apps, tools, and
services to spread highly elusive malware. Evasive malware requires an
efficient, resilient, and scalable malware detection mechanism. Modern data
processing and malware defense solutions are needed. The goal of the proposed
research is to develop an integrated AI-based model to defend against present
and future evasive malware attacks. The specific aims of this project are to: 1)
elucidate the factors that influence the security and vulnerabilities, 2)
develop a new AI-based model for the automatic discovery of malwares through
static analysis, 3) develop a new black-box AI-based model for the automatic
discovery of malwares strains through dynamic analysis, 4) develop a
cybersecurity testbed for training and evaluating cybersecurity operations, 5)
providing cybersecurity datasets to researchers, 6) train HBCU undergraduate
students in cybersecurity through undergraduate research projects, and 7)
improve public cybersecurity awareness through community workshops and outreach
events. The project goal will be achieved through a two-stage (static and
dynamic analysis) strategy that combines the following AI techniques: graphical
neural networks (GNN), fuzzy/similarity hashing (SSDEEP), and bidirectional
Mass-Conserving Long Short-Term Memory (biMC-LSTM) deep-learning network. This
project's intellectual contribution will consist of 1) two novel AI-based black-
box models designed to combat malware evasion tactics, and 2) a revolutionary
deep-learning neural network model called bidirectional MC-LSTM, which will help
cybersecurity experts predict cyber occurrences and conduct digital forensics on
past events, 3) a method for extracting software program behavior from
unstructured event records using a graphical deep neural network (GNN). This
will assist researchers in identifying similarities between malware families and
preventing recurrence of similar events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.