* 2300667
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Mentor Teachers' Practices through Collaborative Pedagogical Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Janine Remillard, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2027
* USD 414,018.00

There is growing momentum to support teachers to engage in responsive
mathematics teaching, which is critical to realizing more equitable instruction.
In this approach, teachers recognize and attend to the diversity and substance
of all students’ ideas and leverage those ideas in instruction. Yet, learning to
engage in responsive mathematics teaching is challenging as this work requires
interpreting classroom activity in-the-moment and making decisions that are well
reasoned and intentional. This decision-making process, known as pedagogical
reasoning, is often invisible to observers, making it hard for novices to learn.
Teacher education programs typically provide novice teachers with opportunities
to work in classrooms, alongside seasoned professionals (mentor teachers),
however, the activity of pedagogical reasoning is rarely a focus of such
mentoring. Given the importance of mentor teachers for novice teachers’
development of instructional practices and the amount of time novices spend in
mentored classroom placements, the project researchers view the mentor-novice
teacher relationship as a critical site for intervention. This project leverages
the role of mentor teachers to support novices’ development of pedagogical
reasoning and increase the likelihood that they will be prepared to engage in
responsive mathematics teaching. Mentor teachers in three differently structured
teacher education programs will receive professional development aimed at making
their pedagogical reasoning visible and supporting them in engaging
collaboratively with novices in this type of teacher thinking. The researchers
refer to this type of mentoring as collaborative pedagogical reasoning (Co-PR).
They will study mentor teachers’ development of Co-PR and its relationship to
responsive teaching. They will also consider how different program structures
and characteristics influence the development of Co-PR. Findings will produce
usable practices for developing teachers’ mentoring strategies across different
teacher education programs, which will subsequently support mentor and novice
teachers’ learning of responsive mathematics teaching.

This project aims to enhance the quality of elementary mathematics teaching by
supporting mentor teachers to better prepare the next generation of novice
teachers to engage in responsive mathematics teaching. This design-based
intervention study is based on several hypotheses about how mentor teachers
might play a stronger role in supporting novices to develop these practices in
K-8 classrooms. Specifically, the researchers hypothesize that if mentor
teachers make their pedagogical reasoning visible to novices through engagement
in collaborative pedagogical reasoning (Co-PR), then novice teachers will learn
about the invisible decision-making that skilled teachers engage in as they
carry out responsive mathematics teaching. Further, they hypothesize that mentor
teachers can be supported to engage in Co-PR through the design of learning
opportunities that afford joint inquiry with others and are mediated with shared
tools, designed to guide both disciplinary and equitable aspects of responsive
teaching. Using an inquiry group professional development structure at three
strategic sites, the researchers aim to build mentoring tools and structured
opportunities that support mentor teachers to make visible the layers of their
decision making and to facilitate Co-PR with novices before, during, and after
teaching. The project team will study the development of mentor and novice
teachers’ Co-PR, exploring growth in their pedagogical reasoning and factors
that contribute to this development. They will also investigate how the
enactment of Co-PR differs across teacher education types and programs. Findings
will contribute to scholarly insights about mentor and novice teacher
development and will generate a set of mentoring tools useful to the fields of
mathematics education and teacher education.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.