* 2300444
* Assessing the Efficacy and Implementation of a Technology-based Mathematics Intervention for Middle School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Haiwen Wang, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,666,600.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT

Middle school is a critical juncture for mathematics learning and a point where
many U.S. students get left behind and turn away from mathematics. This has a
lasting effect, as these students enter high school unprepared for the college
preparatory courses that would set them up for more advanced academic and career
opportunities. This project will investigate the potential of a novel approach
to mathematics intervention that leverages the affordances of technology and
evidence-based pedagogy to improve mathematics learning for middle school
students. The mathematics intervention entitled EMPIRES is a collaborative
activity set in Ancient Mesopotamia that offers a multifaceted approach in which
(1) rich, narrative math problems increase conceptual comprehension; (2)
animated representations of mathematics concepts support mathematical
understanding; (3) multiplayer collaboration leads to peer instruction and
modeling; (4) simulations offer exciting challenges that increase mathematics
resiliency; and (5) a bridge curriculum aids transfer of learning to multiple
contexts, including traditional standardized tests. This project will contribute
to the research base on middle school math interventions; the application of
technology to mathematics education more broadly; and the potential of
educational technologies to support mathematics motivation, resiliency, and
achievement for students, especially English learners. EMPIRES augments
teachers’ ability to facilitate learning for a range of levels and provides
timely feedback, allowing mathematics intervention teachers from a range of
backgrounds to provide higher-quality learning experiences. This model could
help English learners and other student groups underrepresented in STEM to stay
motivated, persist, and pass the gateway of algebra into STEM career pathways.

The core research design will employ a one-year cluster randomized controlled
trial. Schools will be randomly assigned to implement EMPIRES in grade 7
mathematics intervention classes during the 2024/25 school year or continue with
business as usual. The primary purpose of the study is to determine whether
EMPIRES improves mathematics achievement on average, whether student-level
characteristics (e.g. English learner status) moderate the effect of EMPIRES,
and whether student motivation, mathematics resiliency, and peer teaching
mediate the effects of EMPIRES. Student scores from the state mathematics
assessment serve as the primary outcome measure. Other key measures include (1)
electronic usage records automatically collected by the EMPIRES platform; (2)
validated student survey scales measuring motivation, mathematics resiliency,
and peer teaching mediators; and (3) teacher implementation interviews and
surveys. Researchers will estimate the main effect of EMPIRES using hierarchical
linear modeling, controlling for prior achievement and other covariates.
Moderator analyses will also employ hierarchical linear modeling to examine
whether the impact of EMPIRES varies for students across policy-relevant
subgroups, including English learners. Structural equation modeling will be used
to assess whether student motivation, mathematics resiliency, and peer teaching
mediate the effects of EMPIRES on student learning. Researchers will also
examine the relationship between teacher and student implementation fidelity and
student achievement. Findings from this study will help researchers and
educators better understand design characteristics of effective games and best
practices for implementing them in educational settings, particularly in
settings with higher percentages of English learners.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.