* 2300828
* Collaborative Research: CueLearn: Enhancing Social Problem Solving through Intelligent Support
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Sam Rhodes, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2027
* USD 194,616.00

The goal of this project is to develop CueLearn, an educational web application
that will foster effective peer collaborations to improve mathematical problem
solving amongst middle school students. Research suggests that learning is often
better and longer lasting when students engage in well-scaffolded, shared, and
collaborative learning experiences. However, educational technologies do not
often leverage this research, with the focus most often being on the individual
rather than a group. The CueLearn project will thus develop, test, and implement
two intelligent strategies to improve students' collaborative problem solving:
1) facilitating effective student collaborations through the creation of
effective peer groups within CueLearn, and 2) using real-time supports to
increase student engagement and help students persist productively. The
project's key aim is to design a system that will easily facilitate quality peer
collaboration for all students, while also supporting teachers in their use of
technology for collaborative work.

The project focuses on social learning experiences by automatically assigning
students to work with optimized peer groups. Multiple grouping strategies will
be tested through a series of observational studies and experiments to identify
which grouping strategy works best. For example, students may be grouped based
on their intended problem-solving strategy, so that students will be exposed to
diverse approaches from peers who are using different strategies. However,
intelligent student grouping methods may not be effective for learning by
themselves, unless students are also provided with additional support during
problem solving. Machine learning approaches will therefore be used to monitor
engagement and detect unproductive forms of persistence in real-time in order to
provide in-the-moment support as needed. Critically, these supports will be co-
designed with students. Automated ideal grouping combined with just-in-time
supports are hypothesized to improve students' problem solving performance and
mathematical beliefs. Through all of these design innovations, the project aims
to provide a new and effective educational technology for students and teachers.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.