* 2300766
* Elementary Teacher Professional Learning of Equitable Engineering Pedagogies for Multilingual Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mary McVee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 06/30/2026
* USD 374,969.00

The need to teach engineering in U.S. elementary schools has been elevated due a
heightened focus on STEM and standards reforms such as the Next Generation
Science Standards. Yet, most elementary teachers have little preparation in
teaching engineering. Additionally, elementary teachers increasingly provide
instruction for students who are still learning English as an additional
language. However, teachers receive uneven preparation related to instruction
for multilingual learners. This project addresses these critical needs through
development of a standards-aligned professional learning model for elementary
teachers of multilingual learners. This interdisciplinary approach is innovative
in its effort to provide teachers with sustained time to reflect on what they
believe about language, their teaching of linguistically and racially
minoritized students, and their interactions with multilingual students around
engineering content. Using a participatory and collaborative approach, experts
in literacy, language, and engineering will work with elementary teachers to
develop strategies for how teachers can view students’ multilingualism as an
asset to engineering. This asset-based approach has wider implications as
teachers’ shifting language beliefs may result in the creation of learning
environments that provide linguistically minoritized students with expanded
opportunities for identifying with engineering as a discipline or tool for
understanding other STEM subjects.

This three-year Exploratory Project will engage elementary teachers (n = 18) in
a sustained professional learning community to learn about engineering content
and pedagogy and explore the intersections of race and language surrounding
engineering education. By noticing how languages are positioned in their
classroom, teachers will be able to develop strategies for re-positioning the
linguistic, cultural, and representational contributions of multilingual
students as core intellectual resources within their classrooms. Using design-
based research with an emphasis on qualitative data generation and analysis
through positioning and language ideologies, this study will explore: 1) whether
and how teachers’ language ideologies shifted in relation to specific elements
of the professional learning experience, 2) how teachers’ language ideologies
mapped onto their engineering pedagogies, and 3) how these pedagogies offered
(or failed to offer) multilingual students with discursive resources for
identifying with engineering. Triangulated analyses of results from validated
instruments, as well as observational, interview, and reflective video data,
will result in robust research regarding elements of professional learning
experiences that contribute to linguistically inclusive engineering pedagogies.
This project will result in a standards-aligned professional learning model for
teachers of multilingual learners, as well as multimedia curricular materials
for educators and guides for providers of teacher professional development. The
project has potential to contribute to increased quality of teaching and
increased time on teaching of engineering. It will also contribute to positive
stances toward students’ linguistic and racial backgrounds since the
professional learning model, curricular materials, and strategies that it will
create will be shared with other elementary teachers who are striving to teach
science and engineering to students who are linguistically and racially diverse.
The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.