* 2300447
* Excellence in Research- Dimeric Bis-Naphthoquinone Formation via a Green and Straightforward Approach Mechanistic and Adaptability Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kevin Riley, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2026
* USD 453,612.00

In this Excellence in Research project, Jayalakshmi Sridhar and Kevin Riley of
the Department of Chemistry at Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA) explore the
versatility of a newly discovered synthetic method for creation of dimeric
quinone molecules with interesting properties. The goal of this research is to
standardize the straightforward method for creation of designed dimeric
quinones, which have strong potential in efficient energy storage systems (e.g.
redox flow batteries), as coloring agents (dyes) and in pharmaceutical
applications (e.g. therapeutics for diseases such as cancer and pathogenic
infections). The project lies at the interface of organic, computational,
materials and medicinal chemistry. Therefore, the project is well suited to
train undergraduate students in multiple areas of chemistry. The collaborative
research groups are well experienced in training undergraduate minority students
in organic synthetic techniques and computational chemistry tools. The research
groups are well positioned to provide the highest level of research training for
students underrepresented in science and ensure their success in graduate
schools. The students receive training in scientific explorations in chemistry
labs, communication of results in oral and written formats at national
conferences and enhancement of soft skills essential for succeeding in a
scientific career.

Homo- and heterodimeric quinones belong to an important class of molecules that
have multiple applications in the areas of energy storage, pharmaceuticals and
dyes. Dimeric quinones are capable of chelating to multiple metal cations with
enhanced performance in redox flow batteries. These extended conjugated systems
display pH-based color spectra. The quinone core moiety, found in several
biologically active natural products, is amenable to modifications for targeting
specific biomolecules. The newly identified synthetic method begins with Diels-
Alder products undergoing redox reactions and Michael addition to form dimeric
quinones. This reaction will be explored for its use in providing a predictable
and easily adaptable way to create a wide array of homo- and hetero-bisquinone
dimers. In this project, the following aspects of the new synthetic method are
targeted for study. (1) The mechanism of the reaction will be studied using
computational and synthetic methods with the goal of developing synthetic
protocols into designed quinone dimers with specific structural features. (2)
With the mechanistic insight gained, the team will explore the synthesis of
homodimers with varied structural features including heterocyclic scaffolds; and
(3) Similarly, the collaborative Sridhar/Riley team will examine the versatility
of the reaction for the synthesis of heterodimers that are designed for specific
end uses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.