* 2300890
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Elucidating Design Rules for non-NRPS Incorporation of Amino Acids on Polyketide Scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2027
* Ashley McDonald, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2027
* USD 490,370.00

More bacteria have become resistant to current antibiotics. Natural compounds
with antibiotic properties are assembled in a modular fashion inside cells. The
modular nature allows for the design of hybrid pathways to produce non-natural
molecules. The mechanisms of individual bond-forming reactions in an antibiotic
molecule will be investigated. The intention is to develop a degree of insight
that would enable the shuffling of building blocks to produce novel antibiotics.
The concept is akin to molecular building blocks. In addition, this work will
provide a foundation for training undergraduate students in conducting
biotechnological research and communicating science to their community.

The project will attempt to uncover novel enzymatic mechanisms that facilitate
production of unique natural products. Specifically, this work will elucidate
mechanistic underpinnings of amino acid incorporation on polyketide scaffolds.
The project focuses on the model molecule TLN-05220, which is an
Echinosporamicin-type antibiotic with antibacterial activity against several
strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin-resistant
Enterococci (VRE), and cytotoxic activities against several human tumor cell
lines. Individual gene functions in TLN-05220 biosynthesis will be identified
using gene knockouts in the wild-type producing organism. Potential substrate
binding sites and catalytic residues of amino acid-incorporating enzymes will be
identified using homology modeling. Expression and characterization of
individual enzymes will elucidate mechanism(s) of amino acid incorporation into
natural product structures. The minimally necessary genes to produce TLN-05220
will be cloned and expressed in a heterologous host.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.