* 2300008
* Grow with Rhodes: Expanding Awareness of Agriculture Technology Careers and Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* James Uphaus, James A. Rhodes State College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2026
* USD 526,765.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by introducing modern
agriculture to STEM high school students, especially females, and their
teachers, as a viable STEM career choice in northwest Ohio. STEM-field sectors,
such as computer science and traditional engineering disciplines, are more
familiar to high school students as a career choice, but agriculture technology
is typically only considered by a small population of traditional farm youth. In
addition to educating STEM/Agriculture students, their teachers and counselors,
who are influential in students' education and career choices, should be
educated about this viable industry sector so they can demonstrate and speak
about it to students. Modern agriculture equipment includes sophisticated
robotics, sensors, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and data
manipulation software designed to collect field data to increase productivity,
raise profitability, and sustain the environment. This equipment is missing a
tech-savvy workforce of technicians needed to operate, compile field data, and
make management decisions. This project is designed to create career-specific Ag
Tech career pathway materials and provide hands-on experiences in the field and
in the classroom for both STEM high school students and their teachers with the
goal of increasing awareness of modern agriculture as a viable career option,
thus meriting serious consideration as a career by STEM students.

STEM/Agriculture teachers will learn about the industry, careers, and advanced
technology. Participants will use the technology to solve real-world nutrient
management problems in the Grow with Rhodes Institute, allowing direct
connections to be made between STEM principles and agriculture. The Institute
will encourage STEM teachers to create their own teaching modules based on the
Institute’s problem/solution sets and to teach it in their own high-school
classrooms. The project will also foster interest in agriculture careers by
bringing the technology to the high schools to assist STEM teachers in teaching
their Institute module to their students, thus allowing students to use
technology and data to connect STEM discipline concepts to agriculture. A Young
Women in Agriculture mentoring program is planned to encourage STEM young women
to choose agriculture as a career. These activities will serve as a model for
other institutions. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.