* 2300335
* Preparing Advanced Manufacturing Technicians for Industry 4.0 in Rural Western Kentucky
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tim Driver, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 320,377.00

Smart Manufacturing, often described as Industry 4.0, is a growing field which
refers to next-generation integration of manufacturing and automation through
the use of digitally-connected systems and processes. Over the past three years,
western Kentucky manufacturers have rapidly accelerated the adoption of these
latest-generation technologies in response to challenges imposed by the COVID-19
pandemic. This has resulted in the need for industrial technicians with
significantly higher skill levels in the installation, maintenance, and repair
of interconnected manufacturing systems and equipment. This is an important
issue in rural western Kentucky where manufacturing jobs can provide a higher
income than many other occupations. Rural areas compete with urban areas for
industrial employers and cannot afford to risk a manufacturer leaving due to the
lack of a skilled technical workforce. This three-year project at West Kentucky
Community and Technical College (WKCTC) seeks to update its Advanced
Manufacturing curriculum to meet the needs of area manufacturers. The project
will utilize an advisory team which includes industry partners to align
curriculum with industry need. Students will benefit from revised training
relevant to the Advanced Manufacturing environment and earn nationally-
recognized, stackable industry certifications in 24 months or less. Faculty
associated with the project will benefit from professional development with
updated equipment and teaching methods. Because WKCTC has a high population of
rural students who are underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM pathways, this
project has the potential to broaden participation in the STEM workforce and
generate new knowledge on the degree to which revised teaching methods and
stronger industry and K-12 partnerships prepare students for industry
employment.

The overall goal of the project is to better prepare students to enter the STEM
workforce with industry-aligned classwork, while meeting area industry need for
digitally-skilled Advanced Manufacturing technicians. The project will update
and enhance technician training courses specific to advanced sensors, robotics,
and artificial intelligence systems. Six principle activities provide a
framework for the project's execution. First is the provision to WKCTC faculty
of training so they are qualified to teach latest-generation Industry 4.0
technology curriculum. Second is updating existing Electrical, Industrial
Maintenance, and Air Conditioning Technology courses to meet industry standards.
Third is to add and embed relevant, nationally recognized industry
certifications into coursework. Fourth is updating student lab equipment to
align with what is being used by regional employers, and fifth is to engage
industry partners in curriculum design and student learning. Sixth, and finally,
is offering annual workshops for high school partners to increase awareness of
programs, training, and career options in Industry 4.0 available to their
students. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields
that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.