* 2300388
* An Automation Robotics Program for Nontraditional Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jeffrey Thorstad, Hennepin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 349,578.00

The Fourth Industrial Revolution, or Industry 4.0, refers to the manufacturing
industry’s use of technologies, such as artificial intelligence and advanced
robotics, that allow machines to communicate with each other and work together
to analyze and diagnose issues with increasingly minimal need for traditional
human intervention. However, there is a growing national need for technicians
who are prepared to work in new ways and with new skills in this modern
technological industrial environment. The goal of this project is to create an
academic program that will provide students with pathways to pursue AAS degrees
while working in the automation industry. The resulting program will be designed
to accommodate the needs of nontraditional and female students. The project will
help to sustain the Nation’s competitiveness in a manufacturing industry that is
becoming increasingly automated and integrated with smart technology.

The goals of the project include developing new courses and stackable
certificate pathways, increasing the availability of Automation Robotics
Engineering Technology (ARET)/Mechatronics education and training by using
mobile training equipment, and increasing outreach and supports including
apprenticeship opportunities. Curriculum modification will be completed in
consultation with industry to ensure the program’s education and training
reflect advances in technology and modern workforce needs. The project’s
evaluation plan will examine the impact apprenticeship participation has on
student retention and completion, addressing a knowledge gap around the outcomes
of community college students’ work-based learning experiences. The project will
advance the knowledge and understanding of the competencies required to prepare
technicians to meet Industry 4.0 standards and the processes necessary to align
curriculum to Industry 4.0 standards. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.