* 2300404
* Developing Concept of Variable Among Students With Mathematics Difficulties in Preparation for Algebra 1
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Amber Wang, RG Research Group
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,085,062.00

Understanding of algebra concepts is necessary for students to gain access to
STEM pathways. However, recent efforts in education have failed to improve
algebra outcomes for many students, especially those with learning disabilities
and persistent difficulties in mathematics. Despite prior instruction and
intervention, many 8th grade students with mathematics difficulties arrive to
algebra coursework without the skills needed to be successful. One of the most
fundamental—and critical—ideas for success in algebra is the concept of an
algebraic variable. Understanding variables is critical for learning algebra and
other mathematics domains such as functions and geometry, both of which are
foundational to algebra coursework. The primary goal of this project is to
develop a supplemental intervention that intentionally develops students'
concept of variable as they learn to (a) interpret and evaluate expressions, (b)
represent real-life mathematical word problems using algebraic notation, and (c)
solve linear equations. A focus on clarifying common misconceptions about
variables will be interwoven throughout the program. Products generated from
this project will provide teachers with much-needed resources that are designed
to prepare struggling students for success in Algebra I.

Development of the intervention will follow an iterative process across three
phases: (1) design and development, (2) a pilot study, and (3) a small-scale
randomized control trial to evaluate evidence of promise. The intervention will
focus instruction on key algebra standards and support students in their
development of the concept of variable via mathematical tasks that align to
these standards. The project is grounded in research from the mathematics
education and mathematics intervention literatures and combines instructional
practices from both disciplines. Project activities include development of
intervention materials, feedback from an advisory panel, teacher feedback
following implementation during an initial feasibility test, a pilot study, and
a randomized controlled trial. Approximately 70 students will be involved in the
small-scale randomized controlled trial and impacts will be assessed using an
intent-to-treat analysis with a two-level model for a partially nested design.
The impacts and social validity of the intervention will be assessed through
analyses of student performance and teacher and student surveys.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.