* 2300057
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic microbial consortia for organismal resilience and reproducible ecosystem services in changing environments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Megan Frederickson, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 06/30/2026
* USD 324,255.00

As our planet's climate continues to change, finding new approaches to alleviate
its impact is crucial. Microbiomes, which consist of smaller organisms making a
living on larger species, can affect how their hosts respond to environmental
change. This project evaluates whether and how we can assemble synthetic
microbiomes to help host species cope with the impacts of environmental change.
Due to the enormous diversity of microbial communities, there are numerous ways
to engineer synthetic microbiomes, making it difficult to identify the
principles that underpin their impacts on host species. The researchers will
employ high-throughput techniques to simultaneously evaluate the impacts of
different synthetic communities and environmental conditions on plant hosts. The
results will expand our understanding of how environmental change alters the
impacts of microbes on hosts and how engineered synthetic microbial communities
may help hosts adapt to a changing climate. The researchers will actively mentor
students from middle school to undergraduate level, create a new Course-Based
Undergraduate Research Experience Lab course in the cutting-edge field of
synthetic microbiology, and design a backyard research program for under-served
middle and high school students to provide training to attract their interest to
possible careers in STEM.

This study will explore the intersection of different research areas to study
the interactions between hosts and microbes, including symbiosis, evolutionary
biology, and ecosystem functioning. It will assess how elevated temperatures
affect three crucial components of host-microbe interactions: (1) microbe-
microbe interactions and their impact on host fitness, (2) functional redundancy
and its effect on biodiversity and ecosystem functions, and (3) evolvability
during microbiome breeding. To achieve this goal, the researchers will collect
duckweed, a widespread aquatic plant, across a temperature gradient, acquire
bacteria from duckweeds and other sources, and use these collections in large
multifactorial experiments on an automated, high-throughput platform. The
collections, results, and experimental methods will contribute to the
development of microbial consortia that can enhance organismal and ecosystem
resilience in the Anthropocene.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.