* 2300888
* Increasing Accessibility to Advanced Manufacturing Programs Using Competency-Based Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* John Levy, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 616,520.00

Regional industry in northwestern Arkansas has a growing demand for technicians
who have the necessary technical skills to implement and maintain advanced
manufacturing technologies. Traditional on campus technician programs can create
barriers for potential students who have time constraints due to commuting in a
rural environment, jobs, or family obligations. New training strategies are
needed to increase accessibility to technical education programs for students
who need greater flexibility in their schedules and current workers who need
upskilling. This project will implement competency-based education for a core
set of courses in electronics and controls that will allow students to complete
a certificate program at their own pace. Instructional materials, competency
assessments, and simulation tools will be available for students online to
address the need for greater accessibility and flexibility. Competency-based
assessments will provide meaningful feedback allowing students to practice,
refine their techniques, and improve their performance until they achieve the
necessary competency for a module in a course. Simulation tools will help
students understand how to work with technologies without requiring a physical
lab space. The results of this project will be made available to technical
education programs at other community colleges.

The overall goal of this project is to increase the number of skilled
technicians to address the need of regional manufacturers. Four objectives will
guide the execution of this project. First is to increase program accessibility
and improve alignment with employer needs by implementing competency-based
modularized hybrid course modules. Second is to expand the role of the current
foundational Business and Industry Leadership Team to guide the development of
the modules. Third is to provide professional development for faculty to develop
and implement modules in their courses. Fourth, and finally, is to recruit and
retain students for the certificate program with an emphasis on broadening
participation. The project will use the Backward Design Process to develop
competency-based modularized hybrid content for each technical course in the
Electronics Technology program. Hybrid delivery options include online, on or
off campus, simulations including virtual reality, and physical simulations.
Remote delivery and open industrial labs will be available during times that are
convenient for industry partners and employees. Hands-on skills assessment will
be conducted in an open industrial lab environment on campus or at industry
sites. The impact of the competency-based modules on student enrollment,
engagement and retention will be assessed using institutional data and student
surveys. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.