* 2300560
* Collaborative Research: Research Infrastructure: CFS (Track III) Cosmogenic Nuclides in Earth Science Research: Allied facilities for sample preparation, analysis, and training
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 306,147.00

Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) is a technique used to measure exceedingly
rare materials produced as cosmic rays interact with rocks, soil, and Earth’s
atmosphere. Using these data, scientists can determine the timing of events that
have the potential to impact human endeavors. Some catastrophic changes, like
floods or earthquakes, occur over short time-scales, while others, landscape
erosion and the growth and demise of ice sheets, occur over longer time-scales,
thousands to millions of years. These changes directly impact the welfare of
human populations world-wide. This award renews funding for the Purdue Rare
Isotope Measurement Laboratory (PRIME Lab) and the University of Vermont (UVM)
Community Cosmogenic Facility. These two facilities will collaborate to produce
a national, multi-user facility dedicated to the measurement of cosmogenic
radionuclides using accelerator mass spectrometry. Doing so allows the combined
facility to train students and researchers from dozens of universities within
the US that do not have these capabilities or the funds to create them. At the
University of Vermont, students learn how to perform the physical and chemical
preparation of samples and then participate in the measurement of their samples
on the PRIME Lab AMS. The interaction between students, faculty, and
professional staff at PRIME Lab and University of Vermont facilitates
interaction with geologists, chemists, and physicists, providing a unique
opportunity to expand the educational opportunity beyond the focus of specific
research projects. An essential component of this award is outreach to
underrepresented communities, which will provide students hands-on opportunities
to participate in geologic field work, laboratory instruction, and exposure to
nuclear physics measurement techniques.

The collaborative facility goals are to provide allied sample preparation,
chemical extraction, and AMS measurements of cosmogenic and other long-lived
radionuclides to the geoscience community. The first goal of this proposal is
the continuance of this sample preparation and measurement capability for the
NSF and geoscience community. PRIME Lab has provided AMS measurements for the
geoscience community since the early 1990’s. PRIME Lab provides measurements of
10Be, 14C, 26Al, 36Cl, and 129I in terrestrial geologic samples. PRIME Lab
routinely measures thousands of unknowns annually for researchers, including
those in the NSF community, but the laboratory can neither keep pace with demand
and adequately train enough “next-generation” cosmogenic nuclides researchers.
Accordingly, a significant goal of this award is the establishment of additional
sample preparation facilities for the geoscience community. The combination of
the AMS measurement capabilities at PRIME Lab with the sample preparation
facilities at UVM has value beyond just the combination of two facilities.
Combining the groups enables us to explore techniques that allow the facility to
streamline some of the processes, identify potential problems in the application
of cosmogenic nuclides, allow for unique opportunities to train the next
generation of cosmogenic nuclide researchers, and develop next-generation
measurement techniques and applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.