* 2300938
* Strengthening Building &amp; Construction Technician Training with Alternative Energy Sources to Advance Sustainability (B/C Alt-Energy Tech)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* laila kadi, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2026
* USD 616,435.00

This Advanced Technological Education Program Track 2 project aims to serve the
national interest by improving curricula and educational materials in building
and construction science technician education for the Northeast Florida region.
By 2050, according to environmental scientists’ predictions, the United States
will be entirely dependent on renewable energy. This includes going green in the
building and construction science industry. Carrying out this transition of the
nation’s energy infrastructure will require a robust construction technician
workforce that integrates building science and energy-efficiency knowledge into
their standard practice. Florida State College at Jacksonville’s project,
Strengthening Building and Construction Technician Training with Alternative
Energy Sources to Advance Sustainability, supports a significant effort to
increase our capacity to educate students and regional technicians.

The project goals are to: 1) create an Alternative Energies track, as part of
Associate of Science degree programs that will prepare students to earn multiple
industry-recognized credentials in alternative energies use in building and
construction, 2) establish an Alternative Energies and Materials Laboratory for
students to practice installation and performance analysis techniques, 3) design
and build a low-cost classroom alternative energy and thermal conductivity
trainer for teachers to use in secondary courses, and 4) create a career
pipeline for K-12 populations, including underrepresented students, and
professional development activities for secondary school teachers. Fifty (50)
college students, 10 incumbent workers, 5 postsecondary faculty members, 20 high
school teachers participating in faculty workshops and 40 high school students
will gain knowledge and skills. Enrollment of underrepresented populations will
increase by at least five percent through using diversity best practices.
Dissemination will take place at regional and national levels. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.