* 2300476
* ERI: Enhanced Robustness for Approximate Quantum Computing Hardware and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Sonia Lopez Alarcon, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,637.00

Some computational tasks in fields such as pharmacological development,
healthcare, finances, and general science, take too long on classical computers
to be practical or even usable. Quantum Computing can potentially accelerate
these to just a few minutes or even seconds thanks to the strange properties of
quantum mechanics. However, Quantum Computing is still in its infancy, and
facing hurdles such as the very low number of quantum bits (or qubits) and the
high levels of noise. This project proposes the use of Machine Learning (ML)
techniques to extract useful information out of the noisy outputs of quantum
computers. By extracting the key features of the noise that disturbs the output,
ML algorithms can separate the useful information from the noise. This has two
advantages that will be the goals of this project. On one hand, it will enable
the use quantum computers despite their noisy nature. On the other, it will
allow for the simplification of the quantum applications through approximations,
requiring less hardware resources and computational steps. In this way, the
project tackles the two problems mentioned above -low number of qubits and high
noise levels- to make quantum computing acceleration a reality.

Quantum computing holds great potential as an accelerator of computational
problems with significant societal impact. Some of these problems are in the
fields of healthcare and drug development, finances or cybersecurity to mention
a few. Although great progress has been made in recent years to reach practical
quantum computation, its true potential cannot be achieved under its current
limited number of qubits and high error rates. This work will apply Machine
Learning and Statistical Signal Processing concepts to enhance the robustness of
quantum computing applications. Robust quantum systems will enable the
application of approximate computing approaches to simplify the hardware and
software demands of quantum circuits design, pre-processing and simulation.
Quantum circuits rely on multiple runs (shots) to find the solution in the final
measured state, and produce their outcome in the form of a probability
distribution. This unique feature of quantum computers can be turned into a
strength. This research is driven by the following research hypothesis: that
although approximate quantum computing will alter the measured probability
distribution, it will not compromise its correctness if the changes are well
understood and applied. The team will explore approximate circuits and software-
level approximation to answer the following questions: (i) to what extent
alterations to the probability distribution of the measured outcome can be
tolerated, and still reach the right outcome in quantum processing; (ii) to what
extent quantum approximate computing is able to reduce the quantum hardware
requirements and classical pre-processing demands; (iii) in which way
approximation techniques affect the probability distribution of the outcome.
Therefore, the project has two objectives: The first objective is to enhance the
robustness of quantum systems by applying Machine Learning to identify the
correct solutions in the system’s outcome. Taking advantage of the enhanced
robustness, the second objective is to identify quantum computations that can be
approximated, making more efficient use of hardware resources, while still
resulting in correct solutions. The final goal of this research it to contribute
to the building of robust and hardware efficient quantum acceleration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.