* 2300602
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Children's Learning About Biological Variability by Leveraging Simple Card Games
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Karl Rosengren, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2027
* USD 276,376.00

Biodiversity is fundamental to understanding the way biologists study nature.
There is much more variability within species than people recognize, and it is
this variability that fuels development and change of species in contexts of
survival and reproduction. It is important that young children understand this
foundational idea. This project will test an innovative approach to promoting
comparisons relevant to understanding biological variability. This approach
involves modifying two popular games, War and Uno, by incorporating cards that
depict organisms at different stages of development (e.g., insect egg, larva,
pupa, and adult). In playing these games, players engage in comparisons relevant
to understanding biodiversity, such as comparing different life stages for a
single species, or comparing similar stages for different species. The research
investigates caregiver-child interactions and comparisons during game play and
examines how game play affects children's learning about biological variability.
The research involves lab-based studies with 2nd- and 5th-grade children playing
LifeCycles (modified War) and CyClo (modified Uno) and is conducting parallel
studies in museums, in order to examine caregiver-child interaction and learning
in both controlled and authentic settings. The team will design and pilot a
museum exhibit prototype that incorporates the games and the lessons learned
through the research. The results will build understanding about how
foundational knowledge about diversity in biology can help young students be
ready for subsequent biology education. In the elementary grades, children are
expected to learn about biodiversity, including within-species variability.
Understanding biodiversity involves relational reasoning: discerning relevant
relationships within and among biological kinds. These relationships are salient
when children compare examples within or between biological categories. However,
comparison is cognitively demanding, and educational materials often lack
adequate support for comparison. This project tests an innovative approach to
promoting relational reasoning by incorporating cards in modified versions of
Uno and War that depict organisms at different stages of development (e.g.,
insect egg, larva, pupa, and adult). This research is conducting lab-based
studies with 2nd- and 5th-grade children playing these two card games (n=150)
and is testing the effects of systematically varying the number and similarity
of the exemplars in the games. The research also is testing the effectiveness of
providing caregivers with support for scaffolding children's relational
thinking. Parallel studies in museums are examining caregiver-child interaction
in game play in authentic settings. Finally, the team will design and pilot test
a museum exhibit prototype that incorporates the games and the lessons learned
through the research.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.