* 2300824
* Improving Students’ Advanced Manufacturing Skills with Mastery Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kenneth Welborn, Piedmont Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 520,281.00

Mastery learning provides students with an opportunity to learn new skills at
their own pace. Given sufficient time and instructional support, students can
demonstrate a high level of achievement for a set of skills. Industry demand for
skilled technicians in advanced manufacturing continues to grow as manufacturers
adopt new technologies to improve productivity and product quality. This project
will implement mastery learning in a core set of courses to address industry’s
need for advanced manufacturing technicians who have the necessary foundational
skills and hands-on experience to be successful in the technician workforce. A
dual enrollment program based on mastery learning for regional high school
students will provide a pathway for students into the advanced manufacturing
program. The project team will assess the impact of mastery learning on student
learning outcomes and the effectiveness of recruiting activities for high school
students. Project results will be disseminated regionally through the state’s
community college system to instructors in other manufacturing programs. Lessons
learned from implementing mastery learning will be presented at national
conferences focused on technical education.

Regional manufacturers recently collaborated on identifying foundational skills
for students in an existing advanced manufacturing program at Piedmont Virginia
Community College. The goals of this project are to: 1) improve student learning
outcomes for foundational skills in advanced manufacturing; 2) increase the
number of graduates from the advanced manufacturing program; and 3) help
students understand the workplace environment at regional manufacturers. Mastery
learning will be implemented in six core courses using a flipped classroom
approach with hands-on learning for advanced manufacturing technologies. Courses
will be structured as a sequence of modules that students complete at their own
pace. Each module builds on the content of previous modules while introducing
more advanced concepts. Students must achieve the learning objectives for a
module before moving to the next module. This project will provide professional
development for high school teachers to implement the modules in four dual
enrollment courses. The project team will partner with existing clubs,
organizations, and programs to develop recruiting activities that will focus on
broadening participation in the advanced manufacturing program. Students will
have opportunities to engage with regional industry through structured
activities such as site visits and job shadowing so that students can learn
about workplace practices. Project results will provide insights for the
technical education community on the effectiveness of mastery learning in
advanced manufacturing programs. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.