* 2300984
* Understanding and Optimizing Ride-Sourcing Drivers' Learning Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Song Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 495,638.00

This project will generate behavioral insights and algorithmic tools for ride-
sourcing drivers to enable effective driver organization and eventual market
efficiency and enhanced societal welfare. It will work with drivers to obtain
location and operational data and generate optimized and coordinated guidance on
tactical and operational decisions to maximize their welfare. Transportation
agencies and local communities could partner with drivers to gain insights into
the market and optimize policies to meet societal goals. The independence of
ride-sourcing drivers comes at the price of social isolation and anxiety. This
project will chart a technology-inspired pathway to better connection and
organization of the diffusive workforce, and increase its cohesion, vitality,
and social contribution. Ride-sourcing drivers are more likely from the lower
income and other vulnerable parts of the population, and the project prototype
serves as an outreach tool to improve their well-being, in addition to being a
test bed for the research program. The PI will incorporate the research results
in her graduate/upper-class undergraduate courses on transportation systems
analysis and economics, where traditionally the supplier side of the
transportation market is not treated in the same depth as the consumer side.

There are three major research objectives: 1) Understand drivers' learning and
choice behaviors using dynamic discrete choice models grounded on
psychologically sound learning theories; 2) Develop model-based and model-free
algorithms to optimize decisions on when to start and end working, where to
search for passengers and whether to accept a ride request, scalable to the
level of driver participation; 3) Generate behaviorally informed driver guidance
synthesizing results from previous two objectives. The project is innovative in
three major aspects. First, it provides an alternative approach to enhancing the
ride-sourcing market by directly working with drivers instead of platforms as
commonly done in the literature and practice. The driver-centered approach is
potentially more socially efficient due to the avoidance of a platform's
tendency for over-supply and fairer due to its collaborative nature. Secondly,
it advances understandings of drivers' learning and choice making dynamics under
uncertainty at various temporal scales: routing and order acceptance at the
minute-to-minute level, and scheduling at the hour-to-hour level. This
integrated approach will fill the knowledge gap of reasons and dynamics behind
the low retention rate of ride-sourcing drivers. Thirdly, it contributes to the
development of high-performance optimization algorithms for ride-sourcing
operations with an emphasis on the scalability to the level of driver
participation and data availability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.