* 2300743
* A Professional Development Model for High School Teachers to Adapt Curricula toward Students' Knowledges and Resources
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Barbara Hug, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2027
* USD 653,723.00

This project brings together education researchers, high school science
teachers, research scientists, and community-based organizations as co-design
teams to modify science curriculum materials to be justice- and community-
oriented. Building on existing partnerships between education researchers and 11
science teachers in two districts in Illinois, project teams will engage in
cycles of curriculum analysis and adaptation over the course of 3 years. These
professional learning cycles will develop pedagogically relevant content
expertise, such as deepened understanding of locally relevant science phenomena,
as well as infrastructure for community-engaged science instruction. This kind
of science instruction provides relevant entry points into science by providing
opportunities for students to address their communities' needs, potentially
encouraging students to pursue careers in science. Each year, 2,250 students
will experience at least one adapted unit, resulting in over 6,500 individual
encounters with such an orientation to science over the lifespan of the project.
Moreover, by working with science departments for 3 years to support adaptations
of the materials they already use, teachers will develop skills for analyzing
and adapting curricula beyond the lifespan of the project, impacting additional
cohorts of students. The project will develop and disseminate frameworks, tools,
and sample adapted units to support similar partnerships across the US.

This study will examine two Illinois districts as comparative cases,
strategically selected because of the contextual variation in the levers and
entry points for teacher professional learning at each site. This intentional
structure enables collection of empirical support for the effectiveness of core
elements of the professional learning co-design program on teacher and student
learning. Measured learning outcomes include: (a) teachers' frequency of use of
NGSS-aligned science pedagogies; (b) development of teachers' critical
consciousness; (c) teachers' self-efficacy for culturally sustaining pedagogies
in science; and (d) students' epistemologies for science and critical science
agency. The research will illuminate variant and invariant elements of the
professional learning model, providing theoretical generalizability informing
how the model could scale in additional contexts. Finally, the study will
examine how the research team builds capacity, both internally and amongst co-
design teams, for enacting the professional learning program objectives. These
analyses will provide principles and recommendations for establishing and
sustaining such co-design teams in other contexts. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.