* 2300341
* SHINE: Prediction of Coronal Mass Ejections and Interplanetary Magnetic Fields Using Advanced Artificial Intelligence Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jason Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 573,200.00

Understanding and predicting violent solar eruptions and their effect on Earth
is a strategic national priority, as it affects the daily life of human beings,
including communication, transportation, power supply systems, national defense,
space travel, and more. Due to increasing spatial and temporal resolution of
solar instrumentation, researchers are facing tremendous challenges in analyzing
massive amounts of space weather data, especially for the operational near real-
time utilization. This interdisciplinary project advanced artificial
intelligence (AI) based tools to forecast geoeffective coronal mass ejections
(CMEs). A graduate student will be supported by this project and undergraduate
students will be mentored. This project is co-funded by the Directorate for
Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the geosciences and by the Space
Weather program.

This project supports fundamental research on advanced AI to forecast CMEs and
their potential to cause geomagnetic storms near 1 AU. The objectives are to (i)
employ AI to predict whether a solar active region will produce a CME and
estimate its transit time, mass, and kinetic energy, and (ii) predict the
orientation of magnetic clouds (MCs) near 1 AU, based on real time solar
observations. Data will be used by graph neural networks (GNNs) and ensemble
learning methods to combine the GNNs with other conventional AI techniques to
predict orientations of MCs. The project utilizes data from NASA, NOAA, and NSF
observatories, including the NSF-funded Global H-alpha Network and Big Bear
Solar Observatory. The study will also utilize existing measurements and model
results, which will be augmented with additional measurements derived from
global coronal field maps as well as non-linear force-free field modeling.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.