* 2300764
* Examining the Effects of Perceptual Cues on Middle School Students’ Online Mathematical Reasoning and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Erin Ottmar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 05/31/2026
* USD 447,578.00

Many students lack the necessary procedural and conceptual knowledge to progress
beyond Algebra I. This limits their ability to pursue STEM interests, training,
and careers. In this promising approach to giving support to learners,
investigators will study the use various perceptual cues embedded in online math
materials for middle school students in an effort to evaluate whether
manipulating the visual perceptual cues in the materials, such as coloring and
spacing, influence learning and performance by directing students’ attention
towards key pieces of information during problem solving. The outcomes will
provide an understanding of whether and how different types of perceptual cues
work in order to provide low-cost, and effective instructional support in online
math learning environments that will better prepare students for algebra and
higher-level mathematics. It is proposed that viewing cues that highlight
relevant mathematical structures will support immediate performance and
learning, but that viewing cues that break the pattern or structure of the
notations, in combination with training, will support greater retention.

The purpose of this research is to implement two experimental studies that
investigate whether and how congruent and incongruent perceptual cues within
math notation influence middle school students’ order-of-operations performance,
learning, and retention, and to understand how perceptual cues create desirable
difficulties, or productive struggles, in mathematics practice. Study 1 will
experimentally manipulate and test the individual effects of perceptual cues in
math notation on middle school students’ performance on order-of-operations
problems. Study 2 will use a 3×3 factorial design to systematically test the
individual and synergistic effects of congruent and incongruent perceptual cues
on students’ order-of-operations performance, learning, and retention.
Additionally, both studies will investigate whether students’ prior knowledge,
math anxiety, and perceptual processing skills moderate the effects of
perceptual cues. This project will produce evidence of the roles of perceptual
cues on students’ math performance, learning, and retention, including
preliminary evidence of any differences in the effects of congruent vs.
incongruent perceptual cues, and whether these variations in perceptual effects
influence learning synergistically.

This project is funded by the EDU Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.