* 2300157
* Collaborative Research: Reconfigurable Intelligent Electromagnetic Surface Using Magnetic Shape Memory Polymers
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ruike Renee Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to dynamically manipulate electromagnetic waves by a flat aperture
will lead to the realization of reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RIS). This
vision includes implementing such reconfigurable surfaces at cell tower base
stations to increase capacity and serve more users for 5G and beyond wireless
systems in both outdoor and indoor settings. Moreover, dynamic and arbitrary
manipulation of electromagnetic wavefronts is an exciting and versatile tool for
next-generation wireless communication, imaging, holography, surveillance, and
sensing applications. Reconfigurability or programmability is a vital feature of
such future agile radio frequency systems. Reconfigurable devices or circuits
(e.g., diodes and variable capacitors) have been used in such smart systems to
control radiation pattern, polarization, or operating frequency. This project
investigates a new approach of using programmable soft materials, for the first
time, on RIS. The new approach offers unique advantages over the state-of-art
technologies. This project is an interdisciplinary and collaborative effort
between the mmWave Antennas and Arrays Laboratory (School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology) and the Soft
Intelligent Materials Laboratory (Department of Mechanical Engineering at
Stanford University).

The research of this project is transformative as it challenges the conventional
methods that have been applied to control RIS and reconfigure those wireless
systems using them. The new approach is based on a viable mechanical
reconfiguration method using shape memory polymers and magnetic actuation. Thus,
unlike other state-of-the-art technologies, semiconductor switching devices such
as diodes are no longer needed inside each unit cell. The advantage of this
global reconfiguration method becomes even more important for large intelligent
surfaces. In contrast to traditional reconfiguration schemes that use
semiconductor devices such as diodes, the new architecture utilizes a unique and
purely mechanical deformation that does not suffer from loss and nonlinearity
associated with traditional semiconductor devices. In this project, researchers
will use magnetically responsive soft materials to drive the multimodal
mechanical shape reconfigurations of the RIS under an external magnetic field
with several tens of millitesla. The project is expected to demonstrate several
advantages of the new approach over existing state-of-art technologies,
including programmability enabled by magnetic excitation, linearity,
scalability, low operating voltage, low loss, and multimodal reconfiguration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.