* 2300985
* Collaborative Research: Smart Dental Implant System for Ambulatory Dental Care
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Albert Kim, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Every year, approximately 5 million implants are placed to replace missing teeth
in the United States. Although the dental implant practice shows initial high
success rates, many studies reported high occurrences of peri-implant diseases,
up to 50% after 10 years of installation. These peri-implant diseases can
potentially lead to patient discomfort, painful and costly surgical replacement
of failed implants, and even the overall oral health breakdown. In particular,
the geriatric population, smokers, or patients with a history of chronic
periodontitis or diabetes were more vulnerable to peri-implant diseases. A
significant body of studies indicates that the root causes of peri-implant
disease are the accumulation of dental plaque at the soft tissue-implant
interface and the subsequent local inflammation. Today, numerous antimicrobial
agents are available, potentially reducing bacterial activity on the dental
crown surface. However, most of these agents may not be appropriate for long-
term use because these may disrupt ecological microbiota and induce drug
resistance over time. In addition, antimicrobial coating surfaces have not been
a great success due to the gradual loss of therapeutic agents into the
surrounding environment. As such, the overall objective of this project is to
build a practical strategy to prevent peri-implant disease by enhancing the
immunity of peripheral soft tissue against bacterial infection. Furthermore, the
project integrates the research with educational venues by mentoring graduate
and undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities and female
students, developing interdisciplinary curricula to bridge the gap between
engineering and biomedical research. The project leverages cross-cutting
innovations spanning engineering and dental medicine to create an ambulatory
dental care platform, a human oral motion-powered Smart Dental Implant (SDI)
system. The SDI system enables in situ, highly effective, and targeted low-level
light therapy in proximity to disease-prone areas. The SDI system represents a
significant opportunity to improve the prevention of peri-implant disease. This
project 1) elucidates the unprecedented potential of human oral biomechanical
energy harvesting as a reliable power source, 2) understands the underlying
mechanism of the photon-cell-microbe interaction in the new mode of near-contact
low-level light therapy, and 3) validates the SDI system using a clinically
relevant animal model of peri-implantitis. The outcome of this award will
provide new perspectives on preventing and controlling the onset of peri-implant
diseases. In addition, a successful demonstration of the energy harvesting
technology will simultaneously extend the range of applicability in any field
requiring near-zero power application. Finally, a similar concept can also be
replicated in other microbially induced inflammations, such as skin wound
healing and sustaining orthopedic implants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.