* 2300779
* Investigation of Clock Transitions in Single and Coupled Molecular Spin Qubits
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 05/31/2026
* USD 527,072.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Mykhailo Shatruk of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Stephen Hill of the Department of Physics and
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University are
investigating approaches to magnetic molecules that can serve as qubits for
quantum information processing. The project focuses on lanthanide complexes with
quantum clock transitions, which can provide protection of the molecular qubits
against external magnetic noise and prolong the duration of quantum entanglement
– a crucial factor for the implementation of quantum technologies. The project
will train junior scientists at the nexus of inorganic chemistry, quantum
physics, and materials science, thus contributing to the education of the future
quantum workforce. The project team plans to organize a nationwide undergraduate
summer school to educate students about magnetic materials. Outreach activities
will also involve high-school students and the general public, and are aimed at
broadening participation by members of groups underrepresented in physical
sciences.

Paramagnetic molecular complexes are promising platforms for the development of
electron spin qubits, due to the high tunability of their synthesis that allows
realization of targeted magnetic parameters. This project will involve the
examination of lanthanide complexes as potential electron spin qubits, with a
focus on quantum clock transitions (QCTs) that emerge from the opening of
quantum tunneling gaps due to mixing of ground doublet states generated by
crystal field splitting. At the QCT, electron spin becomes insensitive to the
surrounding spin bath, leading to a dramatic increase in the quantum coherence
time, thus allowing protection of the entangled state from the magnetic noise.
The first stage of this project involves the investigation of mononuclear
complexes to identify the most promising QCT systems that demonstrate the
desired values of tunneling gap and coherence time. The second stage will be
devoted to connecting such qubits through a photo- or redox-switchable linkers,
to make possible quantum gate operations. Advanced characterization methods,
including a suite of electron paramagnetic resonance techniques, far-infrared
magnetic spectroscopy, inelastic neutron scattering, and theoretical modeling
will be used to investigate the molecular qubits and guide further synthetic
efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.