* 2300317
* The Role of Interstitial Air Layer in Drop Impact on Liquid-infused Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Ying Sun, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 34,403.00

Liquid-infused surfaces have attracted great interest in recent years due to
their super slippery properties upon drop impact and potential benefits in self-
cleaning and anti-fouling applications without much understanding of the
underlying physics. The proposed project seeks to address this issue by
examining the drop impact dynamics on lubricated and liquid-infused surfaces,
with a focus on probing the role of the entrained air layer prior to drop-film
contact and during drop-film interactions. Understanding the air film dynamics
underneath the droplet allows for the better tuning of the liquid film
properties in the lubricating layer, designing more robust nanostructures, and
ultimately enhancing the performance of liquid-infused surfaces for applications
ranging from anti-fouling and anti-icing to phase separation and thermal
management. Since the air film dissipation is a universal phenomenon, the
outcome of this study is also relevant to many industrial processes such as
multilayered inkjet printing of functional materials, spray coating on wetted
surfaces, combustion of fuel in internal combustion engines, pesticide spraying
on waxy plant leaves as well as cooling of microelectronics. The project is
hence relevant to several research frontiers of fluid mechanics in conjunction
with surface sciences, nanomanufacturing, and heat transfer. This project will
also enable new course materials for PI's two recently developed courses on
Interfacial Transport Phenomena and Nanomanufacturing, as well as original
contributions to the Gallery of Fluid Motion at the American Physical Society
Division of Fluids Dynamics Meetings. In addition to training graduate students,
the PI will actively mentor undergraduate researchers and recruit women and
under-represented minority students. The community outreach programs extend to
inner-city K-12 teachers and students through the Philly Materials Day, Philly
Science Festival, and Drexel Graduate Fellows in K-12 and Research for
Undergraduate programs.

The key objective of this study is to advance the fundamental understanding of
drop impact on lubricated and liquid-infused surfaces, with a focus on probing
the role of the entrained air layer between the drop and film both prior to
liquid-liquid contact and during liquid-liquid interaction. In contrast to drop
impact on solid surfaces where even the smallest asperities cause random breakup
of the entraining air film, the air film failure mechanisms on lubricated
surfaces are expected to be much more controllable. Moreover, the post-rupture
liquid-liquid contact may lead to interfacial instability and microbubble
formation whose mechanisms are unclear. By integrating the total internal
reflection microscopy, reflection interference microscopy, and high-speed
imaging, the air film evolution and post-rupture liquid-liquid contact dynamics
will be directly visualized for different impact conditions and
drop/film/substrate properties with nanometer spatial and microsecond temporal
resolution. This unique capability enables direct probing of air film profile at
thickness where the liquid-liquid intermolecular interactions become important.
The knowledge obtained from this project will bridge the gap between the drop
impact physics of solid surfaces to deep liquid pools and enable technological
discoveries from surface structural design to enhanced lubricant stability. The
specific project aims are to address the following issues as fundamental to drop
impact on lubricated and liquid-infused surfaces: (1) How does the air film
evolve and rupture with varying impact conditions, film properties, and ambient
pressure? (2) What is the frontal growth dynamics of liquid-liquid contact after
air film ruptures? (3) What is the mechanism of finger-like instability at the
growing liquid-liquid front? (4) How do surface structures and inclination
affect air entrainment and drop impact dynamics?