* 2300239
* Collaborative Research: Closed-loop control of microbial communities by integrating optogenetics and metabolite biosensing
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Jose Avalos, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2027
* USD 947,750.00

Biotechnology is essential to the nation’s interest in scientific progress and
maintaining world leadership in key strategic areas such as biomanufacturing,
biomedical research, renewable energy, sustainability, and food production.
While microbial bioprocesses are dominated by monocultures, utilization of
synthetic microbial communities holds enormous potential for many applications
in biotechnology, including production of high value chemicals. However, the
lack of effective controls over key attributes of these communities impedes the
development of this research field. This project will use metabolite biosensors
and novel optogenetic growth control systems to modulate microbial community
composition and to increase production of the desired chemical products. This
project will generate new knowledge and methods to advance basic research in
synthetic microbial communities and generate strategies for improved production
of important chemicals. Moreover, this project will offer outstanding
opportunities to engage high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in
STEM education.

The overall goal of this project is to integrate optogenetic controls and
metabolite biosensing to achieve unprecedented automated dynamic regulation of
microbial communities. Optogenetics offers the unique ability to control
biological functions with light, which can be added or removed instantly and
reversibly following any prescribed schedule. For this project, optogenetics
will be used to modulate the growth of targeted microbes and ultimately to
adjust contributions to bioproduction. Metabolite biosensing will provide
instant feedback on the metabolic state of microbial communities to inform
optogenetic actuators, establishing closed-loop feedback controls. This first-
of-its-kind control system will be used to engineer interactions between members
of microbial communities and their contributions towards collaborative
biosynthetic pathways. It will also help identify the optimal community
compositions throughout co-culture cultivation despite sup-optimal inoculums or
system perturbations. Moreover, this project will explore the application of
closed-loop controls in communities with different features, such as communities
comprising members of the same or different species, containing linear or non-
linear biosynthesis pathways, and capable of sensing biosynthetic pathway
intermediates or final products. This project will open new opportunities to
gain fundamental understanding of complex behaviors of synthetic microbial
communities.

This project is jointly supported by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering,
Biosensing and Biophotonics Programs in ENG/CBET, and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Program in BIO/MCB.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.