* 2300200
* The Dynamic Assembly and Resilience of Panicum Root-associated Microbiota
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Thomas Juenger, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 07/31/2026
* USD 672,686.00

A series of pivotal scientific discovies over the past decade has shed light on
the diversity of bacteria, termed the microbiome, that exist in the environment,
particularly in soils. Plants cohabitate soil with these diverse bacterial
communities, a subset of which are recruited to plant roots via a myriad of
processes and can provide beneficial services to the host. For example, root
associated bacteria can help the host plant acquire critical nutrients, thwart
pathogen attack, and promote growth and yield. Therefore, there is widespread
interest in harnessing the plant microbiome to increase yield and environmental
resilience of agricultural commodities. A roadblock, however, is the complexity
of the soil microbiome and the environment from which the host plants recruit
root-associated bacteria. This makes dissection of the microbiome assembly
process difficult under natural settings. A promising avenue to overcome this
hurdle is by using controlled synthetic microbial communities, where previously
isolated and characterized bacterial strains are inoculated into a controlled
system.

This research investigates the spatiotemporal dynamics of the switchgrass root
microbiome by implementing synthetic microbial communities which are tractable,
reproducible, and ecologically relevant. Switchgrass is native to the North
America and is used as both a biofuel feedstock and in soil restoration.
Previous efforts by the researchers undertook a comprehensive effort to
cultivate members of the switchgrass microbiome across diverse locations. Here,
the researchers will use these previously isolated bacterial strains to form
reduced complexity communities to examine how bacteria assemble both across time
and space on plant roots. This information will be used to form a network to
infer microbe-microbe interactions which can be further tested by dropping out
select microbial modules. These results will bring the field closer to fully
understanding the root microbiome assembly process, will provide a resource in
the form of a universal switchgrass synthetic microbiome which will be shared
with other switchgrass / plant microbial ecologists, and may provide new avenues
for beneficial microbe delivery into agronomic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.