* 2300513
* Creating a Workforce Pipeline of Agriculture Drone Operators and Remote Sensing Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joseph Howard, UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS SYSTEM
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 279,924.00

Farmers, ranchers, and foresters are experiencing technological shifts in the
knowledge and equipment necessary to operate environmentally friendly and
economically efficient agribusinesses. Research has been conducted on the use of
drone-based geospatial technologies in agriculture for some time, and their
applications at the farm and in the field are expanding rapidly. The goal of
this project is to enable the University of Arkansas Community College
Batesville (UACCB) to enhance the education of aspiring agriculturalists and
conservationists by creating a comprehensive educational pipeline. This project
will enable the emerging and current agricultural workforce to apply these
advanced technologies in a region where they are not yet prevalent. Upon program
completion students will have earned an FAA Part 107 drone license, Commercial
Applicator Technician License, as well as demonstrate proficiency using remote
sensing and GIS data analysis software.

The pipeline for geospatial agriculture technicians will begin with academic
exposure through summer youth enrichment workshops. Familiarity with state-of-
the-art agriculture technologies will serve as a springboard for excitement and
understanding of applications for drone technologies in the emerging workforce.
The proposed pipeline will feed into UACCB’s Certificate of Proficiency in
Agriculture Drone Technology, where students will engage in theory-based
instruction and apply knowledge through field-based laboratory exercises. The
project will expand existing credit-based agricultural course offerings to
include a sixteen-week Certificate of Proficiency (CP) program focused on
educating licensed drone operators and remote sensing technicians. Faculty will
redesign existing coursework and develop curriculum for new courses embedded in
the certificate program, provide professional development for high school and
postsecondary faculty, as well as enhance student awareness of geospatial
technologies in agriculture through youth enrichment activities. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.