* 2300497
* Accelerating Advanced Electric Vehicle Technician Education While Increasing the Recruitment and Retention of Women
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Garwin Burroughs, Linn Benton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 347,934.00

The shift towards battery powered electric vehicles continues to change the
landscape of public and personal transportation in the United States and shows
no signs of slowing down. While development of infrastructure ramps up and the
number of electric vehicles on the road continues to grow, the impact on the
automotive and heavy equipment repair industry will need to be addressed. This
project from Linn Benton Community College (LBCC) seeks to address the growing
skills gap facing automotive and heavy equipment technicians in southwest
Oregon. The college will leverage its existing automotive and heavy equipment
diesel facilities to create a new one-year certificate that will focus on
electric vehicle and hybrid vehicle technology. As part of this effort, the
college will make a special effort to engage more female students in the
college’s advanced transportation technology program. Finally, the project will
promote the development of advanced vehicle technician education programs
regionally through a collaborative effort including neighboring community
colleges and high schools.

The project team recently completed an industry survey of dealerships,
independent repair shops, and municipalities in the region to gauge their needs
for current and future workers. Results from this survey will inform the
creation of a new one-year certificate, which will be a new stackable credential
that will contribute to the existing Advanced Vehicle Technology degree.
Instructors from LBCC will complete industry recognized training to prepare them
for the creation of six new courses on Advanced Transportation and Battery
Vehicle Technology. To increase the representation of females, the college will
participate in customized training sessions to make systemic changes that should
result in increased female enrollment. Practices from this training will create
a culture of support for female students, and should ultimately help to
diversify the electric vehicle workforce. Results from this work will be shared
regionally among Oregon’s 17 community colleges, and nationally through the ATE
community. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.