* 2300457
* The Hostos Technical Education in Cybersecurity (H-TEC) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Moise Koffi, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by producing more qualified
technicians to meet workforce demands in cybersecurity. Keeping computers and
information systems secure is a critical need and a major challenge in business,
industry, and government. The growth of cyber-threats has created a need for
many more workers who have the knowledge and skills to protect both existing and
emerging technologies. To meet the need for well-trained, certified
cybersecurity technicians in the New York City area, the Hostos Technical
Education in Cybersecurity (H-TEC) project will create an online cybersecurity
program leading to industry certifications aligned with federal standards. This
innovative curriculum will take a holistic approach, incorporating peer
mentoring, regulatory compliance, a law enforcement perspective, and
experiential and project-based learning. Because the project is based at a
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with a supermajority of minority students, it
also has potential to increase the diversity of the cybersecurity workforce
while improving social mobility for the students.

The project has two goals: (1) Develop an online, state-of-the-art cybersecurity
program, which includes modules that lead to industry certifications and
integrate concepts of regulatory and law enforcement compliance and the
development of communication, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. (2)
Build a pipeline from neighboring high schools and the college's Continuing
Education and Workforce Division to recruit minority students into the program
and help diversify the cybersecurity workforce in the New York City area. Seven
key activities will frame the project team's efforts. First, is to develop seven
online cybersecurity courses that make use of existing high-quality materials
and resources available through the ATE centers for cybersecurity education.
Second, is to create four learning modules, in collaboration with industry
partners, to teach content and hands-on skills that lead to industry
certifications. Third, is to embed experiential learning and project-based
learning into the new cybersecurity courses in collaboration with industry
partners. Fourth and fifth, entail offering workshops on the new courses and
modules to faculty and peer leaders and offering workshops and informational
sessions to guidance counselors at local high schools, high school juniors and
seniors, students just entering the college, and the college's Career Services
Office staff. Sixth, is leveraging the well-established Proyecto Access program,
which provides year-round enrichment courses, tutorial services, and project-
based learning to high-achieving yet economically disadvantaged high school
students in STEM disciplines. Seventh, and finally, is to create a pathway to
the cybersecurity program for incumbent workers by awarding credit for prior
learning to Continuing Education students who complete the CompTIA A+
certification. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.