* 2300118
* Developing a Multi-Disciplinary STEM Education Model for Multilingual Learners That Meets Societal Challenges
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Okhee Lee, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,534,147.00

This project contributes to advancing knowledge on STEM education focusing on
societal challenges by harnessing the convergence of STEM subjects, including
data science and computer science, to empower a minoritized student group -
multilingual middle-school learners (MLs). The research seeks to make two
significant contributions. First, the project will develop a conceptual
framework for multi-disciplinary STEM education with MLs to address pressing
societal challenges. Second, over the course of four years, the project will
translate this conceptual framework into practical implementation in classrooms,
creating a comprehensive innovation to: (1) develop an instructional unit
centered around a societal challenge in STEM education for MLs, utilizing the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic; (2) create a teacher professional development
(PD) program to facilitate successful implementation of the instructional unit
in classrooms; and (3) Develop and validate a suite of instruments to measure
the impact of the innovation on both students and teachers, evaluate the
integrity of implementation, and assess its potential for diverse instructional
settings.

The project is grounded in a conceptual framework that addresses pressing
societal challenges and employs the convergence of multiple STEM subjects to
explain these challenges. The primary goal is to empower MLs in STEM learning by
recognizing and nurturing their assets, such as transnational experiences and
rich meaning-making resources to build students' equitable participation in STEM
education. The research will take place in New York City Public Schools, the
largest school district in the nation, and will be conducted in three phases
over four years. Phase 1 (Years 1, 2, and 3) will employ design-based research
to develop, test, and refine the instructional unit and PD program iteratively.
Phase 2 (Years 2 and 3) will focus on developing a suite of instruments to study
the innovation, ensuring they are valid and suitable for future larger-scale
studies. Phase 3 (Year 4) will finalize the instructional unit, PD program, and
instruments, making them ready for implementation and broader use. The
conceptual framework, innovation, and instruments will pave the way for future
large-scale field trials. Furthermore, the project will serve as a foundation
for extending STEM education to address other pressing societal challenges, such
as climate change and sustainability. Finally, it will contribute to a research
agenda that seeks to tackle complex and pervasive societal issues that
disproportionately impact minoritized groups.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.