* 2300865
* Physical Science Robotics Interdisciplinary Design in Computer Science Education: Broadening Participation in STEM through Cascading Peer-Mentorship
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jian Li, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2027
* USD 665,994.00

Physical Science Robotics Interdisciplinary Design (PRIDe) in Computer Science
(CS) Education investigates how an innovative cascading peer-mentorship approach
can improve upon current practices in K-12 CS education. The project will
design, field test, support teachers with professional development, and evaluate
a cascading peer-mentoring model that connects high school, middle, and
elementary school students as well as their CS and science teachers with the
Advanced Telerobotics Research Lab at Kent State University through the PRIDe
curriculum. This curriculum provides students with interdisciplinary learning
experiences in physical science, robotics, and robotics engineering design
challenges. Cascading mentorship transforms junior members from passive
recipients into active participants by allowing them to mentor younger students
while creating opportunities for participants to experience reciprocal mentoring
and develop an understanding of what it means to teach or mentor somebody else
in CS. This project will create and implement a cascading mentorship ladder in
formal educational settings that connects more than 650 economically
disadvantaged students along with their CS and science teachers from a
predominately black and Hispanic school district with a University CS research
lab. The goal of this project is to create multiple pathways that encourage
students with different interests to connect to and communicate about science
and robotics by (a) combining engineering design challenges with robotics, (b)
encouraging storytelling and creativity within robotics, (c) including mentoring
and socializing experiences, and (d) organizing robotics exhibitions. A design-
based research approach will be used to iteratively design and field test the
proposed project curriculum with cascading mentoring to find out what works and
what does not, improve it in an informed way, and evaluate its impact on
students. A mixed methods experimental intervention design that employs
quantitative and qualitative data will be used to investigate how the proposed
curriculum with and without cascading peer-mentorship influences participating
students' CS and physical science learning and their attitudes toward CS and
science. In addition, it will explore students' cascading peer-mentorship
experiences and engagement in CS using surveys, focus group interviews,
classroom observations, and school metric data. This project will contribute to
the research on K-12 CS education by developing a prototype of a cascading peer-
mentoring model, field testing it in real-world classrooms, and examining its
impact on participants. Moreover, it will contribute to the research on
educational robotics by examining the sociocultural dimensions of computing and
connecting robotics with science through critical social issues of energy and
sustainability using an affordable custom-developed robot.

This project is co-funded through The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) and the CS for All: Research and RPPs program. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.