* 2300849
* NOVA Biotechnology Leadership in Education (NOBLE) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* David Fernandez, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2026
* USD 550,679.00

The greater Washington, D.C. area is home to numerous biotechnology companies
that require an educated skilled technical workforce (STW) in order to operate.
This project will support the industry needs by recruiting, training, and
upskilling students through the Biotechnology Program at Northern Virginia
Community College (NOVA). NOVAâ€™s Biotechnology Program is ideally situated to
provide students the skills to be successfully employed in entry-level positions
in biotechnology. The program is housed on the Manassas campus in Prince William
County, the first minority majority county in the Commonwealth. The project will
recruit students from underrepresented populations and non-traditional students,
including military veterans. This project is expected to benefit 20-40 students
each year by providing them with the skills necessary for entry-level employment
in the bioeconomy workforce.

The project will recruit and graduate increasing numbers of NOVA biotechnology
students to meet the workforce needs of the regional biotechnology and life
sciences industries. Four project activities will guide the efforts of the
principal investigators. First is to recruit students with the aim of increasing
the numbers of underserved students including women, veterans, and non-
traditional students such as adult learners. Second is to support student
retention through a summer orientation program, assigning mentors/advisors for
biotechnology majors, developing more robust research experiences and internship
program opportunities, and developing a peer tutoring program. Third is to
revise biotechnology curriculum to meet the needs of regional biotechnology
industries and provide professional development for faculty and partner high
school teachers. Fourth, and finally is to develop and implement a career
preparation workshop series to prepare biotechnology students for the workforce.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.