* 2300800
* Expanding Hands-On Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Experience for Diverse Student Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ying-Tsu Loh, MiraCosta College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 649,986.00

This project aims to promote awareness of Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing
career pathways for diverse, underrepresented community college and high school
students. The BioSCOPE (Bioscience Supply Chain Operations Projects for
Education) model provides students with project-based activities to learn about
biomanufacturing and gain hands-on, industry-relevant skills by producing
laboratory reagents and consumables compliant with industry quality standards
and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP). Products are typically components of
laboratory kits that are packaged and distributed to high schools for use by
biology and biotechnology students. This is important because connections
established between community colleges and high schools create awareness and
pathways for students from high schools to enter community college bioscience
courses and programs. The project provides students with hands-on experience
that prepares them for entry-level employment in livable-wage jobs with upward
mobility. Fear of science is a barrier for many students, including those who
are underserved and underrepresented in their participation in the pursuit of
such careers, as many falsely believe a career in life sciences requires an
advanced degree. BioSCOPE removes this barrier and helps students that like to
work with their hands by giving them experience that introduces them to
opportunities for a rewarding career in life sciences. These student populations
benefit by entering rewarding, high-paying careers, and industry benefits by
gaining an inclusive, diverse, and skilled workforce.

This project is a collaboration between the Bioscience Workforce Development Hub
at MiraCosta College, the Bay Area Bioscience Education Community (BABEC), and
Laney College, and includes partners throughout California from community
colleges, the Bioscience industry, state industry trade associations, workforce
development organizations, and related NSF ATE project PIs. The project
specifically aims to train community college biotechnology faculty to equitably
implement BioSCOPE activities, create a pipeline for enrollment in biotechnology
at community colleges by increasing awareness and providing hands-on experience
in biotechnology through doing BioSCOPE activities, and provide mentorship to
prepare diverse, underrepresented community college students for careers in
Biomanufacturing. These students are often not aware of Biotech or of the
accessible high-wage careers Biotech can provide that suit their interests,
talents, and skills. The project personnel aim to learn if the project builds
awareness of Biotech, whether it bolsters a pipeline of students into community
college Biotech programs, and how it impacts students getting industry
internships and jobs. Participating community college faculty will be surveyed
to track the frequency of BioSCOPE activities implemented, the number of
students that participate in BioSCOPE, who continues on to industry internships
or jobs, and the number of students that enroll in community college Biotech
courses from partner high schools. By expanding knowledge and understanding of
Biotech and Biomanufacturing among a diverse population of historically
underserved students, the project aims to prepare them for growth and innovation
within an industry that provides solutions for many global challenges that
impact both health and environmental issues. The findings of this work will be
disseminated in California and nationally through websites, social media, in-
person and virtual trainings, state and national presentations at conferences
and industry advisory meetings. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.