* 2300262
* Ocean Studies Board Activities in Support of NSF
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Susan Roberts, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2026
* USD 307,378.00

The requested funding will be used to continue providing guidance on major
ocean-related science, engineering, and policy issues to the federal ocean
agencies, including the National Science Foundation. The Ocean Studies Board
(OSB) is the focal point within the National Academy of Sciences for ocean-
related science, engineering, and policy issues. The board explores the science,
policies, and infrastructure needed to understand, manage, protect, and restore
coastal and marine environments and resources. The board has produced reports
that garner interest from the public media, various industries, educational
institutions, Congress, and other federal agencies. The convening function of
the board brings together the academic, federal and state agency, and industry
scientists as well as interested stakeholders on particular issues such as
fisheries and coastal hazards. OSB supports ocean literacy and helps build the
public’s understanding of how the ocean influences their daily lives, educates
children about the Earth’s environment and its processes, and inspires the next
generation of ocean scientists. They support recruitment of minorities into the
earth sciences through participation in mentoring and fellowship programs. In
1999, the OSB initiated the Roger Revelle Commemorative Lecture. This annual
lecture, held in Washington, DC, focuses on ocean science topics of interest and
importance to policymakers and the public. In addition, through the National
Academies’ Christine Mirzayan Science and Technology Policy Fellows program,
graduate student fellows are supported.

The Ocean Studies Board (OSB) of the National Academy of Sciences explores the
science, policies, and infrastructure needed to understand, manage, and conserve
coastal and marine environments and resources. It provides a forum for ocean
issues to be discussed, organizes studies to help address these issues, and
produces reports that are available to the public. The OSB conducts a wide range
of activities, from in-depth studies of scientific controversies to fast-track
reviews of urgent policy issues. The OSB core support is shared between multiple
federal agencies. In addition to the activities related to ocean issues, this
proposal provides partial support for expenses associated with OSB core,
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR), the Revelle Lecture, and U.S.
National Committee for the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.