* 2300726
* Expanding sixth-grade youth's understanding of engineering through critical multilingual journalism
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Kristen Wendell, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 05/31/2027
* USD 625,529.00

This four-year project will develop, enact, and study a critical climate
technology journalism curriculum to support multilingual sixth grade students’
knowledge and practices in engineering. Synthesizing expertise in climate
technology, communication, and multilingual education, the project will engage
students in investigating, designing, and communicating critical engineering
knowledge about community-based technological systems. Students will learn
engineering as they construct and convey messages about climate technology in
their community for an audience of family members, community groups, and civic
leaders. While many existing middle-school engineering curricula emphasize
creating an optimal solution to an engineering design problem for a client or
user, this project takes a civic-oriented approach, where students engage in
engineering to inform multilingual audiences about a climate technology
affecting their local communities. An important characteristic of the urban
school district partnering on this project is that students speak more than 50
languages and nearly 50% speak a language at home that differs from that of the
dominant society. Given this, professional development workshops will support
teacher learning to enact the curriculum so that it engages multilingual youth's
participation in engineering design practices in culturally meaningful ways.

Over the course of three design-based research cycles with the proposed
curriculum unit, the team will generate evidence-based theory about how a
critical technology journalism approach influences engineering learning among
sixth-grade youth, including students from multilingual families. The project
aims to answer three research questions: (1) What is the evolution of student
learning outcomes, including their practices of engineering, communication, and
translanguaging, their ideas about climate tech, and their perceptions of the
value of engineering and technical communication for the community?; (2) What
community resources (language and culture, contexts) do students draw on as they
participate in the curriculum?; and (3) What is the influence of curriculum
resources and teacher facilitation moves on student learning outcomes? To answer
these questions, the research team will use qualitative methods that include
video recordings of lesson enactments and interviewing teachers and students.
The team will analyze these data using techniques from interaction analysis and
discourse analysis. Beyond the seven teachers and 920 students directly engaging
in the curriculum during the four-year project, the project's Community Tech
Press website will share the finalized curriculum unit and its supporting
materials with the broader community. This dissemination intends to enable
teachers across the country to adapt this approach to create locally-relevant
curriculum for their multilingual students. This project is funded by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.