* 2300927
* Support Partnership for New Bilingual Science and Engineering Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Alberto Esquinca, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,202,028.00

This project examines how Latine, bilingual teachers' dispositions to teach
science and engineering to bilingual learners change as they enter the teaching
profession. Specifically, it explores bilingual teachers' transition from a
period of strong social support to one of scarce social support, i.e., from
being Bilingual Teacher Candidates to Novice Bilingual Teachers (NBTs) as they
plan and teach bilingual science and engineering lessons. Given the isolation
that many new teachers face, the project positions NBTs as teachers of science
and engineering and provides them with a network of support including peer
coaching, mentorship, and a professional learning community. This work is
important because scarce social support may hinder NBTs' prioritization of
science and engineering content, thus contributing to the historical
underrepresentation of Latines in science and engineering. This exploratory
research project represents a partnership between the largest bilingual teacher
preparation program in California--the Department of Dual Language & English
Learner Education (DLE) at San Diego State University--and local educational
agencies including California's second largest school district. The project's
research questions are: 1. How does a community support network mediate NBTs'
transition to the profession? 2. How does a professional support network
influence NBTs' science and engineering instruction? and 3. How do NBTs'
dispositions to teach equitable bilingual science and engineering change during
their professional transition? To answer these questions, the project uses a
mixed methods multiple-case study design using an inductive approach. A
multiple-case study design permits the generation of cases for comparison and/
or examination. Illustrative cases will be essential for dissemination to
district partners and for further professional development. Findings will be
shared broadly at practitioner-oriented conferences (e.g., California
Association for Bilingual Education) and national conferences (e.g., National
Association for Bilingual Education, the American Educational Research
Association). Findings will also be shared with audiences where bilingual
education research is not often disseminated (e.g., National Science Teachers
Association and the American Society of Engineering Education). The project is
funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.â€¯

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.