* 2300977
* Design for Sustainability: How Mental Models of Social-Ecological Systems Shape Engineering Design Decisions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2027
* USD 332,655.00

The work engineers do and the designs they create have long-term, often
unforeseen, impacts on people, infrastructure, and the environment. To help
ensure that the results of engineering work advance human and environmental
well-being, we need to first understand how engineers currently connect their
technical work to these broader contexts and systems. To achieve this
understanding, this project will integrate cognitive and behavioral science,
social theory, and advanced computational methods to connect theories of mental
models and planned behavior with engineering design practice. In particular, the
project will examine the beliefs and practices of students in civil and chemical
engineering programs across the country, two fields that have substantial
impacts on the Nation’s infrastructure and environment. The results will enable
future researchers and educators to predict how students’ mental models of
social and ecological systems will inform their engineering design work. Such
predictions in turn will assist educators to more effectively develop students’
ability to account for the broader impacts of their work. In doing so, this
project will also help educators better understand how students transfer their
learning about design as undergraduates into the practice of design in the
workplace. This transition is not yet well-understood but is critically
important in shaping engineers’ real-world decisions in light of long-term
impacts on society and the environment. This focus on the links between formal
education and professional practice will help to identify places in
undergraduate courses and programs where educators can assist students to better
recognize and understand the impacts of their work and use that understanding to
make decisions more likely to lead to positive future impacts. Finally, the
project uses advanced analytic approaches such as natural language processing
and Bayesian statistics to increase the capacity of educational research in
dealing with large-scale qualitative data sets and novel information formats.

The project integrates the theory of planned behavior with mental models to
build new fundamental knowledge about (1) engineers’ mental models of social-
ecological systems (SES), (2) changes in students’ mental models over time, and
(3) relationships between mental models and design decisions in both engineering
school and engineering work. By leveraging and extending recent advances in
natural language processing and Bayesian statistics, the project will test and
validate a powerful approach to qualitative data analysis that allows for much
larger sample sizes but is currently underused in the field. Senior engineering
students in chemical (n=250) and civil (n=250) in capstone courses from a range
of universities across the country will be recruited and followed into post-
graduation employment. These disciplines are chosen both because of their
potential impact on national infrastructure and environments and because prior
work has identified potential differences in mental models among these
engineering subdisciplines that highlight the need for comparative research. The
capstone to work period is the central focus in the study because capstone
provides an ideal environment to examine the relationships between mental models
of SES and design decisions, but those relationships may change as graduates
encounter competing interests, industry norms, and increased complexity in
engineering practice. A combination of quantitative and qualitative data will be
collected at multiple time points to measure participants’ mental models of SES
as well as their design decisions. Identifying and understanding how mental
models of these systems inform design decisions as participants transition from
formal education into the workforce can inform engineering workforce development
and better prepare engineers to design for sustainability and meet emerging
sociotechnical and environmental challenges.

This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.