* 2300319
* Research Initiation Award: Integrated Approach Toward Examining Fecal Indicator Bacteria Trends in a Coastal Watershed
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nikaela Flournoy, Miles College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Miles College supports faculty and undergraduate
research experiences examining potential sources and environmental factors that
regulate fecal indicator bacteria (FIB) patterns in surface water. Specifically,
using a combination of innovative approaches, this proposal aims to monitor
fecal pollution inputs to surface waters and study the efficacy of integrating
fecal markers from Microbial Source Tracking (MST) into current and machine
learning-based watershed models, to predict trends of FIB in surface water.

The overall project goal is to predict the occurrence of FIB exceeding total
maximum daily load (TMDL) in shellfish growing waters. Toward this goal, this
project aims to integrate MST data, 16S rRNA sequences, and environmental
parameters into existing and next generation watershed models. Tools and data
generated from this project will: (i) contribute to water quality knowledge and
baseline data on sources of FIB in a coastal Alabama watershed, (ii) validate
use of alternative indicator methods, such as MST tracking and amplicon
sequencing, for water quality monitoring in existing watershed models, and (iii)
identify scalable watershed modelling framework(s) conducive for MST data to
predict source-specific FIB in different environmental conditions. Outcomes from
this project will provide improvements in predicting patterns of FIB, a valued
water quality index. Implementation of this project would extend the STEM
education and research capacity of the PI and institution, increase on-campus
research training opportunities for enrolled students, and cultivate a
partnership with the United States Geological Survey Lower Mississippi-Gulf
Water Science Center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.