* 2300676
* Enhancing Early Childhood Educators' Reflective Practice and Content Knowledge to Increase Children's Capacity for Science Talk
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Soo-Young Hong, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,918.00

This project aims to strengthen key capabilities in early childhood educators
(ECEs), including the ability to (1) build science content knowledge and
confidence in guiding young children's scientific investigation, (2) closely
observe children's interactions with science materials, and (3) use those
observations in the reflection, planning, and practice of science teaching. ECEs
understand that effective science teaching and learning requires content
knowledge related to science concepts and practices and pedagogical knowledge.
However, ECEs, especially in rural communities, express a lack of science
content knowledge and confidence in incorporating science-related conversations
in their early care and education settings, and they believe this might be a
result of limited professional training relevant to science content. To address
ECEs' desire to know more about science concepts and practices, early childhood
science professional development (PD) should include resources, support, and
explicit guidance for integrating science talk into everyday interactions with
children in early childhood settings. The PD model must also enhance ECEs'
science content knowledge and their capacity to notice opportunities for science
talk and encourage young children to continue to ask questions and conduct
scientific investigations. An early childhood science PD developed through this
project will empower ECEs to become reflective thinkers based on solid knowledge
of science concepts and practices, significantly impacting their teaching
practices and, in turn, children's learning.

Rural ECEs often lack adequate training in teaching science concepts and
practices and, thus, do not feel competent in planning and teaching science-
related lessons. These ECEs need an early childhood (EC) science PD model that
provides access to resources and a community of practitioners. This project aims
to (1) develop and test the feasibility of an EC science PD model with materials
and resources that strengthen ECEs' science content knowledge and reflective
practice to be implemented in rural early care and education settings and (2)
use a refined PD model with the critical components identified, explore the
change in the level of ECEs' reflection on their teaching practices, knowledge
of science concepts and practices, and use of science talk in their practices,
along with how each of these changes is associated with children's use of
science talk and scientific investigation in their early care and education
settings. In year 1, the team will develop and refine a PD model for rural
communities. In year 2, the team will use a mixed methods convergent design to
test the PD model with a small group of ECEs in rural communities. This project
will generate an EC science PD model that empowers ECEs to build science content
knowledge and effectively use reflective practice to improve their science
teaching practices. The PD model will allow ECEs to collaborate with other ECEs
- a critical need expressed by ECEs in rural communities - while enhancing their
capacity to incorporate science-related conversations in their interactions with
young children. The PD materials, developed in collaboration with science and EC
experts, will enhance ECEs' capacity to engage young children in meaningful
science learning experiences and further support their interests in science
topics. Ongoing communication with participating school/center administrators
and family childcare home providers in rural communities will also build greater
capacity to impact ECEs' reflection and science teaching practices, which will,
in turn, influence their overall teaching quality. The knowledge generated from
this project will inform ECE communities of transformational approaches to
teaching and learning science concepts and practices. In addition, this
exploratory study will further engage researchers in conversations about
multidisciplinary approaches to addressing early childhood PD in rural
communities. This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models, and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.