* 2300558
* Culturally Responsive Elementary Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joslyn Melton, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,045,966.00

Curriculum materials are not a script for teachers to follow, but a tool over
which they exert agency as they make decisions about how to adapt the materials
for use in their specific context with their particular students. Indeed,
adaptation is necessary in order to ensure that teachers can provide equitable
learning experiences for all students, particularly those from marginalized
groups. Teachers' adaptations make a significant impact on both instruction and
on students, and can have a considerable effect on curriculum-driven and equity-
focused education reform interventions. While researchers have begun to identify
patterns in teachers' curriculum adaptations, little is known about which kinds
of adaptations support student learning or how teachers' capacity to adapt
materials develops over time. Most current studies provide only a snapshot of
teachers' curriculum implementation--often their first use of the materials--as
opposed to successive curricular enactments. Because research indicates teachers
need at least two iterations with curriculum materials in order to use them
purposefully and skillfully, further research is needed to understand how
teachers' adaptations change with experience using curriculum materials. This
project will contribute valuable knowledge about how teachers' capacity to adapt
curriculum materials develops over time, and has implications for the
development of curriculum, professional development, and teacher education
efforts to promote culturally-responsive instruction.

This Level II Exploratory Project in the Teaching Strand of the DRK-12 program
seeks to better understand how teachers' capacity and willingness to customize
instructional approaches to meet standards and the needs of diverse student
populations develops through initial practice and successive enactments of
curriculum materials. This work will address current gaps in the literature and
contribute to an overall understanding of how teachers develop the capacity to
use curricula in ways that advance the goal of equitable science instruction.
The overarching goals of the project include: 1) implementing a high-quality
practicum-based professional development model for K-6 teachers; 2) conducting a
comprehensive and rigorous program of research to examine associations between
teachers' learned adaptations of curriculum over successive enactments of
materials and pedagogical design capacity for culturally responsive instruction;
and 3) disseminating project outcomes to a variety of stakeholders to produce
broader impacts. Over three years, this project will work with a cohort of 30
elementary teachers, 30 preservice teachers, and approximately 1700 students.
Professional development will be provided to introduce teachers to the Explore
the Salish Sea (ESS) curriculum, which utilizes marine phenomena in the local
environment to help students meet the Next Generation Science Standards. By
examining four successive enactments of curriculum materials, the project will
provide insight into the process by which teachers develop curricular context
knowledge (CCK), but also how the curriculum functions to engage students with
science ideas and practices in particular contexts, which has implications for
how teachers connect their CCK to culturally responsive instruction (CRI).
Through collective case study methods, the researchers will document and examine
the ways in which elementary teachers develop the capacity to adapt curriculum
materials to be culturally responsive to their students, and the role that
developing CCK plays in this process. This work will help develop a more robust
understanding of what it means to be 'culturally responsive' in elementary
science, and to advance practice by developing context-rich representations of
culturally responsive curriculum adaptation to share with stakeholders with
similar contexts and goals. This project is funded by the Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.