* 2300038
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the impact of Arctic sea ice loss on summertime climate change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Lantao Sun, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2026
* USD 158,059.00

The decline of Arctic sea ice is dramatic evidence that the world is warming, as
sea ice cover at the end of the melt season has fallen from about 7 million
square miles in 1980 to about 5 million in 2022. The loss of ice cover has a
warming effect as ice loss exposes the darker ocean surface allowing the ocean
to absorb more sunlight. The influence of this warming on weather and climate
below the Arctic circle is a topic of great interest, as Arctic warming can
influence midlatitude weather by weakening the jet stream and shifting it
southward. Most of the research to date has focused on the effect in winter,
looking in particular at cold air outbreaks and snowstorms. But recent work by
the PI and others suggests that the weakening of the jet stream could also
happen in summer, resulting in a weakening of the cyclones and anticyclones that
travel along the storm tracks of the middle latitudes. The work also shows that
similar effects can occur as a direct response to the warming of the atmosphere
by greenhouse gases, thus some effort is required to separate out the effects of
sea ice decline.

This project addresses the effects of sea ice decline on atmospheric circulation
in summer, addressing four questions: 1) To what extent does Arctic sea ice loss
affect summer atmospheric circulation, and through what mechanisms? 2) When will
the effects on summer circulation become evident? 3) How does the impact of sea
ice decline compare to the direct effect of atmospheric warming on summer
circulation? 4) What is the effect of Arctic sea ice decline on heat waves and
how are the heat waves effects related to the circulation changes?

The research is conducted through analysis of climate model simulations
generated in the Detection and Attribution Model Intercomparison Project (DAMIP)
and the Polar Amplification Model Intercomparison Project (PAMIP), as well as
simulations created specifically for the project using the Community Earth
System Model (CESM). Simulations created for the project are designed to show
the separate responses forced by Arctic sea ice decline and the greenhouse
warming of the atmosphere. One analysis method developed for the project
separates the effects of sea ice decline on cyclones from its effects on
anticyclones, which is of interest as anticyclones are associated with summer
heat waves.

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest given the need to prepare
for and adapt to the consequences of climate change. The possible effect of
Arctic sea ice loss on atmospheric circulation and related extreme weather has
attracted considerable attention, both in the scientific community and the
media, thus better basic science understanding of the likely consequences of sea
ice decline is highly desirable. The project would also provide support and
training to a graduate student and recruit an undergraduate student through the
Leadership Alliance, an organization created to promote diversity in higher-
level education and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.