* 2300166
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Inclusion and Equity of Minoritized STEM Faculty: Examining the Role of Epistemic Exclusion in Scholar(ly) Evaluation Practices
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Isis Settles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2028
* USD 460,884.00

The proposed project examines whether and how epistemic exclusion, a form of
scholarly devaluation, is a barrier to the full inclusion and participation of
women faculty and faculty of color in STEM. Epistemic exclusion occurs when
disciplinary biases defining what STEM scholarship is valued are coupled with
negative stereotypes about productivity and commitment of individuals based on
their social identities to produce unfair evaluation processes. Because many
faculty career outcomes (such as hiring, tenure, promotion, and leadership
opportunities) are determined by research productivity metrics, research
evaluation biases can impact interest, retention, and success in STEM research
careers. The focus on scholarly work as a site of devaluation extends prior work
on interpersonal forms of exclusion (e.g., social exclusion) in STEM education
and research contexts. This knowledge is important for informing the development
of individual and systemic level interventions to broaden participation in STEM.

The study will: 1) examine whether the level of epistemic exclusion among STEM
faculty varies depending on scholars’ identities and career stage; 2) determine
how experiences of epistemic exclusion affect STEM faculty careers; and 3)
examine how consequences of epistemic exclusion vary depending on STEM scholars’
identities and career stage. This project will survey of 1800 tenure track STEM
faculty at U.S. R1 and R2 universities nationally and hold focus groups of a
subsample surveyed. The focus groups will explore how epistemic exclusion is
uniquely experienced, understood, and impactful by career stage (early, mid,
senior). This work builds on prior work by the research team that developed and
validated the Faculty Epistemic Exclusion (FEE) Scale. This research will make
significant intellectual contributions including the exploration of a new area
of study for researchers interested in issues of fairness and inclusion in STEM
education and research environments.

This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.