* 2300281
* I-Corps: Software application for predicting consumer food acceptability based on appearances under different illumination conditions
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Dongyi Wang, University of Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software application to predict consumer acceptability under
different illumination conditions. The proposed technology is focused on
consumer acceptability prediction related to food appearance, evaluating how
external illumination may affect a deep learning-based image understanding
model. Consumers may benefit from the proposed technology by having a more
accurate understanding of the products they purchase and a reduced risk. In
addition, the proposed technology may be used to recommend the correct
illumination levels, which may help reduce food waste. With proper illumination
recommendations, retailers may find an increase in purchases and a significant
cost-savings as there may be a reduction in product returns.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an illumination estimation
deep learning model that may be used to predict food acceptability. Illumination
estimation is a fundamental prerequisite for many computer vision applications.
Unnatural illumination may influence human perceptions of essential
characteristics of goods, e.g., food products in retail stores under different
lighting conditions. When food products are placed under different lighting
conditions, consumers feel differently in response to the products, which may
further affect purchase decisions. The goal is to develop an illumination human
acceptability prediction model, which may be transferred to general industrial
manufacturing and inspection applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.