* 2300640
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Patterned Doping of Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rui He, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,519.00

Non-Technical Abstract: The research team has developed a method to incorporate
impurities into layered materials, such as graphite, on the micrometer and
nanometer scale. These impurities modify the physical, electronic, and optical
properties of the layered materials. These properties have applications in solar
cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), and quantum computers to name a few. The
ability to control impurities at the nanometer scale enables scientists and
engineers to reduce the size of current devices, and possibly even discover new
applications. The goal of this research is to use a multidisciplinary approach
to obtain a more complete understanding of these samples. The University of
Northern Iowa leads the fabrication efforts of impurity samples as well as
characterization of their physical and electronic properties. Optical properties
will be characterized at Texas Tech University. This research involves
undergraduate students trained on a wide variety of techniques and technologies.
Such an environment results in well-rounded students ready for careers in either
industry or academia. As a leader in K-12 education, the University of Northern
Iowa provides an excellent opportunity for this project to have a positive
impact on elementary, middle, and high school students from diverse backgrounds.
Regular contact with high school science teachers allows faculty research
activities and student opportunities to be showcased directly. Such efforts
encourage students to explore careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) fields.

Technical Abstract: Layered crystals exhibit a rich variety of phases such as
magnetism, spin-glass behavior, superconductivity, and charge density waves.
These phases can occur naturally in pure systems or be induced, disrupted, or
modified via doping. Intercalation is a form of doping, in which atoms or
molecules are inserted between the molecular layers. The research team has
discovered a new method to locally intercalate layered crystals using a focused
high energy electron beam. The goal of this research is to explore the ability
to control phases in layered crystals on the micrometer and nanometer scale. The
ability to create localized phase changes permits an exploration of a range of
boundary conditions between different electronic or magnetic phases, as well as
tunneling between them. This technique can be used in finite layer systems to
reduce interlayer coupling and perhaps create new opportunities for entirely new
two-dimensional behaviors.The collaborative effort between the University of
Northern Iowa and Texas Tech University has the combined capabilities of atomic
force microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy to
characterize the local physical, electrical, and optical properties of these
materials. The PIs work with a diverse group of research assistants and attract
undergraduates from a variety of backgrounds and majors. An additional benefit
of this collaborative work is the opportunity for undergraduate students from
Iowa to work with graduate students from Texas Tech University. Lubbock, TX, has
a very different culture and population than Cedar Falls, IA, which will benefit
all students in learning to work with individuals from diverse backgrounds as is
necessary in modern research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.