* 2300978
* Data Center Operations Program Development: A National Approach to Improving Capacity for Data Center Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Josh Labrie, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 649,884.00

The economic activities of enterprises that rely on Internet services require a
significant data center infrastructure to ensure continuity of services. In
turn, data centers require significant capital investment, ongoing operational
maintenance, and the technical workforce capacity to support various center
operations. As data center capacity continues to expand in the Northern Virginia
(NOVA) region and the country at large, a trained engineering technology
workforce is necessary to meet the growing demand for skilled workers. At
present, community and technical colleges lack the instructional capacity to
offer programs and coursework to support this rapidly emerging technological
field. This project intends to address the lack of workforce issue by developing
a sustained professional development program. The proposed Data Center
Operations Program Development (DCO PD) has the potential to prepare engineering
technology faculty to integrate DCO skills into their teaching practice, conduct
national outreach to administrators and educators, and establish professional
networks with data centers and their operators regionally and nationally.

The project has three primary components. First is a sustained professional
development fellowship for faculty, including a three-day workshop series at
NOVA Community College's data center training facility and a five-day externship
at an operational data center. Second is an awareness and recruitment campaign
at national conferences including project presentations, data center site
visits, and hands-on skills workshops. Third, and finally, is a data center
education digital resource hub serving as a repository of curriculum, industry
contacts, career information, and a map of growing data center markets. The
project intends to advance the understanding of industry externships and site
visits as a tool for facultu professional development. Instructional materials
would be disseminated through publications of the Association for Career and
Technical Education's Techniques magazine, the career and technical education
Journal, The Science Teacher, and Technology and Engineering Teacher. Results of
the project will be submitted to peer-reviewed journals and presented at various
conferences. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.