* 2300124
* CRII: CNS: Auction Mechanism Design for Energy-Efficient High Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Kishwar Ahmed, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2024
* USD 154,068.00

High performance computing (HPC) systems (such as supercomputers) are generally
large infrastructures containing thousands of server nodes that can perform
computations in a fast and efficient manner. HPC systems can consume an enormous
amount of power during their operation. For example, current top-ranked
supercomputers can consume tens of megawatts of power during peak operation. As
a direct consequence of power consumption increase, energy cost has become a
major component of the overall cost of the operation of an HPC system. To
achieve energy sustainability in HPC, this project plans to develop novel models
to reduce energy cost and contribute to the power system stability. There are
three primary objectives of this project: (1) develop machine learning models to
predict the power and performance of parallel applications; (2) develop an
auction mechanism model to reduce HPC system’s energy cost via collective energy
reduction of HPC users, while incorporating the renewable energy generation into
the model; and (3) experiment and validate the proposed auction mechanism model
via simulation. Overall, the project is expected to reduce the energy cost of
large-scale systems, as well as to achieve power grid energy conservation and
stability.

This project will contribute towards advancement of the state-of-the-art in
energy-efficiency of HPC, as well as to balance the energy-performance trade-
offs in HPC. In doing so, this project will increase HPC system’s participation
in sustainable computing. The proposed research will enable HPC systems to
closely interact with the power grid system, and enable feedback-based energy
reduction based on electricity price variation and renewable energy generation.
This project will increase research participation of both graduate and
undergraduate students. Additionally, the project will train and educate
students in the area of parallel and high performance computing, and energy-
efficient computing. Furthermore, through various outreach activities and
research involvement, the project plans to promote diversity in computing by
involving underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.