* 2300689
* Engaging Teachers in Integrating Human-Centered Design for Geometry Problem-based Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Gloriana Gonzalez Rivera, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2027
* USD 763,859.00

Geometry instruction offers unique opportunities for students to apply design
thinking to authentic problems. This project supports teachers in designing and
implementing lessons using a human-centered design (HCD) approach. Geometry
teachers will participate in lesson study for two years to plan problem-based
geometry lessons and to observe student thinking during those lessons. The
project investigates how teachers learn about and apply a human-centered
framework for teaching geometry. It will be implemented with teachers who teach
in high-need schools that serve many students from underrepresented groups.
Findings will support innovation development with teachers for integrating
human-centered design in math instruction. Students will benefit from learning
about and applying human-centered design processes to solve problems addressing
issues in their communities. The project team will produce cases documenting the
development and implementation of the lessons, along with a podcast of stories
drawn from the lessons. Lessons and podcasts will be available through the
University of Illinois Siebel Center for Design's website.

The project investigates whether and how the innovation supports teachers in
integrating human-centered design in problem-based geometry lessons. The
research questions are: (1) How do teachers design and implement lessons using
the HCD framework through lesson study? (2) What changes in teacher noticing,
teacher professional community, and teaching-learning resources result from
designing and implementing the lessons through lesson study? (3) How does lesson
study support teachers in designing and implementing the lessons? To answer the
first question, the team will apply human-centered design to understand the
processes involved in crafting and teaching the lessons. To answer the second
question, the team will examine changes from teachers' lesson study
participation, including changes in teacher noticing of student thinking and in
the development of a professional community. With the third research question,
the team will investigate challenges that result from adapting lesson study
phases to integrate a human-centered design approach. Research methods include
case study methodologies and the examination of videos from teachers' lesson
study discussions to identify teacher noticing and teacher learning
opportunities. Findings will contribute to an understanding of how teacher
educators and others who work with teachers can engage in applying human-
centered design to math instruction. The team seeks to identify features about
the underlying lesson study structure that can support teachers in planning and
implementing human-centered design geometry lessons. Examination outcomes will
be useful in the future for expanding this work with other teachers who seek to
connect human-centered design and math through lesson study.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.