* 2300137
* Collaborative Research: Engineering host-associated synthetic consortia based on ecological modules.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Salvador Almagro-Moreno, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2027
* USD 491,635.00

Feeding a growing human population will require the development of new
technologies that increase the efficiency of animal farming and reduce the
detrimental impact of pathogens. The engineering of gut-associated microbial
consortia can hold the key to the development of these new technologies. While
microbiome science is often discussed in the context of human health, the impact
of microorganisms on animals is much more pronounced, especially in the context
of high-intensity farming such as aquaculture – one of the main sources of high-
quality protein and fat for humans. Given the enormous relevance of aquaculture
in the economy and nutrition of many nations, it is imperative to develop
strategies to control microbiome composition and function, in order to maintain
and increase productivity in a sustainable manner. In this project, synthetic
microbiomes will be constructed to increase feed efficiency in the brine shrimp,
Artemia salina, and prevent infection by a bacterial pathogen, Vibrio
parahaemolyticus, which is responsible for great losses from disease in
aquaculture worldwide. Furthermore, a two-pronged bridge program partnering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and University of Central Florida with
Ecuador’s National Center for Aquaculture and Marine Research (CENAIM) will be
created. The bridge program will directly further the development of sustainable
aquaculture methods while protecting marine biodiversity and ecosystems and will
provide a critical translational avenue to test the results of this work in
large-scale, real-world settings. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in all aspects of the research.

Microbiome engineering is an emerging field and the ability to design and
construct multispecies systems from isolates is currently limited. This project
leverages research on marine bacterial communities and environmental pathogens
to design synthetic microbial consortia that maximize feed efficiency and
prevent pathogen colonization in aquaculture – a major source of edible protein
for humans. The ultimate goal of the project is to develop standardized animal
microbiomes that could be used to increase animal production and well-being by
synergistically controlling the interaction between feed efficiency and pathogen
colonization. Underlying this project, a novel framework, based on “ecological
modules” of organisms that could be mix-and-matched to obtain a desired
functionality, will be used to design synthetic consortia. The investigators
have already established two key ecological modules that are ubiquitous in
communities that degrade complex organic matter in the ocean and have amassed a
large strain collection with a wide range of metabolic capabilities. Synthetic
consortia will be built from this collection by combining different primary
degraders and secondary consumers to modulate host diet and deter pathogen
colonization using a model system consisting of the brine shrimp, Artemia
salina, and Vibrio parahaemolyticus, a bacterial pathogen of enormous impact in
aquaculture worldwide. Overall, this research will generate an experimental
platform to design synthetic communities using modules assembled from natural
isolates for desired functionalities and may provide insight into microbiome
assembly and formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.