* 2300976
* Integrating Data Science and Hands-on Experience into the Community College Biotechnology Classroom with Applications to Antibody Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Berestecky, INSTITUTE FOR FUTURE INTELLIGENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Antibodies are proteins naturally produced by the vertebrate immune system. They
are important in biotechnology, serving as reagents in research, diagnostics,
and therapeutics. Using antibody engineering as a focus for training, students
at Kapi’olani Community College (KCC) will learn practical skills for the
biotechnology workforce. Indeed, the biotechnology industry is experiencing a
period of growth that requires talented personnel trained across many
disciplines, including data science, artificial intelligence, and machine
learning. Moreover, the pandemic severely impacted the economy in Hawai’i due to
its heavy reliance on tourism. Thus, to diversify the economy and create high-
paying jobs in high-tech, knowledge-based, and emerging industries such as
biotechnology, the state of Hawai’i is interested in diversifying innovative
industries to ensure the state can function in a technologically advanced world.
As a minority serving institution, with a native Hawaiian student population of
~20%, KCC contributes to the enhancement of diversity, equity, and inclusion in
STEM. The unique opportunity to introduce antibody engineering into KCC’s
regular biotechnology curriculum will contribute to the building of a capable
workforce for the growing biotechnology and biomanufacturing sectors in Hawai’i.
This project will also contribute to the diversification of the economy in
Hawai’i and have a positive impact on native Hawaiian students and the biotech
industry in the state of Hawai’i and across the nation.

This project will introduce new antibody engineering modules to the
biotechnology program at Kapi’olani Community College. The first goal is to
train students to enter the biotechnology workforce. The second goal is to
demonstrate the importance of data science in biotechnology and biomanufacturing
and to enhance the undergraduate experience. The third goal is to train students
in the design, production, purification, and characterization of antibodies
using the Design-Build-Test paradigm. Accomplishing these goals will extend the
capabilities of the Monoclonal Antibody Service Facility and Training Center
(MASFTC). The specific aims for this project are: (1) Develop classroom and
laboratory modules to support experiential-based undergraduate learning and
research activities using the Design-Build-Test paradigm as applied to antibody
engineering. (2) Develop data science and bioinformatics education modules with
a web-based graphical user-interface to guide classroom activities and
laboratory components with an emphasis on undergraduate research experiences.
(3) Establish the KCC-Antibody Center of Excellence (KCC-ACE) database to record
the Design-Build-Test activities carried out by KCC students and faculty. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.