* 2300548
* Critical Aspects of Sustainability (CAS)-Climate: Actionable Heat and Carbon Mitigation by Urban Greening--Integrating Physical Modeling and Machine Learning for Decision Support
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Tianfang Xu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2026
* USD 746,097.00

This project seeks actionable climate solutions by using urban green
infrastructure to mitigate heat, promote carbon neutrality, and support decision
making processes in U.S. cities. Global urbanization in past decades, with
concomitant burgeoning anthropogenic activities, has been the primary and the
most irreversible driver to climate changes. Today, urban areas are
accommodating 56% of the world population, consuming about 70% of energy, and
producing about three quarters of global carbon emissions. Practically speaking,
the sustainable future of human societies depends largely on urban
sustainability. The research helps to unravel climate-carbon feedback and
improve the awareness and preparedness of stakeholders, policy makers, and the
general public to emergent patterns of local and regional climate changes. This
project actively engages stakeholders, especially those from local cities, for
project evaluation and outreach activities through regular meetings and annual
workshops. In addition, this project involves participation of pre-college,
undergraduate, and graduate students from ethnically underrepresented groups in
education, research, and stakeholder engagement, to prompt the principle and
initiatives of equity, diversity, and inclusion.

This project integrates transdisciplinary quantitative and qualitative methods
in the fields of atmospheric science, climate modeling, data science, and urban
sustainability to discover nature-based solutions for sustainable urban
development under changing climates. The overarching goal is to develop a
transformative platform by integrating the physically based modeling of urban
system dynamics and machine learning-based techniques in support of decision-
making and urban planning. Specific research tasks and outcomes of this project
include: (i) improving modeling capability of complex interplays between urban
system dynamics and anthropogenic stressors in the built environment, (ii)
creation of machine learning-based nimble surrogates for urban climate modeling
to overcome high computational cost and other technical barriers, and (iii)
bridging the gap between decision-making processes and climate modeling and
enable discovery of sustainable nature-based solutions via synthesis analysis
and multi-objective optimization. Furthermore, by recognizing that global
climate changes are challenging to the socioeconomic growth and sustainable
futures of cities worldwide, the new scalable platform enables policy makers to
find and evaluate actionable mitigation and adaptation strategies that are
tailored to city-specific development plans in a timely manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.