* 2300382
* Harvesting Actionable Results for Learning and Instruction: A Novel Mixed Methods Approach to Extracting and Validating Information from Diagnostic Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jim Minstrell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,984.00

Cognitive diagnostic models (CDMs) are an area of psychometric research that has
seen substantial growth in the past decade. These assessment tools have received
more attention because a simple overall test score does not serve teaching goals
as a richer evaluation of the student's skills is needed to support tailored
instruction. The investigator proposes to extend existing CDM psychometric
approaches to develop the diagnostic facet status model (DFSM) for formative
assessment design based on the high school physics curriculum.

There are a number of working concerns with existing CDMs. They do not scale
well to high-dimensional facet spaces, they require complex coding schemes based
on expert input, they cannot explore intricate facet relationships, or option-
based nominal responses. This project will build on existing CDM approaches to
address these limitations. The project develops a new psychometric model, the
DFSM, and a longitudinal extension, which can simultaneously model high-
dimensional goal and intermediate understandings at item option level. The PIs
develop a machine learning method to identify relations among facets, yielding a
comprehensive "facet map" that reveals both attribute hierarchies and conjoined
facets for the learning of physics. Finally, the researchers conduct qualitative
studies to validate DFSM and longitudinal DFSM's output for learning and
instruction.

The project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators' capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.