* 2300361
* Research Initiation Award: Comparing Carbon Fluxes of Tidal Marshes and Oyster Aquaculture Farms in the Chesapeake Bay
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amanda Knobloch, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,642.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Morgan State University supports faculty and
undergraduate research experiences determining the relative impact of climate
change in the Chesapeake Bay. Specifically, by measuring particulate organic
carbon, dissolved organic carbon and dissolved inorganic carbon in salt water
tidal marshes and oyster aquaculture, the project will reveal evidence of carbon
cycling and serve as a basis for comparative analyses between two coastal
ecosystems.

The overall goals of the proposed project are to compare the effects of
saltwater tidal marshes and oyster aquaculture farms on coastal carbon cycling,
understand the effects of oyster aquaculture facilities have on the coastal
carbon cycle, and train HBCU undergraduate students in chemical oceanography
using modern chemistry instruments and techniques. Toward this goal, this
project aims to analyze three carbon pools (particulate and dissolved organic
carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon) and an array of water quality parameters
(chlorophyll-a, total suspended solids, colored dissolved organic matter, etc.)
from three different locations in the Chesapeake Bay six times per year for two
years. The results are likely to reveal seasonal and tidal patterns and
differences in carbon cycling between paired marsh-aquaculture sites and between
the tidal marshes and aquaculture facilities in general. It is anticipated that
this will produce valuable information to the scientific community to better
understand how the coastal carbon cycle may be changing as tidal marshes are
lost due to climate change and human activities in oyster aquaculture
facilities. In addition, this study may contribute to enhancements in STEM
education, increasing diversity in geosciences, advancing industry-academic
partnerships, and informing environmental and public policy decisions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.