* 2300832
* Collaborative Research: Engaging students in discourse about criteria for judging scientific models
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Joshua Danish, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2026
* USD 547,105.00

The goal of this project is to study how secondary students come to understand
better an underlying logic of natural sciences--the relation between
construction of new ideas and critique of them. Science education has
traditionally focused mostly on how students construct models of natural
phenomena. However, critique is crucial for iterative refinement of models
because in professional science, peer critique of explanatory models motivates
and guides progress toward better understanding. This project engages students
in this process and helps them understand the relation of critique to better
explanations, by focusing students on the criteria by which critique and
understanding develop together through classroom discussions. The team is
developing a suite of teaching tools expanding upon the previously developed
open source software, Modeling and Evidence Mapping Environment, which
structures how students connect evidence directly to models they construct. The
products of this project, which include enhanced software, curriculum, and
assessments, are intended to increase capacity to engage young learners in
ambitious science educational experiences that are consistent with the Next
Generation Science Standards.

The project focuses on three interlinked practices critical for successful
reasoning with evidence about scientific models in science: engaging in peer
critique of models, describing and justifying key epistemic considerations to
guide model critique, and iteratively revising models towards greater accuracy
by attending to peer critique. This project advances the existing Model and
Evidence Mapping Environment software by adding a scaffolding suite to support
student engagement in, and valuing of, this epistemic meta-level of community
critique for improving the veracity and utility of models. A set of design
experiments provide insights regarding teachers' effective scaffolding of
activities and software features, and inform iterative design of instructional
materials. The entire ensemble is tested in small and larger scale heterogeneous
classroom settings in Indiana and New Jersey. Measured outcomes include student
learning, based on interviews and written student artifacts, as well as
examinations of classroom collaborative discourse. The project is yielding
critical theoretical insights about learners' growth along these dimensions of
understanding science, and practical materials and professional development to
support it.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

The project is also supported by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.