* 2300019
* Collaborative Research: Structure, Dynamics, and Catalysis with Dilute Bimetallic and Single Atom Alloy Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David Flaherty, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 399,779.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
David Flaherty (Georgia Institute of Technology), David HIbbitts (University of
Florida), and Ayman Karim (Virginia Polytechnical Institute) will examine the
connections among the structure, dynamics, and catalysis of reactions with
oxygen on bimetallic nanoparticles. The team will create, characterize,
simulate, and test how atoms of distinct metals move and facilitate reactions
upon the surfaces of nanoparticles comprised primarily of gold with small
amounts (1-5%) of a second element such as palladium or platinum. These
materials are commonly described as single atom alloy (SAA) catalysts. These
materials offer high rates and selectivities for numerous reactions important
for domestic production of energy carriers and platform chemicals (e.g.,
valorization of biomass, shale gas, operation of fuel cells and electrolyzers).
SAA currently suffer from a distressingly low number of active sites per gram of
precious metal used. The collaborative team aims to develop methods to create
SAA nanoparticles with smaller diameters (< 2 nm) to remedy this problem, and
then test if the emergent and beneficial catalytic properties of these SAA are
preserved as the size of the nanoparticles decreases. Here, the team will
combine cutting-edge methods in quantum chemical simulations and multiscale
modeling, characterization of operating catalysts using synchrotron methods, and
catalyst testing and spectroscopy to learn how the nanoparticles restructure in
different combinations of reactive gases relevant for catalysis (e.g., oxygen,
hydrogen, carbon monoxide). Subsequently, the team will assess how rates and
selectivities for a testbed reaction (reduction of oxygen with hydrogen) depend
on the spatial organization of the atoms on the nanoparticle surface. Methods
that will be developed will be useful for other dynamic catalyst systems and
will be integrated into graduate-level courses. The proposed work involves lab-
based education of graduate and undergraduate students and focused efforts to
increase participation of women in catalysis science, especially with NSF REU
(Research Experiences for Undergraduates) opportunities and cross-training of
researchers across the three partnering institutions.

Under this award, the collaborative Flaherty/Hibbitts/Karim team aims to learn
how the structure, dynamics, and catalytic properties of bimetallic and SAA
materials depend upon mean particle diameters, composition, and support
identity, all factors that impact the coordinative saturation of surface atoms
and the identity of their nearest and next-nearest neighbor atoms. The team will
couple precise synthesis, advanced characterization techniques (including n
situ, operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy, microcalorimetry, infrared
spectroscopy), and computational methods (simulations of full nanoparticles with
density functional theory and kinetic Monte Carlo) to address the complexity and
dynamics of SAA catalysts. A testbed reaction system with rates and
selectivities proven to be structure-sensitive with respect to these materials
(H2 + O2 → H2O2) will be used to probe the surface structures of active
catalysts, a challenge as the high pressures and complex solvents used often
render characterization difficult. First, Au-rich bimetallic alloy nanoparticles
(i.e., M1Aux materials, where M = Pd, Pt, Rh) with mean diameters of 1-2, ~6 and
~10 nm will be created, their post-synthesis structures will be characterized,
and then the influence of adsorption and reactions on their structures will be
examined over extended periods. Second, the thermodynamic relationships among
adsorption energies, active site motifs, and nanoparticle structure will be
determined. Third, the fundamental connections surrounding elemental identity,
mole fraction, and coordination of the reactive metal and reaction rates,
selectivities and barriers for H2O2 and H2O formation will be examined.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.