* 2300291
* Integration of Computer-Assisted Methods and Human Interactions to Understand Lesson Plan Quality and Teaching to Advance Middle-Grade Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Wei Ai, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 741,729.00

Planning and selecting instructional materials is one of the most complex and
important components of mathematics teaching. As online instructional materials
continue to proliferate, schools and educators are relying on them in addition
to textbooks. While there are advantages to open educational resources that are
freely available, questions about ensuring their quality and utility to teachers
and students remain paramount. An important contribution of this study is
identifying ways to measure the quality of large quantities of lesson plans
using an integration of cutting-edge machine learning techniques, knowledge of
effective mathematics education, and human feedback. Later phases of the project
include interviewing teachers about their planning practices, measuring lesson
plan quality, and analyzing students' work to provide multiple perspectives on
mathematics lesson plan quality in the middle grades. The use of machine
learning to measure lesson plan quality holds transformative potential for the
field of mathematics education.

The project will identify ways to analyze large numbers of mathematics lesson
plans using a mixed methods approach of natural language processing and human
coding. The project focuses on middle grades mathematics lesson and includes
data from teachers and students as well as the lesson plan documents themselves.
The study has three research aims. First, to develop a shared conceptual
framework and specify dimensions of quality lesson plans for middle-grades
mathematics by organizing an expert plan of leading researchers and skilled
teachers. Second, to develop and validate measures to capture the key dimensions
by applying state-of-the-art computer-assisted approaches (e.g., machine
learning) and human coding to analyzing a large volume of digital lesson plans
obtained under Creative Commons Licenses. Third, to conduct an exploratory
sequential mixed-methods study of how teachers attend to, interpret, and select
information to create their own lesson plans, and how lesson plan quality is
related to students' completed mathematical work. The mixed methods approach to
examining lesson plan quality is an important innovation for advancing research
about mathematics teaching and learning.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) Program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.