* 2300012
* Synthetic Antifreeze Glycoproteins for Cellular Cryopreservation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Jessica Kramer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2026
* USD 487,851.00

Non-technical Abstract: Animals living in polar regions have adapted to survive
freezing conditions. One of their strategies is to produce specialized
antifreeze proteins that stop ice from forming in their blood and cells. These
proteins prevent damage and death caused by ice crystals. When tissues and cells
are frozen for medical and research purposes, chemicals are added to prevent ice
from forming and causing damage. However, these chemicals can be harmful to
cells that are important for medical purposes, such as stem cells, and there is
a need for better strategies. The goal of this research project is to create
polymer materials that work like the antifreeze proteins found in animals. The
materials will be tested to see if they can stop ice crystals from forming and
whether cells can survive being frozen in the presence of these materials. We
will also examine if there are any toxic effects or genetic changes. As part of
this research project, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained and
all investigators will participate in community outreach efforts. This will
include support and training efforts to females and underrepresented groups to
encourage them to pursue careers in STEM.

Technical Abstract: Extremophile organisms in cold climates produce specialized
antifreeze glycoproteins (AFGPs) to defend their tissues against freezing
damage. These proteins have shown great potential for prevention of
cryopreservation damage of cells and tissues with research and regenerative
medicine applications. However, AFGPs are heterogeneous in structure and can
only be isolated in small quantities from the blood of polar fish. The overall
goals of this project are to generate transformative materials that capture the
chemical and biophysical properties of natural AFGPs and probe their ice binding
and cryopreservation activity. This will be achieved by developing a scalable
and tunable synthetic route to sAFGP structural variants and studying their ice
binding, ice shaping, and membrane stabilizing properties. We will also examine
bioactivity, including cellular viability and function after cryopreservation,
cellular localization, any genetic changes, and induction of metabolic stasis.
Additionally, we aim to incorporate EDI principles into biomaterials and
glycoscience education and mentoring in the research lab, the classroom, and in
community outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.