* 2301580
* ERI: Development of light-emitting devices having intensive quantum-optical properties using a low-dimensional semiconducting material
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Jae Yong Suh, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,875.00

The last few decades have seen significant technological advances in fabricating
nanometer-scale structures and performing ultrafast laser spectroscopies.
Physical or chemical phenomena occurring in extremely small distances (less than
one micrometer) for extremely short time durations (less than one nanosecond)
can be analyzed and understood with such advanced nanofabrication tools and
methodologies. Superfluorescence (SF), collective light generations from an
ensemble of interacting emitters in a nanometer-sized dimension, is one of the
fascinating quantum phenomena. SF occurs when the light emitters synchronously
behave under a single-mode electromagnetic field as they generate intensive
short pulses. As a new type of bright light source, SF may find rich
applications in quantum sensing, ultranarrow laser, and photonic-based quantum
computation. The realization of SF, however, is challenging because it usually
requires very low temperatures and stringent excitation conditions. This project
uses a low-dimensional compound semiconductor called quasi-two-dimensional (2D)
perovskites in thin film form. Indeed, a room-temperature SF has been observed
in quasi-2D perovskite thin films, demonstrating that a room-temperature SF is
feasible, but still, the quantum-optical properties of this SF akin to
traditional SFs of gaseous phases have yet to be explored. Because of the
potential inherent in a room temperature SF, it is of pressing importance that
SFs from solid-state quasi-2D perovskites are refined and their exquisite
quantum states measured. The proposed work will advance our understanding of the
collective optical effects from a robust solid-state material and show the
practical way to engineer and control the output properties of the quantum
lights.

This proposal aims to develop optical devices that control SF-lasing phase
transitions by incorporating quasi-2D perovskite onto distributed feedback (DFB)
resonators. Engineering monolithic resonant cavities with quasi-2D perovskites
will provide optical controllability over the phase diagrams of SF-lasing
transitions. Besides reproducing the existing results, the proposed project will
perform (1) time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy on a femtosecond time
scale to examine the dynamical characteristics of the SF emission from quasi-2D
perovskite DFB resonators. This experiment will measure the SF build-up time
required for the phase-synchronization of interacting emitters and the
characteristic Rabi-type oscillations of photoluminescence decay curves,
implying a strong light-matter coupling. Moreover, this project will perform (2)
measurements of wavelength-dependent second-order correlation functions that
will reveal the photon statistics and bunching characteristics of SFs. Finally,
using homodyne detection tomography, the research team will (3) search for their
non-classical photon states, such as displaced squeezed states. The pulsed and
quantum nature of SF at room temperature may open a route toward realizing an
ultrafast quantum light source. Photonic device fabrication and femtosecond
time-resolved spectroscopy are the major experimental tasks of the project,
which will also allow the exploitation of other emerging photoluminescent
materials beyond perovskites. In addition, this project involves the development
of a quantum optics lab course at Michigan Tech.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.