* 2301519
* ERI: Identifying Seismically-induced Failure Mechanisms in Homogenous Rock Slopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lorne Arnold, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,861.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award supports research aiming to
explain the fundamental behavior of homogenous rock slopes during earthquakes.
In this study, homogenous refers to modeling of the rock mass without explicitly
defined pre-existing discontinuities. The study will investigate the initiation
and growth of fractures within the rock slope and earthquake and slope
characteristics controlling the failure mechanisms. Identifying the dynamic
stresses that lead to failure initiation will enhance our knowledge of how
seismic waves interact with slope geometries to induce rupture in the rock mass.
This work will enable a new understanding of the factors contributing to rock
slope failures during earthquakes by quantifying the triggering thresholds
associated with different failure mechanisms. This understanding will enhance
engineers' ability to perform regional-scale hazard analysis in seismic hazard
areas with rock slopes. Regional hazard analysis can improve the safety and
well-being of individuals in populated areas with hazardous rock slopes by
enabling designers and policy-makers to make data-informed decisions about
hazard risk and mitigation associated with this phenomenon, thus saving lives
and preserving critical infrastructure economic investments. The research in
this study will be complemented by developing outreach materials focused on
engaging middle and high school students in civil engineering.

The goals of this study are to identify the dynamic stress state characteristics
leading to the initiation and failure of homogeneous rock slopes, identify the
combinations of ground motion characteristics, rock mass properties, and slope
geometries that lead to those critical stress states, and develop and test a
predictive framework for predicting co-seismic rock slope performance. Rock
slope dynamic stress states, fracture initiation, propagation, and coalescence
will be modeled using a subset of the discrete element method called the bonded
particle model. The dynamic implementation of the bonded particle model can
capture wave transmission, reflection, and absorption at boundaries. The study
will extend previous dynamic bonded particle model capabilities by calibrating
the softening bond model, which captures a broad range of brittleness ratios for
dynamic simulation. A systematic study of the dynamic stress state
characteristics leading to initiation of failure of intact rock mass slopes and
subsequent slope performance will be used to develop the predictive framework.
The ability of the framework to predict real-world coseismic rock slope
performance will be evaluated through comparison to well-documented case
histories of rock slope failures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.