* 2301007
* I-Corps: Ultrasonic appliances
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Ulysis Rivera, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of nontraditional washers and dryers. People living in rural areas
including Alaska, often cite water as a scarce resource and often visit a
washateria/laundromat or haul water to wash their clothing. Many homes do not
have the water hookups needed for a washing machine, and it often takes a day to
do laundry by hand. Current laundry appliances rely on large-scale mechanical
agitation for washing and heat-driven evaporation of retained water for drying.
The average washing machine uses 20 gallons of water to operate and uses hot and
cold water hook-ups for operation. The standard dryer requires a 240-volt
dedicated circuit. Clothes dryers account for 6% of residential energy usage and
are responsible for 40 million metric tons of annual carbon dioxide emissions.
The proposed technology leverages ultrasound to reduce the energy and water
consumption of home laundry appliances while combining the processes into one
low-cost appliance. These factors not only reduce the cost of ownership but make
the proposed appliance more accessible to smaller dwellings.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an accessible, all-in-one
ultrasonic washer and dryer to save time, space, and resources in environments
that lack the traditional infrastructure for washers and dryers. The core
technology is an ultrasonic transducer array that enables washing and drying to
be performed with less energy and water in a single, compact appliance.
Ultrasound is used to drive the creation of bubbles. Upon collapse, they
generate a localized force and heat which gently expels dirt out of clothing. In
the drying process, the technology uses ultrasonic atomization to cut drying
time and use less power, allowing for the use of a standard wall outlet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.