* 2301543
* ERI: Operator-Automation Shared Protection for Security and Safety Assured Industrial Control Systems: Learning, Detection, and Recovery Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Qin Lin, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Industrial control systems (ICSs) are commonly utilized in critical
infrastructures, including power, water treatment and distribution, and
transportation. However, the increasing digitization of ICSs, involving sensing,
communication, and control, brings advanced features but also exposes
vulnerabilities to malicious cyber-attacks. Protecting ICSs from such attacks is
crucial due to the potential catastrophic physical damages they can cause. The
project aims to develop a comprehensive solution, integrating human-on-the-loop
explainable machine learning (ML), detection, and recovery control in an
operator-automation shared protection framework, to provide security and safety-
assured ICSs against malicious cyber-attacks. Moreover, the project will
incorporate engineering research and education to train students, particularly
those from Under-Represented Minorities (URM), and cultivate a diverse, globally
competitive cybersecurity workforce. With the goal of lowering barriers to ICSs
security research and education, this project aims to have a significant impact
by providing accessible testbeds for a diverse population of beginning and
expert cybersecurity students and engineers to learn and practice.

The underlying concept of process anomaly detection, which is used for detecting
cyber-attacks, involves comparing observed and expected behaviors based on
physical invariants. The data-driven approach has the advantage of automatically
discovering these physical invariants without requiring domain expertise.
However, existing approaches based on black-box Machine Learning (ML) often
overlook the role of system operators in safety-critical ICSs. The lack of
insightful explanations in detection results hinders system operators from
conducting troubleshooting and isolating anomalous sensors and actuators under
attack, which is necessary for scheduling online recovery. To address this
issue, the PI's team proposes to develop an operator-automation shared
protection framework that unifies human-on-the-loop explainable ML, detection,
and recovery control. This framework aims to enable real-time decision-making
using cutting-edge ML and control techniques while valuing the feedback of human
operators to prevent over-trust in autonomy in a safety-critical system. The
research project has three major objectives: 1) The PI's team will develop
insightful hybrid automata learning that captures physical invariants in a way
that system operators can understand the model and the detection results, verify
and correct the model, and localize anomalies; 2) A real-time provably safe
control under uncertainty will be designed to restore the system to normal
operation without violating safety constraints; and 3) the PIâ€™s team will
evaluate, demonstrate, and disseminate best practices of the proposed framework
on 3D simulated and real testbeds with portability across a wide range of ICSs
for lowering the barriers to ICSs security research and education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.