* 2301049
* Investigating the Influence of Interpersonal Dynamics and Sociocultural Fit in STEM Research Apprenticeships
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Rachael Robnett, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 07/31/2027
* USD 560,706.00

Efforts to broaden and diversify the STEM workforce include programs that engage
undergraduate STEM students in conducting scientific research with faculty
mentors. Although there is evidence that these mentoring relationships can be
beneficial, there is also evidence of variations in student outcomes from these
experiences. Existing research provides limited insight into why some students
thrive in these mentored research experiences while others may struggle. The
proposed research will investigate the influence of interpersonal dynamics and
sociocultural background as potential mechanisms of variable outcomes of
undergraduate research experiences. Findings could provide novel insights about
how students and mentors may influence one another and how these interactions
may be shaped by participants’ sociocultural values and interpersonal dynamics.
Results from this research could be used to improve mentoring programs,
especially those that aspire to attract students from marginalized backgrounds
into the STEM workforce.

The proposed research aims to advance the research mentoring literature by
investigating underexplored dimensions of STEM research apprenticeships. The
project will investigate how interpersonal dynamics and sociocultural fit may
relate to student STEM research apprenticeship outcomes. Using a mixed-methods,
sequential exploratory design and leveraging social exchange theory and
community cultural wealth frameworks, project goals are to 1) understand student
and mentor conceptualizations of interpersonal dynamics and sociocultural fit
within research apprenticeships, 2) analyze longitudinal associations between
student perceptions of sociocultural fit and academic attitudes and outcomes,
and 3) explore the dynamics of mentoring relationships over time and identify
pivotal moments that may influence perceptions of mentoring relationship
quality. These goals will be addressed across three studies that focus on
student and research mentor pairs – study 1: 35 mentoring pairs, study 2: 100
mentoring pairs, and study 3: 150 mentoring pairs) – who are involved in STEM
research apprenticeships. Data collection on student outcomes will include
assessment of student academic attitudes, future STEM career plans, and science
inquiry aptitude. This research will be carried out in partnership with pre-
existing summer research programs at colleges and universities that serve
students from a range of sociodemographic backgrounds. Given that undergraduate
STEM research apprenticeships are widely used as tools aiming to broaden and
diversify the STEM workforce, the findings of the effort could have significant
and transformative impacts across STEM disciplines, apprenticeship models, and
institution types.

This project is supported by NSF's Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.