* 2301649
* ERI: Fluid dynamics of non-Newtonian blood substitutes in heart valve
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Hoda Hatoum, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The implantation of an artificial heart valve alters the blood flow in the
heart, which makes flow assessment post-implant of utmost importance. To
understand outcomes after aortic valve replacement procedures, especially
related to clot formation, experimental protocols to emulate cardiovascular
performance and operation have been established. Because of the challenges
associated with performing laboratory experiments with whole human blood, blood
substitutes are generally used. The majority of blood substitutes are Newtonian
mixtures, whereas blood is non-Newtonian. A non-Newtonian fluid is a fluid that
is characterized by a viscosity that varies with shear rate. This effect becomes
important in areas that are subjected to flow stagnation and therefore
thrombosis, which current experiments do not fully consider. Therefore, the aim
of this project is to understand the impact of non-Newtonian behavior on the
surrounding flow dynamic environment. The project will also encompass
significant educational activities, including undergraduate involvement and an
outreach program for students in local communities.

The goal of this project is to find an adequate blood substitute with non-
Newtonian properties to accurately model bloodâ€™s interactions with the
surrounding aortic root anatomy, mainly the sinus and neo-sinus, under various
physiological conditions in benchtop flow testing chambers. Then, experiments to
characterize the resulting flow properties in the aortic root will be performed
using high-fidelity imaging tools consisting of particle image velocimetry. The
influence of non-Newtonian rheology on flow stagnation assessment under
pulsatile physiological conditions, such as cardiovascular applications, is an
underexplored territory. We aim to address that using two specific aims: (i)
preparing and developing a non-Newtonian blood analog solution and testing its
rheological properties and (ii) assessing the effects of non-Newtonian
properties on flow stasis under pulsatile conditions after valve implantation.
The research described in this proposal is novel in that, the sinus and neo-
sinus flows after valve replacement will be experimentally evaluated using non-
Newtonian blood analogs and a comparison between resulting flow stasis
properties such as velocity, shear stress, and washout that are associated with
thrombosis in Newtonian versus non-Newtonian fluids will be established. The
project would contribute to further the understanding of hemostasis-related
thrombosis, a scientific area that is constantly growing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.