* 2301858
* AccelNet-Design: A Global Network of Networks of Integrated Urban Services (GNNIUS) for Healthy and Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* John Albertson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 249,021.00

Urbanization alters the forms and functions of a city, which can affect the
atmosphere and hydrosphere locally and regionally, resulting in a city's unique
urban climate. These changes can also interact with extreme weather and climate
events, having a significant impact on the health and operation of multi-
sectoral urban systems. With the advancement of smart sensor systems and
computational power, researchers have been able to generate state variables for
urban climates and systems research, which have demonstrated success in decision
support for urban meteorological hazards. Despite this progress, there is still
a lack of an urban analytics platform that provides coherent and standardized
databases for urban climates and systems at appropriate spatiotemporal scales.
This lack of an urban analytics platform impedes the generalization of urban
climate research results across global cities and hinders the application of
research outcomes to multi-sectoral urban systems. To address these challenges,
this project aims to establish a global network of networks of integrated urban
services (GNNIUS), bringing together scientific expertise and unique facilities
and resources from different countries to address knowledge gaps in urban
climate and systems research. GNNIUS will improve the inclusiveness and
diversity of the next-generation researchers and will help advance fundamental
science in urban climates and solve pressing societal problems with global and
multi-disciplinary joint efforts.

Through a series of guided discussions and a workshop, the international
coordination of urban climates and systems researchers and stakeholders will
establish guidelines for initiating an urban analytics platform and protocols
for applying it to better deliver integrated urban services across global
cities. This network of networks will initiate a general urban analytics
platform currently missing in the urban research community that is needed to
advance understanding of multi-scale processes, harness the new paradigm of
sensors and models to address the most consequential knowledge gaps, and
consider co-benefits/tradeoffs in multi-sectoral systems for decision-making
support. GNNIUS will create (1) trans-disciplinary dialogues between domain
experts (i.e., urban climates and systems) and technical experts (i.e., sensor
networks, sensing and control, uncertainty quantification, and big-data
science). (2) synergies among complementary observation, modeling and data
analytics in distinct global cities. (3) a consensus to holistically evaluate
strategies to achieve the desired objectives, such as urban climate mitigation
and adaption strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.