* 2301597
* Conference: Conservation Paleobiology Symposium
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Michal Kowalewski, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 21,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This proposal covers the cost of student registration
fees for the Conservation Paleobiology Symposium in Gainesville, Florida in
February 2023. This academic conference is run by the Conservation Paleobiology
Network, an NSF-funded network with over 650 members from 44 countries based out
of the Florida Museum, University of Florida. The potential conference attendees
come from all over the world and specialize in a variety of topics such as
paleontology, archaeology, conservation science, and historical geology.
Participants will include people from universities, government agencies, and
non-profit organizations. This conference will provide a way of connecting
specialists who would not otherwise have a chance to meet and exchange ideas. By
funding student registration fees, this proposal will help to attract and engage
students, particularly those from historically underrepresented groups, thus
nurturing the next generation of scholars and educators. The participation of
students is important for science and society. Not only will these individuals
be the future of the growing discipline of conservation paleobiology, but they
often have new approaches and apply the science in new and important ways. Fees
for conferences are often expensive and difficult for many students to afford.
By covering their registration fees, the conference is made more accessible to
students.

Technical Description: This proposal covers the cost of student registration
fees for the Conservation Paleobiology Symposium in Gainesville, Florida from
February 16 to February 19, 2023. This academic conference is organized by the
Conservation Paleobiology Network, an NSF-funded network with over 650 members
from 44 countries based out of the Florida Museum, University of Florida. The
potential conference attendees are geographically, disciplinarily, and
professionally diverse, and include people from academic institutions, state and
federal governmental institutions, and non-profit organizations. The sub-
disciplines of potential attendees include, but are not limited to,
paleontology, archaeology, conservation science, and historical geology. This
conference will provide a venue for cross-disciplinary specialists who would not
otherwise have opportunities to meet and exchange ideas. By funding student
registration fees, this proposal will facilitate our efforts to attract and
engage students, particularly those from historically underrepresented groups,
thus nurturing the next generation of scholars and educators. The participation
of these individuals is critical to the health of the field, which directly
impacts and benefits the shared future of our society. Not only will students
and individuals from underrepresented groups be the future of the growing
discipline of conservation paleobiology, but they commonly have new approaches
and use novel applications. Registration fees for conferences are often
expensive and difficult for many students to afford. By covering their
registration fees, the conference is made more accessible to students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.