* 2301637
* Modular Multiphase Interleaved High Current Conversion for Distributed Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Hua Zhang, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project will investigate a novel high-current conversion technology to
promote various distributed energy resources (DERs)-related applications,
including battery energy storage, electric vehicle fast charging, hydrogen
production from solar and wind power, and data centers. With the rapid growth of
energy demand from DERs, there is a significant challenge to directly supply a
huge DC current, up to a few kiloamperes or even higher. From the power systems
perspective, this project aims to provide capability to support high-power
demand response with high efficiency and fast speed. From the power electronics
perspective, it suggests a solution to satisfy the high-current requirements
with high power density and low cost. This project aims to alleviate the
existing technical gaps and contribute to the development of the next-generation
high efficiency, compact, and low-cost high current conversion technology. The
project is expected to benefit the renewable energy and transportation
electrification industry and contribute to the advancements of the US both
technically and economically.

This project will leverage the state-of-the-art wide bandgap (WBG) semiconductor
devices to develop a modular multiphase interleaved high current conversion
technology for various DERs and loads. To satisfy the high current needs and
overcome existing challenges, the project proposes to study high-efficiency
resonant circuits, integrated magnetic coupling, and modeling and control of
power converters. A key technology is the compensation circuit topology design,
including inductors, capacitors, and their interconnections to create resonance.
A unique innovation of this project will be the development of novel
compensation topologies to achieve a high-current source output property, which
is different from a conventional voltage-source output. In this way, the
expected high-current capability could be realized to satisfy many DER
applications. The developed high frequency soft-switching strategy would
significantly reduce the size of passive components and contribute to high power
density in practical use. Meanwhile, education efforts will also be integrated
into the research to ensure that the research achievements in this project will
benefit students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.