* 2301800
* Establishing a Dynamic Language Infrastructure Community of Science
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Kristine Hildebrandt, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 03/31/2025
* USD 227,604.00

The human heritage and knowledge encoded in endangered and under-documented
languages constitutes scientific data that must be preserved. To meet this need,
language documentation research must include perspectives and best practices
from a diverse array of experts, approaches, and stakeholders. This project
brings together established and junior scholars and knowledge-holders from
fields such as Anthropology, Arctic Studies, Geography, Language and Health,
Linguistics, Political Science, Social Psychology, and Information Sciences, to
create outputs that define, exemplify, and promote sustainable and impactful
cross-disciplinary language documentation research. These experts formulate new
research questions and methodologies, and build collaborative work plans that
bridge language documentation with areas such as computational infrastructure,
data management, and convergence research more generally. The programming
strengthens capacity in language research infrastructure that crosses discipline
boundaries and also strengthens connections between those in the academy and
communities, advancing transformative knowledge in the language sciences. This
project includes participation by junior scholars, graduate and undergraduate
students, and representatives of Indigenous communities, diversifying the field
of language documentation and training the next generation of researchers in
this area.

The participants in this project represent diverse experiences, skill sets, and
perspectives about how language documentation can ethically and impactfully
converge with, and benefit from, other fields. The methods include repeated
meetings to survey existing work, to define or re-define research problems and
research questions, to align terminology from different disciplines, to address
challenges regarding ethics and community participation, and to identify broader
impacts of language documentation. The outcomes of this project are disseminated
through a position paper and through peer-reviewed “State of the Art” (SoTA)
review articles, all co-authored by project participants. The SoTA review
articles present examples of research questions and methods that convergence
work advances. This programming also creates actionable recommendations that
help scholars from multiple disciplines to generate fundable proposals in
language documentation research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.