* 2301484
* Chromium isotope fractionation during oxidation of trivalent chromium by birnessite at near-neutral pH
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2025
* USD 248,988.00

A specific type of chromium, hexavalent chromium, is a known carcinogen and
common environmental contaminant. Chromium ranks fifth in importance among
inorganic contaminants at superfund sites. Hexavalent chromium enters our
environment from industrial releases and weathering of certain rocks. The
research project advances understanding of chromium geochemistry in modern and
past environments by applying a novel approach that uses specialized, highly
precise measurements of the stable isotopes of chromium. The objectives of this
approach include (1) “fingerprinting” chromium to distinguish and track chromium
sources in the environment and (2) determining when toxic, mobile, hexavalent
chromium converts to immobile, non-toxic, trivalent chromium. Such reactions
occurred early in Earth’s history and the research helps identify how and when
ancient earth systems shifted from a low oxygen state to an oxygen-rich
environment that fostered development of complex life. The findings will advance
practical use of chromium isotope measurements to improve management of chromium
contamination in the environment. To promote a diverse science workforce, the
project provides environmental geochemical training for graduate and
undergraduate students underrepresented in the geosciences. The research team
provides geochemical content for outreach to a minority-serving school district,
including a middle school girls geosciences summer camp.

The research answers two outstanding questions regarding the fundamental drivers
of chromium stable isotope variation. Chromium isotope measurements in modern
waters and ancient rocks suggest that hexavalent chromium released by oxidative
weathering is systematically enriched in heavy isotopes relative to trivalent Cr
in the parent rock. This implies that oxidation of chromium favors the heavier
isotopes, but the processes behind this phenomenon are paradoxical and not well
understood. This presents a fundamental knowledge gap in our understanding of Cr
isotope variations in both modern and ancient environments. The project targets
two major questions: Does oxidation of solid-phase trivalent chromium at near-
neutral pH generate significant chromium isotope shifts, and if so, does the
magnitude of isotopic fractionation induced by chromium oxidation depend on
geochemical variables such as pH, oxygen levels, and the type of chromium-
bearing solids being oxidized? The project is answering these questions via a
series of novel laboratory experiments wherein chromium present in three
different solid forms, and in natural sediments, is oxidized under a range of
relevant conditions by manganese oxides, the dominant chromium oxidant in
natural settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.