* 2301738
* Congruences between modular forms, Galois representations, and arithmetic consequences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jaclyn Lang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 175,000.00

A major theme in modern mathematics is that it is useful to study how objects
can be changed or deformed. For instance, the value of a function at a point is
just one number, but knowledge of how a (continuous) function behaves in a tiny
neighborhood of that point gives qualitative information like whether the
function is increasing or decreasing and how fast. This requires a notion of
distance so that one can talk about perturbing an object “a little bit”. In
number theory, one often replaces the usual notion of distance with a “p-adic”
distance — one that measures how divisible a number is by a given prime number
p. The PI will investigate the p-adic variation of “modular forms” — special
functions whose graphs have many symmetries. Studying variation of modular forms
is a topic in number theory that has led to many deep results such as the proof
of Fermat’s Last Theorem. The PI and her collaborators have found new directions
of p-adic variation that have yet to be explored and promise to yield new
insights about arithmetic. This investigation will incorporate young scientists
at many career stages as the PI mentors high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students and organizes conferences at both a regional and international level.

On a more technical level, there are three overarching topics to be studied. The
first two concern congruences between modular forms, first in the “vexing”
setting and then Eisenstein congruences. The final topic concerns images of
Galois representations. Each topic contains multiple projects, both addressing
the topic directly as well as arithmetic consequences. One new direction of
(tame) p-adic variation referenced above occurs in the vexing setting, where the
PI and her collaborators can prove a structure result on the relevant Hecke
algebra. A deeper study of this phenomenon will allow her to explore
consequences for tame analogues of Iwasawa theory and the Bloch-Kato
Conjectures. Within the topic of Eisenstein congruences, the PI will explore the
structure of pseudodeformation rings and Hecke algebras in weight 2 and prime-
square level. This has natural applications to the p-rank of the class group of
the field cut out by a p-th root of an integer. Finally, she will use her recent
work with Conti and Medvedovsky on images of 2-dimensional Galois
representations to understand images of finite products of such representations,
doing this in a way that characterizes the availability of elements needed for
Euler system machinery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.