* 2301361
* Collaborative Research: Multiparameter Topological Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bei Phillips, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 42,645.00

Complex datasets arise in many disciplines of science and engineering and their
interpretation requires Multiparameter Data Analysis, which broadly speaking,
studies the dependency of a phenomenon or a space on multiple parameters. For
instance, in climate simulations, scientists are interested in identifying,
verifying, and evaluating trends in detecting, tracking, and characterizing
weather patterns associated with high impact weather events such as
thunderstorms and hurricanes. In recent years, topological data analysis (TDA)
has evolved as an emerging area in data science. So far, most of its
applications have been limited to the single parameter case, that is, to data
expressing the behavior of a single variable. As its reach to applications
expands, the task of extracting intelligent summaries out of diverse, complex
data demands the study of multiparameter dependencies. This project will help
address this demand by developing a sound mathematical theory supported by
efficient algorithmic tools thus providing a powerful platform for data
exploration and analysis in scientific and engineering applications. The
educational impact will be accelerated by the synergy between mathematics and
computer science and integrated applications. Graduate students supported by the
project will be trained to develop skills in mathematics and theoretical
computer science, most notably in algorithms and topology, and analyze some
real-world data sets. The investigators will follow best practice to recruit and
mentor students from underrepresented groups who will participate in the
project. The investigators also plan to broaden research engagement via
workshops or tutorials at computational topology and TDA venues.

Although TDA involving a single parameter has been well researched and
developed, the same is not yet true for the multiparameter case. At its current
nascent stage, multiparameter TDA is yet to develop tools to practically handle
complex, diverse, and high-dimensional data. To meet this challenge, this
project will make both mathematical and algorithmic advances for multiparameter
TDA. To scope effectively, focus will be mainly on three research thrusts to:
(I) explore multiparameter persistence for generalized features and develop
algorithms to compute them; (II) exploit the connections of zigzag persistence
to multiparameter settings to support dynamic data analysis, and (III)
generalize graphical topological descriptors. From a methodological point of
view, the geometric and topological ideas behind the proposed work inject novel
perspectives and directions to the important field of computational data
analysis. In particular, the project team will investigate several novel
mathematical concepts in conjunction with algorithms to address various
challenges appearing in the aforementioned thrusts. The resulting TDA
methodologies have the potential to complement and augment traditional data
analysis approaches in fields such as machine learning and statistical data
analysis. The investigators bring together expertise in theoretical computer
science, algorithms design, mathematics, and in particular topological data
analysis to conduct this research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.