* 2301693
* ERI: Enabling tunable electronic device fabrication on flexible substrates using Barium Strontium Titanate (BST) printable ink development
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Oshadha Ranasingha, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 197,500.00

Printed or additive manufacturing has application potential as a low-cost, high-
resolution, fast prototyping of a range of complex circuits. Printed tunable
devices proposed in this work will allow the electrical tuning of circuit
functions, drastically reducing the cost, footprint, and weight of the overall
circuitry compared to mechanically tunable electrical devices. These printed
tunable electrical devices are critical to national security, especially radio
communications. In addition, low-cost Internet of Things (IoT) and wearable
devices will significantly benefit from the proposed tunable flexible electrical
devices. However, currently, there are no tunable printable inks to fabricate
tunable electrical devices on flexible substrates. In addition, existing
printable materials need high-temperature processing (greater than 800 °C) to
achieve the required tunability, which will damage most types of flexible
substrates, such as plastics, paper, and fabrics. Multiple challenges and unique
bottlenecks are associated with printable inks, and there are limited ongoing
research efforts to solve these issues. This project will cover novel tunable
materials syntheses, printable ink development, and the design, simulation, and
fabrication of tunable electrical devices. This project will open a new paradigm
of tunable flexible electronic devices. Both undergraduate and graduate students
will directly benefit from this project, and the proposed educational outreach
projects will enhance middle school students' interest and awareness of science
and engineering careers. In addition, the proposed project's novel findings will
be integrated into graduate-level printed electronics-related teaching.

This project will comprehensively advance the fundamental understanding of the
utilization of sinterless Barium Strontium Titanate (BST) nanoparticles as a
tunable material for flexible electronics. The composition of BST nanoparticles
to achieve the highest possible dielectric constant and tunability at room
temperature (without sintering) will be identified. An in depth investigation
will be carried out to determine the effects of the Ba:Sr molar fraction, the
size, and the packing density of BST nanoparticles on dielectric tunability.
High-resolution X-Ray diffraction patterns of sinterless BST nanoparticles under
an applied electric field will be used to investigate the correlation between
the variation of lattice parameters and the dielectric tunability. This will
give a greater insight into the dielectric tunability of sinterless BST
nanoparticles, which have not been experimentally reported yet. Lowering the
required bias voltage to less than 25 Volts is a significant achievement that
enables the usage of printed tunable flexible devices in real-world
applications, such as phase shifters, frequency-selective surfaces, and phased
array antennas. These devices are not currently feasible for real-world
applications. The proposed work will significantly advance the knowledge of
sinterless BST nanoparticles as a tunable material, nanoparticle ink formulation
for direct-write printing technologies, and fully printed tunable radio and
microwave frequency devices on flexible substrates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.