* 2301682
* AccelNet-Design: Circular Economy Network for Plastics in the US &amp; Caribbean
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Amy Landis, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,891.00

Plastics are everywhere; from the micro to the macro scale youâ€™ll find them in
oceans, in food, and even in your body. Plastics have untold environmental
impacts, and mismanaged plastic waste represents a loss of valuable resources.
The Caribbean has three times the mismanaged waste compared to other regions.
Most research on waste management has focused on large, wealthy European and US
systems. Those approaches are not applicable for the many small island nations
of the Caribbean as the small island nations of the Caribbean import copious
amounts of goods, including plastics, but have limited means or space for
recycling and recovery. A circular economy for plastics could reduce global GHG
emissions and fuel a more sustainable economy in the Caribbean. This project
establishes an international network of Caribbean and US collaborators that will
connect the various components of the plastic ecosystem to design sustainable
solutions to the plastic economy of the Caribbean. We will collaborate with
BioGals, a nonprofit empowering women of color to create sustainable solutions
for communities, to support broadening participation in our project. The team
will improve understanding of the impacts of microplastics, recover the
resources lost when plastics are mismanaged, develop solutions based on local
needs with local researchers, and improve understanding of the scale of plastic
wastes in conjunction with their environmental impacts.

The team will use a strategic planning process to develop a plastics network
strategic plan and research roadmap that at its core ensures sustainability and
supports a circular economy. The activities include a workshop and a network
event that is part symposium and part design charrette. These events will
develop operational links among networks; design collaborative approaches that
would engage students, early-career researchers, and leaders in the
identification of knowledge gaps and development of professional skills; and
identify knowledge gaps and research needs. This project will prepare U.S.
science and engineering students, postdoctoral scholars, and early-career
researchers for success in conducting and leading multi-team international
collaborations to address the pressing problem of plastic sustainability around
the globe, particularly for the Caribbean. It will enable strategic linkages
between U.S. and international research networks to identify knowledge gaps,
accelerate the process of scientific discovery, and develop a research roadmap
that will stimulate and foster future research advances for a sustainable
plastics circular economy.

The Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network
Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of
scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for
multi-team international collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic
linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary networks abroad that
will leverage research and educational resources to tackle grand scientific
challenges that require significant coordinated international efforts. This
project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.