* 2301256
* Flexible Technical Education Pathways in a Building Automation Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jeffrey Pedelty, MONTCALM COMMUNITY COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 631,715.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a Building
Automation Technology program to prepare students for high-demand technical
careers in the west-central Michigan region. In collaboration with industry and
other academic institutions, courses will be designed and offered to technical
education students in SMART HVAC systems, energy storage, production controls in
manufacturing, and cybersecurity related to these control systems. The course
curriculum will be aligned with industry certifications to better prepare
students for the current and future needs of employers in the region. The result
will be an increase in the number of skilled building automation technicians
that enter the regional workforce each year of the project. Ultimately, this
effort aims to fill significant gaps in the availability of customized training
programs that meet the needs of industry in today’s data and automation driven
society. This project team will collaborate with industry to complete the
following activities: 1) create Building Automation Technology courses for
Industry 4.0 HVAC systems, including SMART systems and effective data storage,
2) develop energy storage curriculum to support electric vehicles, 3) provide
students with practical experience in data and production controls in advanced
manufacturing and HVAC systems, and 4) include the creation of cybersecurity
curriculum related to controls for advanced manufacturing and municipalities.
Course curriculum will prioritize hands-on lab activities and work-based
learning experiences as a way to actively engage students in practical and
effective skill development. A flexible pathway model with multiple on and off
ramps that result in certificates, industry credentials, apprenticeships,
degrees, and/or the option to transfer will be implemented. An external
evaluation will be conducted to assess project activities and outcomes with a
focus on contributing to the body of knowledge on preparing skilled technicians
to support the advanced manufacturing industry. A targeted dissemination plan
will be carried out that shares project results with other Michigan state two-
year colleges and at the national level through presentations to the broader
technical education community. This project is funded by the Advanced Technology
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.