* 2301461
* Excellence in Research: 2D Heterostructure Materials Based CRISPR Sensors for Detection of Salmonella and its serotypes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Korsi Dumenyo, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2026
* USD 588,345.00

Foodborne diseases are a major public health concern all over the world, and it
is important to develop methods that can quickly and accurately detect these
diseases. The use of CRISPR-based systems is becoming popular for detecting
these diseases, but they still rely on the amplification of target DNA. To
address this issue, a new sensing platform will be developed based on 2D MXene-
based heterostructure materials, which have unique electrochemical properties.
This new platform can potentially detect pathogens in less than 15 minutes with
superior sensitivity and specificity over existing platforms. If successful,
this CRISPR sensor could enable rapid detection of Salmonella and other
pathogenic agents without the need for pre-amplification steps. The system can
also be easily and rapidly expanded for the detection of other emerging
pathogenic agents and can assist policymakers in planning preventive measures.
This project also offers opportunities for workforce development, including
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, offering workshops on
nanomanufacturing CRISPR-based biosensors, and recruiting a team of high school
students for competition at the iGEM international competition.

The proposed project aims to develop a new sensing platform for the rapid
detection of Salmonella using CRISPR-based systems and 2D MXene-based
heterostructure materials. The project has three specific aims: Aim 1: Design
specific gRNAs for Salmonella and its serotypes and evaluate their specificity;
Aim 2: Develop a functional group to attach to the dCas9 enzyme and bind it to
the surface terminal groups of the MXene-graphene materials; Aim 3: Prepare two
types of CRISPR-MXene-graphene sensors based on either dCas9 or Cas12a enzymes,
validate the sensors, and investigate the effect of bandgap and capacitance
tuning on the sensing mechanism for different types of MXenes. The project's
intellectual merit lies in advancing understanding of molecular interactions,
chemical bonding, and electrochemical response in 2D heterostructure materials
with tunable bandgap. The experimental methods developed from the proposed
research can also help explore similar scientific problems in a wider range of
the community, including the development of versatile platforms for rapid
detection of other pathogenic agents. If successful, the proposed CRISPR-based
MXene-graphene system could enable rapid detection of Salmonella and its
serotypes without the need for pre-amplification steps. The system can be easily
expanded for the detection of other pathogenic agents and can be useful for
point-of-care applications in remote clinical laboratories. The project also has
broader impacts, including enabling foundational technologies, workforce
development, and strengthening HBCU research infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.