* 2301526
* Higher Multiplier Ideals and Other Applications of Hodge Theory in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Christian Schnell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 05/31/2028
* USD 101,671.00

This is a project in pure mathematics, more precisely in the field of algebraic
geometry. Algebraic geometry studies geometric objects that are defined by
polynomial equations, using methods from algebra, complex analysis, differential
geometry, topology, and partial differential equations. Algebraic geometry also
provides useful examples for certain parts of theoretical physics such as string
theory. Most of the research proposed by the PI has to do with a subfield of
algebraic geometry called Hodge theory. Hodge theory makes it possible to apply
results from the theory of partial differential equations to problems in
algebraic geometry, in a language that is closer to algebra than to analysis.
Some of the work proposed by the PI is about developing Hodge theory further
(and to make it more accessible to graduate students); the rest is about using
Hodge theory to solve several very specific problems in algebraic geometry. The
PI will also work on a comprehensive book on this subject which will be of
enormous use to the research community.

More specifically, this project has several different research objectives, all
related to Hodge theory: (1) To develop a theory of higher multiplier ideals for
effective divisors, in joint work with Ruijie Yang, by using the nearby cycles
functor for mixed Hodge modules. (2) To apply this theory to theta divisors on
principally polarized abelian varieties, in particular to a conjecture by
Casalaina-Martin about the multiplicities of their singular points. (3) To
continue to study the local and global structure of the locus of self-dual
classes for integral variations of Hodge structure; self-dual classes are a
generalization of Hodge classes that are of interest in theoretical physics. (4)
To further investigate the behavior of Kodaira dimension under smooth morphisms,
especially several related conjectures by Campana-Peternell and by Popa. (5) To
continue the study of degenerating complex variations of Hodge structure in
higher dimensions, in particular the precise local behavior of the Hodge metric,
and its relation with the representation theory of semisimple Lie algebras. (6)
To continue the "Mixed Hodge Module Project" (joint with Claude Sabbah), whose
aim is to write an accessible treatment of the theory of mixed Hodge modules
with complex coefficients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.