* 2301172
* Collaborative Research: Advancing the Science of STEM Interest Development through Educational Gameplay with Machine Learning and Data-driven Interviews
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* H Chad Lane, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 262,815.00

The integration of digital games into STEM education has been an active area of
research for quite some time, but details about how students' interactions with
educational games may or may not reflect their interest is more difficult to
obtain. This project will use a Minecraft-based simulation environment to
advance understanding of how educational digital games can support the
development of enduring STEM interest. Middle school students in summer and
afterschool camps will experiment with a variety of scientific topics in the
What-If Hypothetical Implementations in Minecraft (WHIMC) learning system while
researchers interview them at key points in their gameplay to better understand
how their interest is developing. In this way, the project will contextualize
how decisions made by students while engaging with the educational game are
related to their prior STEM interest and how they may, in turn, influence the
development of enduring STEM interest. This work will contribute advanced tools
and methodological resources for studying STEM learning and interest that will
help broaden participation in STEM.

Hidi and Renninger's (2006) model of interest development propose four phases
that correspond with students' acquisition of knowledge on a topic. In the first
two phases, students may need situational triggers (such as those that are
afforded in popular digital games) to sustain their interest and motivation, but
to advance to the later stages of sustained, individualized interest, they must
also acquire knowledge. Research on how student STEM interest develops during
learning activities has typically relied on a handful of methods, each with
their own limitations. Standardized survey methods, for instance, may capture
important changes in students' interest level, but do not necessarily capture
important details on the processes required to increase students' interest. This
project will take a novel approach, using machine learning to trigger an alert
to researchers when the software detects an activity (or lack thereof) likely to
be tied to student interest. This will allow researchers to capture the
students' experiences in situ, interviewing them before they have time to either
forget or reconceptualize the event. The studies will take place in the context
of WHIMC, a Minecraft-based learning environment that provides afterschool and
summer educational opportunities to low-income families and to students with
backgrounds traditionally underrepresented in STEM. Researchers will triangulate
the interviews with more traditional measures of interest development, log data
of student activities, and measures of STEM knowledge to better understand how
these experiences relate to student engagement and their development of
sustained, individualized interest. In doing so, researchers can explore the
range of ways in which interest emerges across diverse student populations.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.