* 2301183
* Creating a Sustainable Educational Pipeline for the Controlled Environment Agriculture Workforce through a Remote Dual-Credit High School to College Model
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Stephen Gomez, Santa Fe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,357.00

Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA), popularly knows as indoor agriculture
is rapidly becoming a widely accepted technology to improve food security, food
safety, and economic development in rural communities. New Mexico is ideal for
CEA with more than 300 days of sun each year, inexpensive land, and growing
demand for fresh locally grown produce. Northern New Mexico is a region with
historical agricultural Hispanic and Native American communities who often lack
access to the educational resources necessary to develop the technical CEA
workforce. Thus, the demand for CEA technicians in the region presents an
opportunity for economic growth and food security in these rural areas. This
3-year project at Santa Fe Community College (SFCC) will train 18 teachers at 9
rural high schools to provide 180 underserved students with dual-credit courses
in the first-year curriculum of the Associate in Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree
in CEA. The project significantly expands the ability for schools across New
Mexico to train a regional CEA workforce and creates a pipeline for students to
enter SFCC and earn their A.A.S. degree in reduced time. Remote instructional
technologies coupled with on-site, hands-on replicated aquaponics systems
provide teachers and students with blended learning opportunities in rural high
schools. A novel online network will connect students and teachers with CEA
industry and academic professionals whom they would not likely have
opportunities to interact with through a conventional high school education. An
academic pipeline, including a robust internship program, will ensure that
students who complete their SFCC CEA degree requirements are ready to enter the
workforce.

This project will meet the technical workforce needs of the industry through
integrated education and outreach efforts. In addition it will address the
opportunity to increase the number of qualified dual-credit CEA instructors
through a summer program for high school teachers at the SFCC campus. Three high
schools from underserved communities will each be invited to send two STEM
teachers to participate in an intensive week-long summer workshop to learn the
introductory CEA college curriculum. The teachers will be prepared to deliver
two CEA dual-credit courses annually. Each school will receive a replicated
turn-key classroom aquaponics system for hands-on practical instruction complete
with sensors for remote monitoring. The first academic year after each cohort of
teachers completes the summer workshop the students will participate in hands-on
learning with their aquaponics system in classes co-taught by the high school
teacher and SFCC faculty. In subsequent years participating high school teachers
will be prepared to teach the dual-credit CEA curriculum independently. The
teachers will be mentored weekly by SFCC faculty and staff throughout the three
years of the project. Student internships and summer research experiences will
reinforce the curriculum and develop workplace skills. The project is unique in
providing twenty-first century agricultural education and networking
opportunities to largely underserved rural communities. The project will
increase the number of dual-credit classes available in local high schools and
engage the local community in food sovereignty issues while creating a
sustainable workforce in underserved communities. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.