* 2301678
* ERI: An Emotion-Based Robotic Behavior Optimization System for Comfortable and Friendly Human-Robot Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Rui Li, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will support research that will
contribute new knowledge related to comfortable and friendly human-robot
collaboration in manufacturing, promoting the development progress of robotics
and advancing human-robot interaction technologies. Collaborative robots in
manufacturing work with humans on repetitive and dangerous tasks to improve
efficiency and productivity. However, stiff and mechanical interaction behaviors
of the current robots lower the naturalness and flexibility of the collaboration
process. Prolonged exposure to working with such robots will cause significant
stress among human workers. Therefore, it is crucial to improve the interaction
behaviors of the collaborative robot. This award supports fundamental research
to provide needed knowledge for the development of an emotion-based robotic
behavior optimization system. It aims to turn the current collaborative robot
into an empathetic and friendly working companion that can adaptively adjust its
interaction behaviors for facilitating comfortable and friendly collaboration
processes. Results from this research can further benefit the U.S. economy and
society by bringing humans back to manufacturing automation. The
interdisciplinary research activities in this project will help broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering research and positively
impact engineering education.

To realize a human-centered, comfortable, and friendly collaboration between the
human and the robot in manufacturing, this project will develop an emotion-based
robotic behavior optimization system. The system can turn the current
collaborative robot into a smart companion which can not only understand and
respond to human intentions and emotions but also adaptively optimize its
actions to facilitate comfortable and friendly collaboration in manufacturing
tasks. This project will: (1) develop a new computational model to let the robot
understand human intentions and measure human emotions, (2) develop an
interaction system to enable the collaborative robot to intelligently respond to
human emotions and optimize its actions for a natural and flexible human-robot
collaboration, and (3) conduct real-world experiments to validate and assess the
effectiveness, efficiency, and human acceptance of the developed system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.