* 2301427
* ERI: Better by Design: Rational Design and Synthesis of Alloy (Electro)Catalysts Atom-by-Atom
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Ian McCrum, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,946.00

Catalysis has long been a key technology for facilitating the efficient
manufacture of fuels and chemicals from fossil resources, while also relying on
thermal process energy derived from fossil-fuel combustion. The recent
transition to “clean” energy technology has stimulated research in alternative
energy sources and associated research and development of electrocatalytic
processes for both chemical manufacturing and reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions. To those ends, the project explores the design of bimetallic alloy
electrocatalysts for two critical nitrogen reactions – ammonia synthesis and
nitric acid reduction. In particular, this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI)
project provides an opportunity for the early-career researcher to further
investigate a novel alloy catalyst design approach – selective step decoration –
advanced by his research group. Such improved catalysts will expand the scale
and scope with which electrocatalysis can replace traditional processes, while
also supporting related educational and outreach activities focused on K-12
students. Selective step decoration involves the electrochemical deposition of
one type of metal atom selectively onto step-edges on the surface of another
metal. This yields a surface which exposes bimetallic surface sites, as on a
bulk bimetallic alloy, but with a known structure and composition, and on top of
a pure metal substrate. The goal of this ERI project is to expand the selective
step decoration technique into a novel method capable of synthesizing a wide
variety of multi-metallic surface alloy catalysts, and to use these catalysts,
with their well-defined and simpler structure, as a model testbed to understand
how alloy composition dictates catalyst stability, activity, and selectivity.
Achieving the promise of selective step decorated bimetallic alloy
electrocatalysts requires that two needs be addressed: (1) synthesis techniques
must be developed that can directly control both alloy composition and structure
at the catalyst surface, and (2) simple design rules must be created that relate
performance of the alloy catalyst to its structure and composition. To overcome
these limitations, two primary objectives will be pursued using a combination of
density functional theory (DFT) computational modeling and experiments on
single-crystal electrodes having a well-defined surface structure. Those
objectives are: (1) identify the driving forces for ad-atom deposition,
dissolution (corrosion), and segregation as a function of ad-atom/substrate pair
across a variety of substrates to understand alloy stability in operando, and
(2) identify simple descriptors (properties of the pure components) and the
general rules which govern alloy catalytic activity and selectivity as a
function of ad-atom/substrate pairs. Determining the conditions for a particular
ad-atom's favorable deposition on, dissolution from, or segregation with a
particular substrate will identify specific pairs of ad-atoms/substrates for
which selective step decoration is possible. Additionally, the study will reveal
insights into how the stability of an alloy differs from that of its pure
components. With DFT, the driving forces for deposition, dissolution, and
segregation will be quantified, to enable the prediction of surface alloy
stability in the electrochemical environment for any pair of metals. By using
the same well-defined, step-decorated surface alloys to measure the activity and
selectivity of a particular set of reactions (nitrogen and nitric oxide
reduction) in combination with DFT modeling, the properties of each alloy
component (e.g., d-band center, work function, and the hotly debated potential
of zero charge) that dictate alloy catalyst performance will be determined.
Whether the governing rules that limit pure single metal catalysts, such as
adsorbate scaling relations, hold true for alloys will also be determined.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.