* 2301577
* ERI:Ultrafast, Robust, Novel  Four-bore Carbon-fiber Microelectrodes for Simultaneous Electrochemical Sensing of Multiple Neurotransmitters and Toxic Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Pavithra Pathirathna, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Neurological disorders have become a major global health problem despite efforts
taken by multiple groups to preserve brain function and structure.
Neuroprotective drugs have limited efficacy, thus indicating a set of
undiscovered causes behind these diseases. Besides some well-known risk factors
such as aging, clinical and epidemiological studies have shown that exposure to
heavy metals can initiate the death of neuron cells. Moreover, based on
biochemistry-related computational modeling, several mechanisms have been
proposed to explain the effects of heavy metal exposure on various
neurodegenerative diseases. Because of the lack of proper tools to perform real-
time measurements in living systems, researchers study heavy metals in
postmortem tissue samples or urine and blood obtained from patients. However,
such studies or theoretical models do not accurately represent the measurements
inside living systems. Additionally, current studies mainly focus on identifying
one chemical messenger molecule or neurotransmitter at a time. Thus, an improved
understanding of interactions among neurotransmitters and other elements, such
as heavy metals, is needed. This research will focus on developing a novel,
robust electrochemical sensor that can perform ultra-fast, simultaneous
measurements of heavy metals and multiple neurotransmitters. The sensor will be
fabricated using carbon fiber microelectrodes, and the data acquisition and
analysis will be performed using fast scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV). The
outcome of this study will explain the fundamentals of this new sensor, thus,
providing a greater mechanistic understanding of the system before testing in
living systems. The broader impact of this project includes broadening women's
participation in the STEM field and increasing public awareness of exposure to
heavy metals and their negative impact on neurological disorders. These goals
will be achieved through several outreach activities in collaboration with a
local middle school.

This project aims to make fundamental contributions to developing an
electrochemical sensing system to understand the role of heavy metals and co-
transmitters in the brain. The outcome will provide missing information about
the multifactorial etiology of neurodegenerative diseases to ultimately design
more efficient drugs. As the initial step of a multi-step project, this work
proposes to engineer new four-bore carbon fiber microelectrodes (CFMs) that
simultaneously measure heavy metals and neurotransmitters using FSCV. The
outcome will be achieved by (1) optimizing FSCV parameters to detect arsenic and
cadmium at millisecond temporal resolution, the required speed to perform real-
time, in vivo measurements, (2) fabricating a four-bore CFM, and (3) detecting
heavy metals and several neurotransmitters simultaneously using the four-bore
CFM. The rationale behind this proposed research is that, once the fundamentals
of this new sensing platform are identified, it can be applied to in vivo
measurements to probe neuronal communication in the presence of external stimuli
such as heavy metals. This study will open new avenues to obtain critical,
accurate speciation information about heavy metals and potential co-transmitter
events, particularly in higher vertebrate animals with transformative
applications in designing more effective therapeutics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.