* 2301417
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Production of Platform Chemicals from Inedible Biomass and Carbon Dioxide
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Aanindeeta Banerjee, RESOURCE CHEMICAL CORP.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable cost-competitive, high-volume
production of useful chemicals and materials from abundant and sustainable
feedstocks. This project is developing a process to manufacture a chemical known
as FDCA (furan-2,5-dicarboxylic acid) from carbon dioxide and a commodity
feedstock made from inedible biomass. FDCA is a naturally occurring substance
and is used to make polymers (i.e., plastics) that have superior performance
compared to analogous polymers produced today from fossil fuel feedstocks. The
obstacle to producing these polymers is that it has been complicated and
prohibitively expensive to produce FDCA. The competing technologies for making
FDCA require edible sugar as the feedstock and a very large number of process
steps, resulting in high manufacturing costs. This project proposes to produce
this chemical using a dramatically simplified process, which enables cost-
competitive production. By advancing the technology toward commercial
application, this project will have a far-reaching impact on US economic
competitiveness and innovation in the chemical industry. With a secure FDCA
supply, US chemical and materials companies can develop manufacturing capacity
for polymers with an ultimate market opportunity of >>$100 billion. In addition,
replacing energy- and emissions-intensive fossil fuel-derived polymers with
these more environmentally friendly polymers will reduce emissions of multiple
economic sectors. Finally, these polymers have favorable end-of-use options that
will reduce plastic waste and its accumulation in the environment.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to advance the technology for a key step of
the FDCA production process to a level that enables its implementation in a
pilot-scale demonstration. The reaction under investigation is the aerobic
oxidation of furfural to furan-2-carboxylate (furoate) under aqueous alkaline
conditions. Oxidizing furfural under industrially relevant conditions (high
concentration and high rates) is fundamentally challenging because furfural is
prone to rapid degradation processes. Studies of the process in the earlier
Phase I project provided key insights into the reaction mechanism and identified
two potential reactor designs for continuous operation. The Phase II project
will compare performance in these two reactor designs, scale up the preferred
design, validate catalyst lifetime, and demonstrate integration of the reaction
product into the downstream steps of this FDCA process. Successful completion of
the project will finalize the reactor design for the oxidation unit operation in
a pilot demonstration. In addition to advancing this technology toward
commercialization, the project will create new knowledge to enable broader
utilization of renewable feedstocks for chemical production by providing
insights into catalyst selection, process conditions, and reactor designs for
aqueous aerobic oxidation reactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.