* 2301403
* SHINE: A Numerical Investigation into Coronal Mass Ejections (CME-CME) Interaction Events
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tibor Torok, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 545,775.00

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are among the most dramatic events in the solar
system, where coronal plasma and magnetic fields are explosively released into
space. A full characterization of the coronal and interplanetary evolution of
CMEs—and of their internal magnetic configuration—is one of the most pressing
issues in space science. Two or more CMEs can collide during their journey away
from the Sun, giving rise to even more complex structures that can potentially
enhance space weather effects at Earth. CME–CME interaction events have been
observed in remote-sensing imagery as well as in in-situ measurements, however,
due to the sparse nature of available observations, many open questions remain.
This project will address this issue through magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
simulations. The project supports an early career woman PI and undergraduate
student researchers.

This project is a detailed investigation into the dynamics and consequences of
CME–CME interaction aimed at addressing the following Science Questions: (1) Can
we identify characteristic CME–CME interaction signatures that are common to
most events and can be used as proxies for interaction occurrence? (2) Is it
possible to determine an overall, global structure for CME–CME interaction
events, or is every in-situ observation only sampling local properties? (3) Is
there a combination of properties of the “original” CMEs relative to one another
that leads to maximum geoeffectiveness? The Science Questions will be addressed
via analyses of a series of MHD simulations based on idealized configurations,
which will model different CME–CME interaction scenarios and properties of the
resulting structures. The work will lay the groundwork for comprehensive
understanding of CME–CME interaction processes in the inner heliosphere, and its
results will be applicable to future in-situ analyses of real events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.