* 2301829
* ERI: Computational Investigation of High-Pressure Turbulent Premixed Flames - Physical Insights and Two-Scale Predictive Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Reetesh Ranjan, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2025
* USD 159,427.00

Premixed combustion is observed in aeronautical and automotive engines, which
are typically operated at high pressure and under turbulent flow conditions to
yield higher fuel efficiency, compact design, and lower emissions. The interplay
of various combustion processes such as species transport, chemical reactions,
and heat release makes the computational investigation of flame-turbulence
interactions in these applications a challenging task, particularly when a
detailed chemical description is essential. Past fundamental studies have
primarily focused on the analysis of such flames at atmospheric pressure. In
this work, aspects of high-pressure turbulent premixed flames will be addressed
by providing fundamental insights into the effects of pressure and establishing
an efficient physics-based computational model. This investigation will also
integrate research and education by enriching courses in fluid mechanics and
thermal sciences; empower undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds with advanced knowledge and computational skills; and mentor
university-supported undergraduate scholars to develop goals and skills.

High-pressure turbulent premixed flames observed in energy conversion and
propulsion devices are multi-scale in nature, which makes their fundamental
investigation extremely challenging. While direct numerical simulation can
provide detailed insights into flame-turbulence interactions, it tends to be
computationally prohibitive for the study of practical applications. To this
end, large-eddy simulation is a promising modeling strategy; however, some
challenges need to be addressed for it to be predictive. Additionally, most of
the past fundamental studies have focused on examining the characteristics of
such flames at atmospheric pressure, thus requiring further studies,
particularly, focusing on the analysis of the multi-scale interactions within
the flame region. This proposal will address these challenges by (i) providing
fundamental insights into the effects of pressure on premixed flame-turbulence
interactions in canonical configurations, (ii) assessing the capabilities of a
novel two-scale physics-based predictive modeling strategy, and (iii) examining
the behavior of different types of fuels under high-pressure conditions. The
outcomes of the project will have a broader impact on the field of turbulent
combustion as it will lead to an improved understanding of features of high-
pressure turbulent premixed flames, and demonstrate the capabilities of a multi-
scale model, which can be used to study practical configurations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.