* 2301165
* Cultivating Career Pathways for Advanced Manufacturing Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Brooks Jacobsen, Lake Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 342,504.00

The South Dakota Department of Labor & Regulation recently reported nearly 3,000
manufacturing job openings and the industry is projected to add 3,500 jobs by
2030. This report and other indicators highlight the significant need for
skilled technicians to fill the state’s high-demand, high-wage Advanced
Manufacturing jobs. Lake Area Technical College’s three-year effort will
encourage learning and career pathways at an earlier age, provide regional
manufacturers with an expanded and diversified talent pipeline, and strengthen
relationships between education and industry. The project was developed with the
support of secondary education, workforce development, and industry partners who
share LATC’s vision for expanded employability and earning potential for workers
and a growing state economy.

The overall goal of the project is to recruit larger classes of college-ready
students into the college’s Advanced Manufacturing programs and increase the
number of technicians entering the workforce. The project will provide the
opportunity for middle and high school students to explore careers and technical
education options not often emphasized in South Dakota’s secondary schools.
Teachers, administrators and other influencers will also learn the importance of
these careers and find resources for improving secondary technical education
programs and supporting students in their career and education decisions. Over
the course of the three-year project, STEM-related recruiting events will reach
1,050 students. In addition, 30 secondary educators will join LATC’s STEM
learning community and 60 incumbent workers will receive additional technical
training through the college. This project will help break the manufacturing
industry stigma in the region; introduce students, parents, educators and
incumbent workers to new career opportunities; and share examples of how
individuals with a variety of STEM-related aptitudes can succeed in today’s
manufacturing industry. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.