* 2301586
* ERI: Engineering a biofilm infection-on-a-chip to elucidate the host-biofilm interface
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Elizabeth Stewart, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Bacteria build protective homes to live in with other bacteria known as
biofilms. Biofilms cause infections at many locations in the body. Bacteria
design biofilms differently depending on the location where they live. New tools
that can relate the location where bacteria form biofilms and their strengths
are needed and could help scientists find new ways to destroy biofilms. This
project creates new strategies to learn about the homes bacteria build on
catheters placed in blood vessels. The research will seek to understand how
blood vessels and blood flow change the design and strength of biofilms. The
project is important for helping to create new ways to study and treat
infections in blood vessels. Another focus of the project is mentoring graduate
and undergraduate students in STEM outreach. Graduate and undergraduate students
will educate the public about how tools for studying infections can help create
new drugs at a local science festival. Women graduate students will develop STEM
career exploration workshops for women undergraduate students.

Bacterial biofilms are estimated to cause 65-80% of infections. Biofilms are
frequently recalcitrant—resistant or tolerant—to conventional antibiotics.
Current dynamic infection models of bacteria-host interactions are limited to
initial bacterial adhesion events or intracellular infections and do not capture
biofilm development. New models are required to advance the understanding of
biofilm resilience in host environments and accelerate the development of
effective antimicrobials. Incorporation of the host interface into biofilm
models is essential as biofilms are sensitive to changes in microenvironment.
The goal of this project is to engineer, validate, and utilize an in vitro
biofilm infection-on-a-chip that effectively replicates a Staphylococcus
epidermidis biofilm infection on a central venous catheter in physiologically
relevant conditions at the host-biofilm-device interface. Engineering
advancements in model design include a window on the microfluidic chip that
controls surface interactions between bacteria and endothelial interfaces, a
common co-culture growth media, and optimization of biofilm growth conditions to
recapitulate biofilms with in vivo characteristics. The validated model will be
used to reveal how the vascular interface influences the development of biofilm
structure. The biofilm infection-on-a-chip will also be utilized to elucidate
how variations in venous shear stress modulate biofilm mechanics and vascular
inflammatory response at the host-biofilm interface. The biofilm infection-on-a-
chip engineered in this project is the first biofilm infection model to enable
direct visualization of biofilm development at the vascular interface in
physiological conditions. Advancing the understanding of biofilm development at
the vascular interface is critical for shedding new light on biofilm resilience
in the host environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.