* 2301002
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering Biology Department Cultural Commitments to Graduate Student Teaching Professional Development
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kristen Miller, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 18,035.00

The United States needs a strong scientific workforce, yet only about 50% of
undergraduate students seeking a degree in Biology complete that major. One of
the main reasons students leave the Biology major is their perception that
instruction in introductory courses is of poor quality. In many cases, graduate
students are the instructors of record, especially for discussion and laboratory
sections. Despite the significant instructional role that graduate students
play, there is a documented lack of teaching professional development in
graduate programs. This pilot project will use consensus surveys with experts to
identify aspects of departmental cultures in biology fields associated with
graduate student teacher training. Findings from this pilot project will be the
basis for future research and for supporting higher quality training of and
teaching by graduate students.

This study will utilize a Delphi methodology to identify consensus aspects of
biology departmental cultural commitments associated with support for or
challenges to graduate student teaching professional development. The central
research question is: What are the consensus biology departmental values and
beliefs that experts associate with departmental support for or resistance to
teaching professional development? The multi-round, Delphi study will enable the
project team to engage a sample of 40 experts from biology departments. The
project is designed to iteratively generate a list of cultural commitments and
rank the list in terms of importance to teaching professional development. The
resulting analysis will be used by the project team to develop and propose a
change theory for improving the quality of graduate student teaching
professional development in biology departments.

This project is supported by NSFâ€™s EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.