* 2301668
* ERI: Robust and Scalable Manufacturing of Ultra-Sensitive and Selective Molecule Sensor Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2026
* Bo Li, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McAdams
* 01/31/2026
* USD 199,676.00

To date, molecule sensors not only have a profound impact on various areas in
clinical diagnostics, but also find applications in medicine, pharma, food and
process control, environmental monitoring, defense and security. However, a low-
cost and scalable manufacturing capability for ultra-sensitive and selective
electronic molecule sensors has yet to be achieved. This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project will develop a novel and broadly applicable platform
for detecting molecules at the single molecule scale in real-time, using
nanoparticle organized single-molecule sensors patterned on a highly scalable
sensor array chip. The manufacturing method is highly reproducible, scalable and
of extremely low cost, due to its inherent “bottom-up” manufacturing strategy.
Such electronic molecule sensor arrays are both practically manufacturable in
the near term, and have a durable long-term scaling roadmap, thus providing an
ideal way to bring the power of advanced manufacturing to the broad area of
molecule sensing. The outcome of this project will greatly impact a variety of
fields with beneficial economic and workforce implications, transition
fundamental scientific discoveries into useful technologies that benefit
society, promote scientific progress, increase national prosperity, and maintain
US leadership in advanced manufacturing. In addition, this project will
establish a program of integrated research and education, promoting education
and interdisciplinary approaches in the areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.

The goal of this project is to develop a novel, robust and scalable
manufacturing process for ultra-sensitive and selective electronic molecule
sensor arrays to enable real time and label-free detection of targe molecule in
an all-electronic format compatible with field deployment on integrated circuit
chips by leveraging recent advances in singe-molecule charge transport and
colloidal cracking. This project offers solutions to two key challenges in the
field. The first is creating electronic molecule sensors capable of switching ON
(i.e., from insulating to conductive state) in response to target molecule
binding at single molecule scale that can be seamlessly integrated on chips. The
second is scalable and low-cost manufacturing method at device scale for
electrode pattern with extremely small gap between electrodes so that it can
yield effective sensing current, and therefore, ultra-high sensitivity.
Moreover, this project advances knowledge of charge transport in molecule sensor
over three distinct length scales: single molecule, single nanoparticle, and
assembled molecule-nanoparticle network. This work has potentially
transformative impact in realizing a long-term endeavor towards advanced
manufacturing - integrating single molecules into electronic chips for molecule
sensor manufacturing to achieve the ultimate miniaturization of molecular
electronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.