* 2301030
* New Advances on Flat Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dawei Chen, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

This project focuses on studying flat surfaces and exploring their applications
across various fields. Flat surfaces are polygons with identified pairs of
parallel edges, where the vertices of a flat surface are glued to form conical
singularities. Flat surfaces provide a valuable framework for investigating the
intricate connections between geometry, dynamics, and algebraic structures. The
understanding of flat surfaces has already led to notable discoveries about
space volumes and billiard trajectories. The principal investigator is dedicated
to advancing knowledge in this area by continuing his research efforts and
achieving new results in the study of flat surfaces. This project will also
create many opportunities for students and postdoctoral scholars. Alongside his
research, the principal investigator will engage in mentoring students,
organizing workshops, and participating in outreach activities. A key focus will
be on fostering diversity within the field and preparing the next generation of
scientists for future challenges and opportunities.

Flat surfaces correspond to differential forms on Riemann surfaces, where the
conical singularities of a flat surface correspond to the zeros of a
differential. These equivalent yet distinct descriptions make flat surfaces lie
at the interface of many fields as a research hotspot. This project will cover
various focal points in the study of flat surfaces, including dynamical
invariants, intersection theory, residue theory, birational geometry,
compactification, Brill-Noether theory, topology, cycle classes, higher
differentials, and affine structures. To address the complex challenges
associated with these areas, the principal investigator will employ a
combination of techniques from algebraic geometry, analytic geometry, dynamics,
and enumerative geometry. By utilizing these diverse methodologies, the
principal investigator will comprehensively analyze different types of flat
surface structures to gain insights into their geometric properties. These flat
surface structures will serve as valuable tools for deepening our understanding
of fundamental mathematical concepts and uncovering new avenues of research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.