* 2301722
* ERI: Evaluating Single-Walled Zeolitic Nanotubes for Separation Applications:  Adsorption and Transport via Molecular Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Kevin Hinkle, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,186.00

Chemical separations are critical industrial processes used in applications such
as removing carbon dioxide from gas streams and purifying drinking water. Many
current separation approaches require massive amounts of energy and still suffer
from efficiency and yield issues. Membranes consisting of a crystalline material
called zeolites have successfully overcome some of these limitations. Zeolites
have regular, nanoscale pores that act as molecular filters. The chemical
synthesis technique determines the exact pore size, which can be tuned to
specific molecular separation needs. While zeolites typically take the form of
membranes, they have recently been created in a nanotube form, yielding a
structure with a central channel enclosed by walls containing smaller pores.
This research project will use molecular simulation techniques to model this
novel zeolite nanotube structure in a range of different chemical environments,
assessing its potential to enhance zeolite-based separation technologies. The
simulation results will produce foundational knowledge to understand the
capabilities of these multiscale structures and to enable the design of
separation techniques that exploit their unique geometry. Research results will
be incorporated into undergraduate thermodynamics courses and high school-
student summer camps hosted at the University of Dayton. The project’s
educational activities will also promote the importance of statistical data
analysis among the next generation of chemical engineers.

The primary objective of this research project is to comprehensively
characterize the adsorption and transport behavior of the newly synthesized
zeolite nanotubes (ZNTs) via molecular simulation. Zeolites are promising
adsorbent materials for separating gaseous mixtures, various organic solutions,
and use as desalination membranes. The research tasks are designed to evaluate
the ability of ZNTs to replicate planar zeolite behaviors and how they perform
in higher dimensional structures such as ZNT arrays and as additives to
polymeric membranes. The ZNTs’ multiscale features are expected to allow for
pressure-driven flow, while filtration occurs radially through the zeolitic
walls. The project’s results will inform the design of potentially
transformative separation technologies using these hierarchically-structured
materials. The principal investigator is heavily involved in operating high
school-level engineering summer camps hosted at the University of Dayton. This
project’s results and computational methods will be incorporated into the summer
camp curriculum to build interest in separation sciences and promote the
importance of statistical data analysis in engineering. Similar instruction
materials will also be used to develop a new undergraduate/graduate course on
designing effective experiments using statistical techniques, thus, preparing
students to approach real-world engineering problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.