* 2301908
* ERI:  Mechanistic understanding of neural stem cell paracrine activity and extracellular vesicle secretion directed by wireless electrical stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Metin Uz, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 196,966.00

Neural stem cells (NSCs) can give rise to all types of cells found in the
nervous system. They have considerable therapeutic potential to treat central
nervous system disease and trauma. NSCs also generate extracellular vesicles
(EVs). The EVs transport bioactive molecules that prompt cellular-level
responses. It has been observed that electrical stimulation can modify the rate
of EV formation. This project will apply experimental and machine learning
strategies to understand the cellular mechanisms that undergird those responses.
A wireless stimulation array to direct cellular and tissue responses remotely
will be developed utilizing these insights. Workforce development will be
achieved through teaching modules and training and research opportunities
offered to graduate and undergraduate students.

Using EVs instead of transplanting NSCs has certain advantages. Immune system
rejection is lower. EVs also cross membrane barriers more easily. The challenges
of using EVs are significant. They must contain a therapeutic level of
biomolecules, and they must be manufactured in sufficient quantities to support
clinically relevant dosages. The objective of this proposal is to achieve a
comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of NSC paracrine activity and EVs
secretion directed by wireless electrical stimulation to biomanufacture
therapeutics for CNS related problems. The first objective will focus on
developing mechanistic understanding of wireless electrical stimulation-directed
NSCs’ EVs secretion and their therapeutic content. The second objective is to
design a wireless array system for high throughput NSCs stimulation to enable
EVs biomanufacturing. High throughput stimulation and adaptive design of
experiment using statistical and machine learning tools will be employed to
generate scientific insights.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.