* 2301520
* Applications of equivariant stable homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Po Hu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 153,765.00

Algebraic topology is the study of topological objects, such as topological
spaces, through algebraic invariants that do not change when spaces are
continuously deformed. Stable homotopy theory, a central part of algebraic
topology, expands from the study of spaces to that of spectra, which are
"stabilized spaces" that also represent generalized cohomology theories, or ways
to assign algebraic invariants to spaces or other spectra. Equivariant stable
homotopy theory further adds to spectra the actions of groups, which can be
thought of as ways to map a spectrum to itself in composable and invertible
ways. Equivariant stable homotopy theory has grown to be an important tool that
offers insights into many deep questions in algebraic topology. The techniques
of equivariant stable homotopy theory have also found applications in other
areas of mathematics, including algebraic geometry and number theory. The
broader impact aspect of the project includes mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students in mathematical research. The principal investigator (PI)
will also continue outreach efforts by working to make her research area
accessible to the public.

This project includes a circle of ideas in equivariant stable homotopy theory.
The PI will continue her ongoing work on equivariant complex cobordism spectra,
in particular the extension of her previous calculation of the coefficients of
such spectra for primary p-groups to more general groups. This has important
implications to the study of equivariant formal group laws, another part of the
project that the PI will pursue. The PI will also investigate applications to
her recent calculation, together with her collaborators, of the equivariant
Mackey Steenrod algebra for odd primes. Specifically, one such application the
PI is pursing is the construction of odd-primary versions of the Real Brow-
Peterson spectrum. A closely related question is the construction and
understanding of equivariant elliptic and Barsotti-Tate cohomologies, as well as
the formal group laws associated with these spectra. The PI will also continue
her ongoing project, along with her collaborators, in the calculation of self-
conjugate and double-real cobordism spectra.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.