* 2301992
* AccelNet-Implementation: Harnessing Global Science Networks to Accelerate Cultures of Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Andrea Chiba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,999,981.00

The objective of this proposal, "NSF Accel-Net-Implementation: Harnessing Global
Science Networks to Accelerate Cultures of Learning" is to build an
interdisciplinary global network-of-networks focusing on aspects of learning,
development, and culture as they relate to global education needs. Our AccelNet
represents an advance in methods for engaging in scalable convergence science,
as well as how to harness global science to accelerate cultures of learning. We
aim to leverage technology, social science, and data science advances to create
collaborative resources designed to elevate the global science of learning and
education. Typically, one describes engaging with communities of practice as
outreach or translation, but in this instance the goal is to reach IN to the
communities and let their needs broadly impact the direction of the network
science. Our networks have broad reach, allowing cross-functional teams to be
assembled that represent many countries, cultures, ethnicities, and demographics
from around the globe. Through an active plan to promote diversity, inclusivity,
and culturally sensitive learning and research opportunities, we will embark on
training the next generation science, education, technology, and policy
workforce; our intent is to transform global education by connecting networks
with embedded architecture to inform science and amplify the intellectual
capital of local community leadership for global impact.

We seek to implement a sustainable ecosystem of communication, synthesis, best-
practices, research, and innovation for a network-of-networks designed to
accelerate the global science of learning. We will evolve an interdisciplinary
network-of-networks, including social science researchers, neuroscientists,
psychologists, data scientists, engineers, designers, global development
practitioners, philanthropists, educators, and policy makers in order to create
cross-cutting infrastructure to tackle pressing challenges in the science of
learning to meet the needs of global education. The network leverages resources
from four existing networks: the Global Science of Learning for Education
Network (GSoLEN), a network of scientists, policy experts, philanthropists, and
practitioners all focused on learning and education, the Center for Applied
Cognitive Science (CACS), a center specializing on applying cognitive science to
relevant problems using culturally appropriate measures and approaches, an
educational technology and innovation network, Mind Center for Educational
Technology (MindCET), and a global development network, Global Communities. Our
AccelNet specializes in global development, learning, education, cross-cultural
training, equity, and policy.

We are a learning network-of-networks; learning is the central feature of
education and attention to the well-being of learners on local terms promotes
parity on global terms. Our AccelNet is designed to promote training of an
intellectually agile, interdisciplinary group of scientific leaders, capable of
engaging in scientific collaborations for societal good. Engagement with and
mentoring of the next generation of scientists within the communities and within
the networks will ultimately build a stronger way of doing science. We have
selected self-regulation as our prototype research challenge for this AccelNet-
Implementation proposal because it is consequential for educational, social, and
economic outcomes, yet relatively little is known about the sources of variation
underlying it, and how to intervene in contextually and culturally-sensitive
ways through practice and policy to promote its development. Self-regulation, a
topic relevant to all domains of learning and well-being, including the digital
domains, requires large-scale mobilization and thus lends itself to the scale of
a network-of-networks. We define self-regulation from the perspective of goal-
directed behavior; an individuals' ability to override and manage impulsive
actions through inhibiting or redirecting their behavior(s) (Hofmann,
Schmeichel, & Baddeley, 2012; McClelland, & Cameron, 2012; Mora & Ozakinci 2013;
Montroy et al., 2016). The developmental trajectory of self-regulation is,
however, not linear or universal and varies broadly across cultures, countries,
and demographics (McClelland & Cameron, 2012; Montroy et al., 2016; Wanless, et
al., 2016), mandating synthesis of knowledge from global partners to promote
shared understanding and benefit society

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.