* 2301627
* ERI: Representations of Complex Engineering Systems via Technology Recursion and Renormalization Group
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Hao Chen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,997.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project aims to supplement essential
missing knowledge for representing and managing engineering design problems at
large and extreme scales. Inspired by the striking similarities between complex
physical systems and complex engineering systems, we will consider primitive
technologies as fundamental building blocks that form components, subsystems,
systems, and eventually, systems of systems, which is analogous to the
hierarchical physical world, where particles form atoms, which in turn form
molecules, cells, organisms, planets, and galaxies. This research will establish
a rigorous mathematical foundation that enables: (a) systematic investigation of
the statistical pattern of technology emergence in the time dimension during and
after a given technical project; and (b) dynamic system representation and re-
evaluation to interpret potential system behaviors with the existing technology
pool. This research establishes a new understanding of the fundamental dynamics
of system evolution during the design process and provides a bottom-up
perspective to handle unreliable system model representations and unexpected
design outcomes for complex engineering systems. We will test the framework
using the Apollo and Artemis programs as two applications at extreme scales to
investigate technology evolution and the spillover effect during and after each
project. This research will generate new knowledge that can enhance our
understanding of the underlying causes of cost and schedule overruns at both the
technology and system levels. Such insights can inform decision-making processes
for future space missions and complex engineering programs in various
industries. This project will also strive to engage broader interest in
engineering design and space exploration among K-12 students and the public
through outreach and diversity initiatives.

The overarching goal of this project is to create a novel system representation
framework by connecting complex engineering systems with recent breakthroughs in
understanding complex physical systems. We will model the engineering design
process as the Renormalization Group (RG) transformation, a ubiquitous technique
in modern statistic physics that models the behaviors of a system depending on
the scale of which it is observed. The research approach is to (R1) understand
the technology recursion process in the time dimension; and (R2) create a
renormalization scheme in the hierarchy dimension to support dynamic system
representation based on the macroscopic design features we are interested in.
This research will lead to a new bottom-up approach to resolve epistemic
uncertainties during complex engineering system design driven by the lack of
knowledge of the correct way to model the system, future design decisions, and
technology development outcomes. The research will have broad societal impact by
incorporating the rigorous mathematical structure of technology recursion and
system dynamics into complex system design to benefit a wide range of industries
suffering from high development costs and project schedule overruns (e.g.,
public infrastructure, healthcare, defense, and aerospace). The integrated
education plan involves engineering-focused outreach initiatives, such as pre-
college workshops for K-12 students and under-represented minorities to develop
broader interest in engineering design and space exploration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.