* 2301545
* ERI: Dynamic membranes in anaerobic wastewater treatment systems: Enhancing mitigation of emerging microbial threats to promote safe water reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Moustapha Harb, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,795.00

Anerobic membrane bioreactors (AnMBRs) are providing new opportunities to
design, build, and deploy a new generation of treatment processes that can
recover clean water from wastewater while generating energy (biogas) and/or
valuable products such as medium-carboxylic acids. AnMBRs combine membrane
filtration (microfiltration or ultrafiltration) with anaerobic digestion in
specially designed bioreactors. Anaerobic dynamic membrane bioreactors (AnDMBRs)
have emerged as promising alternatives to address the shortcomings of current
AnMBRs including low flux, high capital and operating costs, and high propensity
for membrane fouling. In AnDMBRs, in-situ formed biofilms on stainless-steel
meshes (or woven/nonwoven fabrics) with pore sizes ranging from 5-200 microns
provide the filtration media thereby circumventing the need to use commercial
microfiltration or ultrafiltration membranes. The overarching goal of this ERI
project is to evaluate the effectiveness of AnDMBRs to remove pathogenic
bacteria, genes, and other biomarkers associated with the spread of antibiotic
resistance with the goal of producing water effluents that are safe for
agricultural reuse. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society by advancing fundamental knowledge on the use of AnDMBRs to enable the
sustainable and safe reuse of rural wastewater for crop irrigation. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of one graduate student and two undergraduate students
at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology.

Anaerobic membrane bioreactors (AnMBRs) combine membrane separation with
anaerobic digestion to produce a high-quality effluent suitable for agricultural
reuse. In anerobic dynamic membrane bioreactors (AnDMBRs), in-situ formed
biofilms on low-cost porous substrates (e.g., stainless-steel meshes or
woven/nonwoven fabrics) serve as dynamic membranes and filtration media. Recent
studies have shown that the biofilms that form on membrane surfaces in AnMBRs
can enhance effluent water quality and aid in the removal of pathogenic bacteria
and emerging biological contaminants. However, it is still unclear if the
biofilms of AnDMBRs can maintain similar benefits for the removal of pathogenic
bacteria, genes or other markers associated with antibiotic resistance. This ERI
project will address this critical knowledge gap. The specific objectives of the
research are to 1) Quantify the concentration and abundance of antibiotic-
resistant bacteria (ARBs), antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), and other
relevant gene transfer elements in AnMBR system effluents; 2) Establish a
baseline for assessing the abundances of both intracellular and extracellular
ARGs in AnMBR system effluents during the treatment of real and representative
rural wastewaters; and 3) Evaluate the effectiveness of AnDMBRs to remove ARBs
and ARGs during the treatment of rural wastewaters. The successful completion of
this project has the potential for transformative impact through the development
of new fundamental knowledge to advance the design and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective technologies for the sustainable and safe reuse of
wastewater for agriculture and farming in rural communities. To implement the
education and outreach activities of the project, the Principal Investigator
(PI) plans to leverage existing programs at the New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology such as the K-12 outreach program, the STE2M summer experience
for high school students, and the Upward Bound Math and Science program for
local high school students to communicate the outcomes of the proposed research
and engage the local community on water management and reuse.

This project is jointly funded by the CBET Environmental Engineering program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.