* 2301462
* ERI: Additive Manufacturing of Polymer-Matrix Composites with High Concentration of Silicon-Carbide Particles by Novel Digital Light Projection
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Erina Baynojir Joyee, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,999.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) offers a versatile platform for fabricating ceramic-
polymer composites of complex structures. Over the last two decades, various
innovative AM processes have been successfully developed for ceramic-polymer 3D
printing. Especially, methods based on digital light projection (DLP) enable the
direct digital fabrication of intricate structures made of ceramic-polymer
composites. Despite potential advantages, current DLP AM have difficulty in
printing composites with a high concentration of ceramic particles, e.g.,
silicon carbide (SiC), desired to enhance the functionality of printed parts.
The challenge lies upon the increased viscosity resulted from the particle-
polymer interactions, causing high resistance to the feedstock flow. This
Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award supports fundamental research to
understand the physics behind printing of ceramic-included photopolymers that
are highly viscous. The research involves multi-disciplinary integration of
physics, materials science, surface engineering, and manufacturing technology.
The project will have strong technological and economic impacts by streamlining
production of components with complex geometries, e.g., gyroid structures, for
scaffolding and heat exchangers, in an efficient and cost-effective manner,
while ensuring the quality in part dimensions as well as microstructures.
Moreover, this project will involve minority students in research and teaching,
thus, enhancing the STEM education and their representation in advanced
manufacturing workforce.

The goal of this ERI project is to understand the fundamentals behind two major
roadblocks, namely, high separation forces and light scattering, in 3D digital-
light printing of complex-shaped parts using highly viscous ceramic suspensions.
The project will first address the challenge of high separation forces through
the “resin replenishment” mechanism by integrating oxygen permeability into the
system, introducing micro-textured air channels to accelerate the resin re-
coating and reduce the separation force between the printed part and the build
window. Secondly, a dynamic mask image projection strategy will be modeled and
employed to minimize the effect of light scattering and undesired photo patterns
within the printed part. This will enable high-accuracy and high-speed
fabrications of 3D polymer-ceramic parts with complex geometry and precise
micro-features. If successful, the project will make a transformative impact of
applying surface engineering techniques to oxygen permeable air channels for
bottom-up layer-by-layer 3D printing of SiC-polymer composite structures with
enhanced mechanical properties. The research will also advance the knowledge of
novel projection using dynamic mask images to compensate for the influence of
light scattering on curing results. Accordingly, a new technology will be
developed to avoid curing defects or failures in high-viscosity ceramic printing
and enable producing complex geometries that are challenging to make using
existing systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.