* 2301382
* SHINE: Understanding the Three-Part Structure of Coronal Mass Ejections Combining Data Analyses and Numerical Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Noe Lugaz, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 337,583.00

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are powerful events that send plasma from the Sun
throughout the solar system. They create space weather at Earth, which impacts
human technology, particularly in space. This project will improve our
understanding of the structure of CMEs through numerical simulations and
analysis of observations. The work supports an early career scientist. The
research team will participate in public outreach efforts geared towards the
general public, students, and teachers.

The project is a comprehensive analysis of the three-part structure of CMEs. It
will combine multiple observations from NSF, NASA, and NOAA and numerical
simulations. Three important science questions are addressed in order to better
understand the CME structure and gain a general knowledge of the physical
properties of the CME substructures: (1.) What is the CME structure observed in
white-light coronagraphic images and where are the magnetic flux rope (MFR) and
filament observed in coronagraphs? (a) In white-light coronagraphic images, does
the bright core consist of the filament material, MFR structure, or both, and
where is the bright core within the whole CME eruptive structure? (b) Are the
observations of the filament and MFR in the low corona in EUV images consistent
with the bright core and/or dark cavity in the middle and high corona in white-
light images? (2.) Where is the CME trailing edge? Which signatures can be best
used to identify the CME trailing edge in remote and in-situ observations and
where is the CME trailing edge in white-light coronagraphic images? (3.) Can a
consistent CME structure be identified in remote observation and in in-situ
measurements? (a) Are the kinematics and evolution of the CME substructures
(including the trailing edge) observed remotely consistent with those measured
in situ? (b) Can the in-situ measurements be used to track back the CME
substructures to the corona?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.