* 2301381
* Understanding electrochemical hydrogenation reactions over post-transition metal electrodes: the role of incidental mediators and metastable phases
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Adam Holewinski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,434.00

Electrochemistry enables the use of electrical energy to drive chemical
reactions. These types of reactions are increasingly interesting due to their
compatibility with renewable electricity infrastructure. The reactions occur by
interaction of molecules with materials known as electrodes, which are held at
an applied voltage and can exhibit catalytic properties when the molecules
contact their surfaces. This project will investigate a phenomenon where the
electrode material is not static, but instead generates corrosion products that
mediate the catalytic reactions. In many cases, corrosion is seen as a
detrimental process; however, in this project the investigators aim to use
corrosion products purposefully and productively. The mechanism is not yet well
understood, and gaining the ability to control and exploit it could have
consequences for the design of electrochemical systems for a wide array of
chemical production. Specific reactions to be studied in this project relate to
the conversion of biomass-derived molecules to make green fuels and chemical
precursors to biodegradable plastics. In addition to the expected benefits of
Ph.D. training for workforce development, the PIs will establish research
opportunities for undergraduates as well as educational materials for larger
groups of students, scientists, and non-expert community members. Several of the
initiatives to be supported are ongoing, while the project will add a new
research experience opportunity for local community college instructors to help
in shaping future curriculum and guiding students in continuing from two-year to
four-year degree programs.

The goal of this project is to understand the extent to which reduced metal
species, generated by cathodic corrosion processes such as the formation of
dissolved metal hydrides or anions, may mediate reduction of molecules. While
traditionally viewed as detrimental side reactions, the project explores the
hypothesis that these cathodic corrosion products can mediate homogeneous
reduction, even as the primary mechanism in some cases. This hypothesis will be
evaluated against possible mechanisms with heterogeneous charge transfer from
either the native electrode material or from metastable in-situ phases such as
solid metal hydrides or alkali alloys. Specific reactivity studies will involve
reduction of levulinic acid (LA) as a testbed. This molecule is derived from
renewable biomass and can be electro-reduced to several valuable products. The
PIs have obtained preliminary evidence that corrosion-product mediation may be
involved on materials that are highly selective to making hydroxyvaleric acid (a
monomer for biodegradable plastics) and gamma-valerolactone (a green solvent and
biofuel) from LA. The plan is to combine rigorous kinetic measurement tools,
quantum chemical calculations, in-situ vibrational and electronic spectroscopy,
and a suite of other advanced materials characterization techniques to
understand and ultimately leverage the phenomena more broadly into better-
controlled electrolysis systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.