* 2301973
* ERI: Nanoscale and in-situ measurement of evaporating liquid thin film thickness
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Iltai Kim, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,680.00

Ultrafast evaporation phenomena have been recently reported, which can be
applied to design high-efficient heat transfer devices such as evaporators,
coolers, and condensers. High-efficient thermal energy systems can play a
critical role in the climate crisis by reducing energy consumption. However, the
fundamental mechanism for ultrafast evaporation beyond the theoretical limit is
still being determined because of the limitation of measurement technology for
the nanoscale liquid film dynamics during evaporation. The highly sensitive
imaging technique based on nanophotonics and optical interference has been
introduced to explore the concentration, temperature, and thickness, but not
nanoscale liquid film thickness in evaporation. Therefore, the principle of this
project is to provide a deep understanding of the underlying mechanism of
ultrafast evaporation by measurement and analysis. The project will also include
significant educational activities such as undergraduate/graduate research
programs, course development, and outreach program for local high school
students.

The goal of this project is to study the evaporating liquid thin film in
nanoscale and real-time to provide experimental evidence for the role of
transition region in the recently reported ultrafast evaporation and understand
its underlying physics. Ultrafast evaporation is reported on hydrophilic
surfaces, but its working mechanism is not clear because of measurement
difficulty with existing techniques. This project will achieve this goal by
experiment and analysis: (i) Nanoscale thin film calibration with a sub-
nanometer actuator on graphene/Au film metasurface, (ii) Nanoscale thin film
dynamics under varying surface wettability and heat flux on flat and two-
dimensional nanochannel, and (iii) Development of simultaneous technique of
surface plasmon resonance imaging and reflection interference fringe for a broad
range of film dynamics from sun-nanometers to hundreds of micron scales. Surface
plasmon resonance imaging will be used to detect liquid film thickness variation
in sub-nanometer resolution with the metasurface technique. The reflection
interference fringe technique will also be verified to complement the result by
surface plasmon resonance. Adiabatic and diffusive film theory will be compared
with experiments and numerical simulation such as ray tracing and modeling. This
project is expected to provide a breakthrough in near-surface phenomena,
including evaporation, boiling, condensation, and surface wetting, through
innovative optical characterization and its physical understanding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.