* 2301296
* Travel: NSF Student Travel for 2023 USENIX Conferences ATC 2023 and OSDI 2023
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The USENIX Association presents conferences at the forefront of computing
innovation and research that build collaborations between researchers and
practitioners from industry, government, and academia. These events provide
educational, mentorship, and networking opportunities of very high value to
graduate students in the computer sciences who attend. To help increase the
representation and participation of these students, this proposal provides
funding to assist approximately 20-25 US-based graduate students to attend each
of the following events:

● 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC ‘23) ● 17th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ‘23)

The knowledge shared and advanced at these conferences has practical and
meaningful application to many tools used in daily life, as well as to the
ethical, cultural, and social ramifications of computing technology. This grant
allows the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend the
conference and extends the impact of research presented to a broad audience of
young researchers from across the country. USENIX is an open access
organization, and all research and results presented and published at these
events are freely available to the public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.