* 2301031
* ERI: Durability of Biocompatible Elastomers under Extreme Environments: Unveiling the Aging Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Georges Ayoub, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Plastic materials are extensively used for structural applications and
protective thin-layer coatings. These materials exhibit many desirable
properties that have been utilized in applications like composites, piping, bio-
devices, flexible electronics, and impact mitigation. However, their use is
limited in applications that require good fatigue and/or impact performance due
to chemical and/or physical degradation, commonly referred to as aging. This is
a significant concern when exposed to extreme environments of mechanical stress,
heat, humidity, ultra-violet, and gamma radiation. This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award supports research that aims to address these challenges
by comprehensively examining the endurance of biocompatible elastomers. In
medical applications, elastomers are used in heart devices which endure extreme
conditions of dynamic loading, body temperature, body fluids, and oxygen.
Natural aging during their intended use can result in fatal consequences for
patients, thus it is crucial to understand the endurance of biocompatible
elastomers to prevent in-service failure. This project will promote STEM
education by collaborating with the Dearborn Toy Library in organizing
activities for K-12 students.

The goal of this project is to find a correlation between the mechanical and
dynamic properties resulting from in-service aging and from accelerated aging
conditions for environmentally aged biocompatible elastomers. Through extensive
experimental and numerical investigations, this project will uncover how aging
mechanisms affect the dynamic properties of biocompatible elastomers. A
thermodynamics-based model and time-temperature equivalence principle will be
developed based on the mechanical behavior of thermal- and humidity-aged
biocompatible elastomers under various loading conditions and accelerated
thermal aging conditions. Specifically, this proposal will address: (1) the
effect of thermal aging on the static, viscous, and fatigue behavior of
elastomers, (2) the effect of aging on the fatigue induced crazing and cracking
initiation, propagation, and coalescence, and (3) the impact of aging on chain
reptation mechanism.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.