* 2301397
* SHINE: Understanding the Relationships of Photospheric Vector Magnetic Field Parameters in Solar Flare Occurrences using Graph-based Machine Learning Models
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Shah Muhammad Hamdi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 437,703.00

This project advances interdisciplinary research connecting heliophysics and
computer science. Solar observations from NASA and NOAA observatories will be
used to train machine learning classifiers for creating a new solar flare
prediction model. Solar flares are intense localized eruptions of
electromagnetic radiation in the Sun’s atmosphere, and the prediction of solar
flares is essential because of their potential hazardous impacts on today’s
technology-driven society. The project supports an early-career faculty member
and will encourage underrepresented minority students to explore data science
and space weather research through the Native American Summer Mentorship Program
at Utah State University (USU). Two graduate students and one undergraduate
student will be supported and the PI will offer a distance learning course for
rural students within the USU system.

This research leverages the rich connectivity information of graph data for
flare prediction from multivariate time series (MVTS)-represented solar active
region data. The research will be centered around two science questions. (1) How
to leverage the time series similarities of the magnetic field parameters for
the prediction of flares? (2) What are the most important magnetic field
parameters (and their time series similarities) that maximally distinguish
multiple flare classes? In Task 1, the team will transform MVTS instances to
parameter graphs, where the nodes denote the magnetic field parameters, and
edges denote the univariate time series similarities of the node pairs. Novel
graph neural network (GNN) models will be designed that can achieve better flare
prediction performance on a benchmark MVTS dataset. In Task 2, features will be
extracted from the parameter graphs at node-level, edge-level, and subgraph-
level, and ranked by the most important graph features. In Task 3, the team will
model the MVTS dataset as a single graph, where nodes will denote AR temporal
segments and edges will denote MVTS similarities of the node pairs. Unsupervised
clustering will be applied with community detection algorithms to find the
magnetically homogeneous active region temporal segments, and clustering-based
features will be used to support flare prediction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.