* 2301509
* The Role of Macroscopic Defects on Electromechanical Instability in Elastomer Dielectrics and Strategies for Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alex Chortos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 325,555.00

Polymer-based actuators provide new opportunities for emerging fields such as
human machine interfaces due to their low cost and mechanical flexibility.
Electrical actuation of soft elastomer achieves fast deformation, but the
mechanism is limited by susceptibility to defects that can cause elastomer
structures to fail prematurely. This award supports fundamental research into
the role of defects in electrical actuation of elastomers (i.e, elastomer
dielectrics) and explores mechanisms to overcome the negative impact of defects.
The insights from this work could enable the adoption of low-cost polymer
actuators for applications in medical devices, consumer electronics, and
national defense, thus contributing to the benefit of society. The
interdisciplinary nature of the work, spanning materials properties, mechanics
of structures, and electronic properties, provides training opportunities for
students in an emerging high-tech field. The award includes activities that
leverage excitement about 3D printing and soft robotics to recruit students
towards research. At the high school level, the award supports a course on 3D
printing that includes content on the mechanics of polymers and their impact on
the strength of structures. At the undergraduate level, a soft robotics club
offers students the opportunity to get hands-on experience with the effect of
polymer mechanics on robot performance.

Electromechanical instability has been characterized for idealized elastomer
dielectrics in a wide range of geometries. However, in manufactured systems,
defects can reduce the critical electric field, which leads to the onset of
instability, limiting the capability of the structure. The electromechanical
deformation of many defects cannot be modeled analytically, motivating the use
of a finite element approach. In this research, a finite element model will be
validated through experimental monitoring of the electrically induced
deformation in single-layer dielectrics with controlled sizes of defects. These
devices will consist of silicone dielectrics to minimize non-idealities
associated with viscoelasticity and dielectric dispersion. Finite element
modeling over a range of defect sizes and geometries will provide
computationally derived trends in the free energy associated with defects as a
function of the defect size, geometry, and constitutive model of the elastomer.
Multilayer dielectrics will be modeled to determine the influence of defects
within one component of mechanically coupled structures. The introduction of
discontinuous stiff electrodes in multilayer dielectrics will be investigated
computationally and experimentally as a method to mitigate the effect of
defects. Knowledge gained in this work will provide insights into the role of
defects in field-coupled deformable structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.