* 2301688
* ERI: Nanoscale Photo-Magnetic Energy Transfer Modulation to Restore the Homeostatic Functioning of the Damaged Endothelium
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Santaneel Ghosh, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,895.00

Endothelial cells, which line the walls of the blood vessels, are subject to
significant stress in a variety of conditions, including diabetes and various
inflammatory diseases. This condition massively increases risk for
cardiovascular diseases associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality.
Current noninvasive approaches lack effective and targeted damage repair. Light
therapy, when administered through a particular radiation mode, can extract
significant advantages, and thus, is often considered a noninvasive therapeutic
approach in regenerative medicine. Nanostructures made from materials with
magnetic properties are attractive possibilities for designing novel platforms
for similar applications. Thus, it may be possible to enhance the effectiveness
of these approaches by aptly combining the optical and the magnetic excitation
for tissue repair. In this project, the PI will use simultaneous optical-
magnetic stimulation to the targeted cells in combination with the delivery of
energy-harvesting nanodevices to create a novel therapeutic approach. The
knowledge derived from this research will directly contribute towards reliable
platforms for high-throughput screening of pharmaceutical or toxicological
agents and their effects on cardiovascular diseases. Additionally, the societal
impacts are broad since this research derived technique will be useful to
release a combination of therapeutic agents plus infection preventing molecules
simultaneously from a drug reservoir. In the middle of an ongoing pandemic or in
future situations like this, where infection prevention is of supreme importance
in conjunction with the critical care, this will be extremely useful to conduct
efficacy assessment on selected drugs. The project, due to its inter-
disciplinary nature, will involve students from multiple fields of science and
technology. Students, especially those under-represented within STEM fields,
will be recruited, and supported to boost the research and innovation culture of
the institution. The students involved in the project will be exposed to a wide
range of perspectives and ideas, thus fostering diversity.

Chronic oxidative stress exposure of the endothelium leading to depletion of
intracellular energy and, therefore, induction of apoptosis, which massively
increases the risk for cardiovascular diseases, is a significant health problem.
Mechanisms to re-establish normal endothelium functioning and induce cell growth
and proliferation following chronic oxidative damage are complex and still not
well understood. The understanding of these processes is important towards
comprehensive control to treat the diseases that involve endothelium damage.
Introduction of combinatorial therapeutics consisting of synergistic photo-
magnetic stimulation, and multifunctional nanoscale energy-harvesting devices
that are biocompatible, remotely tunable, and capable of performing on-demand
release of a specific drug or a combination of drugs to the targeted cells can
revolutionize the treatment outcomes for diseases that involve endothelium
damage. This research, by implementing an innovative multimodal comprehensive
strategy that has been unexplored thus far – hybrid photo-magnetic stimulation –
will focus on synergistically modulating the intracellular pathways to restore
homeostatic functioning of the endothelium following the induction of oxidative
stress. In this project, the primary objectives will be: (a) Introduce molecular
level energy-harvesting devices to provide photo-magnetic and chemical cues; (b)
Determine whether the combinatorial photo-magnetic therapy can restore
homeostatic functioning of the endothelium following induction of oxidative
stress; and (c) Explore the cellular and molecular mechanism(s) by which the
photo-magnetic combinatorial therapeutics would reverse the endothelium damage.
Opto-magnetically responsive nanodevices will be encapsulated within a thermo-
activated poly(ethylene glycol) based biopolymer network, which is non-toxic,
and anti-immunogenic. The energy-harvesting devices will be targeted to cells by
derivatizing the polymer shell with ligands for specific plasma membrane
receptors. The cell-bound nanodevices, when placed inside the hybrid photo-
magnetic excitation exposure, will perform the controlled release of small
molecules that activate signal transduction pathways leading to endothelium
damage repair, and convert the excitation energy to chemical potential for
Adenosine triphosphate synthesis. Additionally, the hybrid photo-magnetic
excitation strategy will permit the use of a less intense alternating current
magnetic field in combination with optical stimulation during the irradiation
process, thus removing the safety concerns associated with using only
alternating current magnetic field assisted therapies. A unique approach of
nanodevice and chemical cues integration with an opto-magnetic excitation
strategy for endothelium damage repair will stimulate several technical fields,
including cardiovascular disease monitoring, high-throughput screening of
pharmaceutical or toxicological agents, and identification of potential effects
on endothelium damage. The primary educational benefit of this project will be
the interactions and direct participation of students at Southeast Missouri
State University. Educational and outreach activities include training students
in advanced instrumentation and conducting cross-listed courses, involving
upper-level undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, research and
educational activities of the project will be integrated with the current
undergraduate educational efforts of the Ronald F. McNair post-baccalaureate
achievement initiative at Southeast, which promotes research experiences among
members of students under-represented in STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.