* 2301721
* ERI:Elucidating the Mechanism and Effects of Enhanced Thermal Ablation of Tissues by Microbubble Assisted High Intensity Focused Ultrasound
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Aswin Gnanaskandan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2025
* USD 199,266.00

High Intensity Focused Ultrasound thermal ablation is an FDA approved cancer
therapy that uses high frequency ultrasound to thermally ablate cancer tissues.
A long-standing barrier in using this therapy to achieve desired therapeutic
outcomes for deeper cancers is the need to use high energy ultrasound to achieve
deeper ultrasound penetration, leading to detrimental heating of the neighboring
wave passage regions. One potential method to overcome this barrier is to
introduce microbubbles in the target region, while using moderate energy
ultrasound, to generate higher temperature elevations in the target region
without elevating the temperature of the neighboring healthy tissues. The main
aim of this project is to elucidate through numerical simulations, the
fundamental understanding of how microbubbles can help in efficient ablation of
tissues without causing damage to surrounding tissues. The project will also
encompass significant education activities including undergraduate research
projects and outreach activities for high school students.

The technical goal of the proposed research is to simulate and quantify the
bubble-acoustics-thermal field interaction phenomenon in microbubble assisted
focused ultrasound based thermal ablation therapy. To address this goal a
numerical model will be developed that can simulate non-linear ultrasound
propagation through tissues, its interaction with a microbubble cloud and the
resulting thermal field. The model will be validated using both in vitro and ex
vivo experimental data. The validated model will then be used to answer two
previously unanswered questions: (i) what is the fundamental mechanism through
which microbubbles enhance heat transfer from ultrasound to the tissues? (ii)
what combination of microbubble parameters and ultrasound parameters can give
rise to an optimal heat deposition in the target region without causing damage
to the surrounding tissues? The proposed research will help in achieving a
breakthrough in using microbubble assisted ultrasound therapy for cancer
treatment by accurately characterizing the acoustic and thermal fields in the
presence of microbubbles. This will enable researchers to explore a wide range
of therapeutically relevant parameters and optimize design settings with
confidence when developing focused ultrasound-based therapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.