* 2301606
* RUI: Simulations of MS2 spectra: An examination of post-translational modification, secondary structure, and non-covalent complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,08/31/2023
* George Barnes, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,814.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM-A) and
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Programs of the Division of Chemistry
support Professor George L. Barnes at Siena College to study how peptide
molecules fall apart or stick to surfaces following high-energy collisions in
the gas phase. Such collisions occur when molecules are being analyzed using
instruments called mass spectrometers, which identify molecules and their
fragments according to their mass and electric charge. The accuracy of the mass
spectral analysis depends on how well the collisions are understood. This
project examines the importance of the molecular shape and of common biological
modifications on the collisions and the molecular products generated by the
collisions. Proteins are synthesized in living cells by molecular machines
called ribosomes, which translate the information stored in messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) into proteins. Modifications of the proteins after
translation are called "post-translational" modifications (PTMs). Prof. Barnes
is especially interested in how the PTMs affect the outcomes of gas phase
collisions. This project actively involves undergraduate student researchers who
are cross-trained in both theoretical and experimental methods and have the
opportunity to present their results at national conferences and other
scientific meetings.

A combined computational and experimental approach is taken that focuses on
model systems relevant to tandem mass spectrometry (MS2). In particular, a range
of protonated peptides and their post-translationally modified versions are
selected to investigate the impact of secondary structure on soft landing and
collision-induced dissociation. The study elucidates the importance of non-
covalent interactions and complex formation of peptide fragments. Methods
include direct dynamics simulations, ab initio calculations, rate calculations,
and experimental tandem mass spectrometry. In addition to the fundamental
insights gained regarding molecular collisions and reactions, the project has
direct implications for the optimization of mass spectrometric experiments on
biomolecules and the interpretation of the resulting data. In turn, the research
may have important implications for a wider range of biological and health-
related sciences. Collaboration with Prof. Julia Laskin at Purdue University is
providing valuable experience in the large research university context for Prof.
Barnes' Siena College student researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.