* 2301994
* Conference: Red Raider Mini-Symposium on Differential Geometry, Integrable Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Hung Tran, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 03/31/2024
* USD 17,100.00

This award provides participant support for the 19th version of the Red Raider
Symposium series, hosted at Texas Tech University, in Lubbock, Texas, from April
20-23, 2023. The main objectives of the activity are to improve our
understanding of recent significant developments in the field of Differential
Geometry and Integrable Systems, bring together mathematicians from different
backgrounds and in various career stages to foster mutual understanding and lay
out foundations for future collaborative research and advance engagement of
diverse graduate students and early-career researchers, particularly from
underrepresented groups.

The topics presented and discussed in this symposium span geometric flows, the
connection between geometry and topology, geometric modeling and PDEs, and
integrable systems. The inter-connection between these closely related subfields
creates a framework in which advancement in one will collaterally lead to
proportional boosts to others. The workshop-style event and participant
diversity provide ample opportunities for interested students and researchers
alike to find access points. The resulting interactions and discussions will lay
the groundwork for future research by identifying important open questions and
potential techniques to solve them.

For more information regarding the line-up of invited speakers and the program,
please visit the website of the conference:
https://www.math.ttu.edu/conferences/rr2023/index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.