* 2301362
* Collaborative Research: The Automatic Weather Station Program: Antarctic Meteorological Sentinel Service 2024-2027
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* David Mikolajczyk, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Antarctic Automatic Weather Station (AWS) program is a long-term automated
surface weather observing network measuring key standard meteorological
parameters, including temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction,
barometric pressure, solar radiation, and snow accumulation. Observations from
the network support weather forecasting, science research, and educational
activities, and all data collected are made available to the public. This
project will continue to maintain and operate the existing network. These data
provide some of the only available weather observations in this very remote
portion of the Earth. To ensure fidelity, observations are reviewed and checked
for errors by a combination of automated methods and expert review, enabling the
data to be used in a wide range of research areas. The project will be overseen
by a team of scientists, researchers, and students, and a newly created AWS
Advisory Board will provide independent input and guidance.

The activities for this project will be focused on the continued operation of
the AWS network, establishment of an AWS Advisory Board, student engagement and
outreach activities. This project will continue to maintain the AWS systems
while upgrading the real-time processing of meteorological data from the AWS
network. The team will continue to adapt to changes communication methods to
ensure that data is distributed widely and in a timely manner. Prior NSF
investments in the Polar Climate and Weather Station (PCWS) are leveraged to
develop a robust production version that can be reliably used year-round in
Antarctica. AWS observations will be quality-controlled and placed into a
database where the public will be able to search and select subsets of
observations. To resolve conflicting radiation shield setups for temperature
observations, the team plans to test different radiation shields (with and
without aspiration) deployed for one year at South Pole Station. The project
will be advised by an independent group of diverse peers through a newly
developed AWS Advisory Board. The team will incorporate students from all levels
in all aspects of the project, including in the research design, engineering and
productions of the PCWS, and in field deployments. A concerted effort to engage
the public will be undertaken via scaled-up interactions with television
meteorologists from several states across the US to bring Antarctica to the
public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.