* 2301780
* ERI: Evolution of Detached Liquid Sheet Edges from Patterned Boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Hans Mayer, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 177,911.00

The complex ways in which sheets of liquid break up at their edges to form
droplets are important to the understanding of spray characteristics, for
example the eventual size of the droplets produced. As sprays are encountered in
numerous natural and engineered scenarios involving liquids, their study is
important both at a fundamental and applied level. The aim of this project is to
develop an experimental platform to explore the role of micropatterned
boundaries on the evolution and subsequent breakup of liquid sheet edges.
Project results can be used to validate numerical and computational studies of
breakup mechanisms. The project, part of the Engineering Research Initiation
program, will take place at a primarily undergraduate serving institution of
higher education and will give student groups from existing project-based
courses the opportunity to develop experimental equipment. Additional student
participants will benefit from existing campus programs - one of which is
directly tied to university efforts at improving and promoting diversity,
equity, and inclusivity in STEM – providing excellent mentoring and professional
development opportunities.

The goal of this project is to improve experiments to explore the breakup of
liquid sheet edges, fundamental to the formation of droplets by sprays, by
investigating the influence of micro-scale patterns on the physical boundaries
from which the edges are created once liquid sheets are detached. Previous
experiments have used rapid heating of metal wire frames to form the edges of
liquid films (soap films). The key questions this project proposes to answer
are: (1) Instead of using an unadulterated metallic wire to form the initial
edge of a liquid sheet for detachment experiments that use rapid boiling to free
the edge, can an edge, or boundary, be created with micro-scale patterns to
induce disturbances of a known spatial wavelength onto that liquid film edge?
(2) If this is possible, what is the nature of the influence of the modulated
disturbance on the evolution of the edge? (3) Is it then possible to demonstrate
measurements of modulated instability growth to determine, without ambiguity,
fastest growing wavelengths to further understand the evolution and breakup, via
instability, of the detached liquid sheet edge? To answer these questions,
challenging experiments using high-speed photography and at high spatial
resolution will be performed. By developing these experimental techniques to
answer the key questions, the project will provide useful avenues for future
study of liquid sheet breakup.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.