* 2301676
* Collaborative Research: Burrows as buffers: do microhabitat selection and behavior mediate desert tortoise resilience to climate change?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ronald Swaisgood, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 03/31/2026
* USD 316,174.00

Climate extremes increasingly exceed physiological thresholds for organisms,
constraining species distributions and ultimately leading to habitat loss.
Resilience to these changes depends on interactions between environmental
features, behavior, and physiology that enable species to access suitable
microclimates. Ecosystem engineers are species that modify their environment by
creating structures, such as burrows, which can provide more stable temperature
and humidity, buffering occupants against temperature extremes. The actions of
these organisms are important not only for their own persistence but to enable
other species to access suitable microclimates. The Mojave desert tortoise is an
ecosystem engineer that creates burrows for shelter and nesting and is
threatened with extinction, in part due to climate change. The youngest tortoise
life stages - eggs, hatchlings, and juveniles - are particularly vulnerable to
temperature extremes due to their small size and limited ability to modify their
environment. These life stages rely on maternal nest placement or small mammal
burrows for protection. This project aims to understand how desert tortoises
modify their environment through burrow creation, to characterize how
thermoregulation is achieved via burrow use, and to measure the effectiveness of
burrows to buffer against rising temperature across life stages, with a
particular emphasis on nesting females and early life stages. This research will
provide new data on the resiliency of each life stage to climate extremes and
will inform life stage-specific models of species distribution under future
climate scenarios, identifying sites that may become climate refugia. This work
will develop grade-specific educational modules and classroom kits that
integrate active desert tortoise conservation research and will implement these
modules in local classrooms. This project will also provide training
opportunities for K-12 teachers, undergraduate students, a graduate student, and
a post-doctoral trainee. This project is being supported via a joint program
involving the Divisions of Environmental Biology and Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Paul G. Allen Family Foundation.

This research takes a mechanistic approach to evaluate the role of behavioral
and physiological flexibility in determining resilience to climate change for
the endangered Mojave desert tortoise across life stages, an important ecosystem
engineer. The research seeks to characterize temperature sensitivity of eggs and
maternal nesting behavior; test the effects of temperature and hydric status on
juvenile burrow use, burrow morphology, and body temperature; quantify the
thermal buffering capacity of behavior and burrows across age classes in wild
tortoises; and use respirometry to characterize temperature effects on energy
expenditure, water loss and thermal preference. These studies will provide key
physiological parameters for life stage-specific mechanistic niche models (MNMs)
of response to altered climate to identify optimal habitat for desert tortoises
that will persist into the future. Finally, this research will test MNM
predictions by collecting environmental data from model-selected sites. By
identifying climate refugia and core conservation areas, these models will
inform future focal sites for Mojave desert tortoise recovery activities,
including restoration and assisted migration. More broadly, results will be
relevant for the extended group of burrowing species and commensal organisms
that use burrows, and lead to improved empirical and modelling methods for
forecasting the impacts of climate change on this diverse group of organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.