* 2301808
* ERI: Multilevel Inverse Robust Co-Design of Materials, Products, and Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Anand Balu Nellippallil, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The research objective of this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project is
to investigate new ways to co-consider manufacturing processes in the early
stages of materials and product design. By including the considerations of
manufacturing processes in the early stages of design, designers can make
effective decisions to customize material microstructures and achieve desired
product performance, as envisioned by Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME). Current materials design methods focus on sequentially
exploring model-based relations of materials and products at individual levels
instead of a concurrent realization of products, materials, and manufacturing
within a holistic system. The holistic, systems-based, robust co-design approach
envisioned in this project will account for the goals of and interactions
between multilevel material systems involving the product and the manufacturing
processes under uncertainty. The approach will enable designers to concurrently
visualize and explore level-specific objectives, multilevel interactions, and
sublevel analyses, thus enabling quantitative linkages in digital design to
materials structure to manufacturing workflows. The project will promote the
progress of science by strategically integrating knowledge and techniques from
the fields of systems engineering, engineering design, and materials science to
enable a fundamental understanding of the couplings between products, materials,
and manufacturing processes. Additionally, by designing new curricula that embed
Design for ICME topics and organizing a summer school on the associated tools,
students and practitioners will be better prepared to address complex materials
design challenges from a systems perspective.

This ERI project will establish foundational techniques for coupling multilevel
modeling of hierarchically structured materials, products, and their
manufacturing processes with multiobjective systems design strategies and
uncertainty management. The research plan consists of two parts: (1) establish
history-dependent, data-driven processing-structure-property-performance (PSPP)
linkages; and (2) formulate a systems-based inverse co-design framework for
exploring ranged sets of robust solutions across multiple levels by managing
uncertainty and its propagation. The overall expected outcome is a novel
systems-based multilevel framework for the inverse co-design of materials,
products, and manufacturing processes in terms of robust decisions made by
distributed stakeholders under uncertainty. The intellectual merit includes: (1)
a fundamental understanding of the interdependent nature of multilevel
materials, manufacturing processes, and product design decisions; (2) an
efficient mathematical representation of material structure hierarchy to realize
products; and (3) a computational framework for the multilevel robust co-design
visualization and exploration of the interactions between the different
engineering disciplines (design, material, and manufacturing) in the early
stages of design. Four related educational and outreach activities are planned
to integrate the research with the broader community of students and
professionals: (1) formalize the data-driven PSPP linkage modeling procedure by
integrating the results in existing graduate courses; (2) iterate, update, and
disseminate a systems-based design approach for standard ICME problems through a
new Design for ICME course; (3) organize a one-week online summer school on
tools relevant to Design for ICME; and (4) broadly disseminate results through
scientific publications, presentations, and research monographs. These
activities will lead to new verified and validated techniques to teach Design
for ICME; new test examples to iterate, assess, and establish the generic
utility of the constructs (individually and integrated); and a foundation for
infusing multilevel materials modeling, manufacturing considerations, and
decision-based design strategies into ICME workflows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.