* 2301663
* ERI: Hybrid Water Microgrid System for Simultaneous Achievement of Water Supply Sustainability and Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Sangmin Shin, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,994.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project will develop a novel hybrid
centralized and decentralized water system (water microgrid system) to achieve
both water supply sustainability and resilience. Current centralized water
infrastructure faces enormous challenges from climate change, extreme drought,
population growth, aging infrastructure, and energy security. Such challenges
require a transformation of current water systems to be more sustainable and
resilient. This project establishes benchmark models of a water microgrid
system, which features decentralized water supply systems with local water
sources nested within existing centralized systems. The water microgrid system
will increase water use efficiency and conservation through water recycling and
harvesting for distributed water sources. Furthermore, the system can change its
operations between centralized and decentralized water supply against unexpected
disruptions and thus will enhance system resilience. The project outcomes will
advance scientific progress and contribute to national welfare and water
services by suggesting engineering solutions to upgrade current water
infrastructures to make them more sustainable and resilient. The project team
will conduct integrated education and outreach activities through water forms, a
project website, publications, course development, international partnership,
and other outreach programs for the public and K-12 students. This project will
encourage the participation of students from underrepresented groups in research
activities.

This project aims to advance the understanding of a hybrid microgrid approach
for water systems and its sustainability and resilience outcomes. The project
will contribute to knowledge on how to incorporate decentralized infrastructure
in tandem with current centralized water systems for water supply sustainability
and resilience. The project tasks include (1) building a lab-scale physical
model of a water microgrid system; (2) testing the configuration and operations
of a water microgrid system using a hydraulic model; (3) developing a framework
to sectorize an existing water supply system into microgrids; and (4) evaluating
the sustainability and resilience effects of water microgrid systems based on
system size, decentralization levels, and failure scales. The project outcomes
will provide insights and guidance to facilitate a transition from current urban
water infrastructure to new ways of simultaneously improving water
sustainability and system resilience. These outcomes will also lead to new
planning, design, and tools for urban lifeline infrastructure to effectively
incorporate microgrid and decentralized infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.