* 2301645
* Collaborative Research:  A Simulation and Theoretical Analysis of Meteor Evolution over Scales Ranging from Sub-microseconds to Minutes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Sigrid Elschot, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 05/31/2026
* USD 327,000.00

Every day billions of extremely small particles, typically weighing less than a
grain of sand, impact the Earth’s upper atmosphere. These particles seed the
upper atmosphere with an array of metal ions and atoms which have important
effects on the chemistry of the atmosphere and play a role in creating dust,
which in turn seeds clouds. This award will further develop the field of meteor
physics through modeling meteor evolution from their point of entry into the
atmosphere through their dissipation. We will use radar observations to test our
models and understandings. The research has a wide range of applications.
Spacecraft designers need to know the distribution of particle orbits and masses
in order to reduce potential hazards. Solar system scientists use meteoroid
population characteristics to better understand the outer solar system and its
evolution. Atmospheric scientists apply meteoroid data to estimate the amount of
material deposited in the upper atmosphere and its chemical evolution. A deeper
understanding of meteor plasma physics will improve the broader scientific and
engineering community’s knowledge of meteor and upper atmosphere geoscience.
This project involves members of underrepresented groups and supports graduate
and undergraduate students. The code developed will be open source. The team
will continue their efforts to share their knowledge and enthusiasm about space
and meteor science with the larger community through outreach to the media, K-12
schools, and at universities through public talks. This will broadly enhance
STEM education and talent.

Over the past decades, meteor researchers have used simulations, theory, and
observations to study meteor plasma dynamics and their radar measurements. This
award will extend this work to areas that remain poorly understood: the early
stage of meteor ablation, the behavior of meteor-induced plasma waves, the
interaction between a spatially variable atmosphere and meteors, and the
scattering of radio waves by meteor plasmas. The team will generate new models
more accurate and reliable than those that currently exist, and then apply these
physics-based models to interpret data collected by radars. This award will help
answer the following questions: (1) How rapidly does ablation proceed for
various meteoroids? (2) How do meteor plasmas evolve from their initial ablation
and ionization through the early-stage kinetic expansion to their later-stage
diffusion and turbulence? (3) Can more accurate theoretical and computational
models improve researchers’ quantitative understanding of radio wave scattering?
(4) How do large-scale atmospheric inhomogeneities and neutral wind shears
modify the evolution of long-lived plasma trails produced by meteoroids?
Answering these questions will lead to progress in understanding atmospheric
dynamics between 75 and 120 km altitude. It will provide better interpretations
of measurements made by radar and optics. This research will address the first
scientific goal listed on the NSF/Aeronomy Program Description: “Dynamics and
energetics of the upper atmosphere, with particular emphasis on the hard-to-
observe region between 80 and 150 km.”

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.