* 2301650
* Excellence in Research: The Fate of Microplastics Within the Georgia Bight
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Christopher Hintz, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,038,533.00

This is a collaborative effort to determine movements and abundances of small
particulate plastics from the main coastal Georgia river systems to the NOAA
Gray’s Reef National Marine Sanctuary. Through existing equipment and resources
at Savannah State University (SSU),the Northeast Fisheries Science Center (NEFSC
Sandy Hook Laboratory, SHL), the University of Georgia Skidaway Institute of
Oceanography (UGA SkIO), and Gray’s Reef National Marine Sanctuary (GRNMS), this
team will address three key science objectives. Further, to advance research at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and increase equitable
involvement of African Americans and other underrepresented groups in the
geosciences, there is a need for intra- and inter-institutional partnerships
that are focused on both the intellectual merit and broader impacts radiating
from that engagement. This can be achieved through place-based, relevant
research that is connected to the broader research and to social communities,
providing students with a sense of place within the scientific community and a
sense of contribution for their social community. This project balances
scientific objectives with multidimensional student mentorship and training in
small particulate plastics research that includes targeted improved efficiency
and training in primary and secondary analytical techniques, both critical to
studying nano- and microplastics.

Utilizing drifters and static water-tracking technology, concurrent water-
sediment-biota collection, unique human-powered shallow-water collection
methods, fluorescence-based particle detection, Raman spectroscopy, and
pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, this team will address the
following Science objectives: (1) Quantify and characterize micro- and nano-
plastic distributions in water and sediments in the Georgia Bight region, with
particular emphasis on establishing the temporal and spatial variability of
these materials; (2) Examine representative estuarine faunal species within
waterways of the Georgia Bight region for micro- and nano-scale plastic
contamination, including in regions with high human population densities and
low, as well as offshore; and (3) Complete design, construction, and testing to
deploy a cost-effective shallow-water estuary profiling system for improved
access to sediment and water sample collection and in situ analyses of site
characteristics. This project will collect multiple types of samples in the same
location, providing high data density that will allow the investigators to
discern the processes that affect microplastic distribution in the Georgia Bight
region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.