* 2301729
* Development and application of innovative tools to mitigate White Nose Syndrome, a lethal fungal disease decimating North American bat populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Tonie Rocke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,782,334.00

This project focuses on developing an immune-based strategy to prevent White
Nose Syndrome (WNS), a lethal fungal infection of hibernating bats that is
spreading across North America. This research will develop a deeper
understanding of how the fungal pathogen attacks, and guide management
strategies for protecting bats against the devastating impact of WNS.
Specifically, the research team will interrogate how a fungal pathogen invades
skin through the role of the epidermal growth factor receptor in bats, possibly
resulting in a broader understanding of such processes in mammals in general.
Additionally, the team will attempt a novel approach of combining vaccination
with topical drugs that block infection – with the goals to advance the
conservation of several bat species, maintain biodiversity and support ecosystem
health. In addition, this project features the training and teaching of early
career scientists and wildlife biology trainees and is based on the
collaboration of an academic institution and federal agencies – USGS and USFWS.

The fundamental research associated with this project is to further understand
how the fungus Pseudogymnoascus destructans (Pd for short) initiates infection
by adhering to bat skin. It is known that Pd makes contact with keratinocytes
(e.g. epithelial cells). This project makes use of a first-of-its-kind
keratinocyte cell line from Myotis lucifugus, a bat species that is highly
susceptible to WNS. The keratinocyte cell line has provided an ideal model to
study how Pd invades bat skin and initiates infection. Preliminary data reveal:
(i) the identity of a receptor – epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) – that
mediates keratinocyte “stealth” invasion by Pd and (ii) the utility of the FDA
approved drug gefitinib® that blocks Pd invasion of the cells. Experiments are
designed to formally test the role of EGFR in Pd invasion via CRISPR editing of
keratinocytes. Because EGFR differs in its structure in susceptible and
resistant bats, EGFR from resistant bats will be used to complement the knockout
cell line to assess the role of EGFR in explaining WNS susceptibility.
Conservation biology is an important aspect of the work. WNS prevention
strategies will be implemented in collaboration with the U.S. Geological Survey
at the National Wildlife Health Center in partnership with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service. Field studies will thus be performed in several U.S. states to
investigate the use of gefitinib together with a protective vaccine created by
these investigators against Pd infection.

This project is being supported via a joint program involving the Divisions of
Environmental Biology and Integrative Organismal Systems and the Paul G. Allen
Family Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.