* 2301154
* Strengthening and Diversifying Engineering and Advanced Manufacturing Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Michael Zimmerman, NORTHWEST KANSAS TECHNICAL COLLEGE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 297,792.00

The Kansas region is facing a serious advanced manufacturing labor shortage that
inhibits industry growth and economic development in low-income rural
communities. This project from Northwest Kansas Technical College will establish
an academic pathway with built-in micro-credentials that are aligned with the
needs of industry to increase awareness of the industry to secondary students
and potentially expedite employment in these high-demand fields. Over the 3-year
project, 83 students from 5 regional secondary schools will be recruited to
complete 3 courses in advanced manufacturing technology. The project will bring
advanced manufacturing technology and equipment into the classrooms of the
secondary schools for hands-on components of the courses. Educators at the
secondary schools will receive professional development training on the
equipment and technology in order to better serve students taking the courses
and increase adaptation of the technology into other related courses and
projects. Career opportunities in advanced manufacturing will be presented to
students through regional industry partners that visit the secondary schools.
Because the project will be focusing on reaching regional secondary students,
there is a large focus to increase the diversity of students that complete the
project, and continue their education with the goal of employment in a STEM
field.

The overall goal of the project is to increase the number of students entering
the STEM workforce in the region with relevant classwork and industry
experience. 83 students are expected to enroll over the 3 years of the project
and 9 faculty members will be trained with a mixture of in-person, hands-on
professional development and hybrid coursework. Students will take 3 courses
that will introduce them to additive and subtractive manufacturing technology
and processes, as well as the design principles used in both processes. Students
will complete a capstone project to demonstrate skills learned and they will
present their project to industry partners for review and feedback. College
faculty members will work closely with members of the industry advisory
committee to develop and integrate up-to-date industry-relevant material for
students and proper professional development for faculty members. Advisory board
members will send representatives to the secondary schools periodically
throughout the timeline of the project to lead marketing efforts of the project
and increase awareness of the industry. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.