* 2301009
* Improving Flexible Attention to Numerical and Spatial Magnitudes in Young Children
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Mary Fuhs, University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 05/31/2028
* USD 139,870.00

Mathematical skills are essential for STEM careers, as well as crucial tools in
everyday life, from financial planning to medical decision-making.
Unfortunately, many students fail to reach their potential in these skills. One
of the challenges that preschool-aged children face when acquiring an
understanding of numbers is distinguishing between numerical magnitudes (like
three elephants) and spatial magnitudes (like the size of an elephant). Prior
research suggests that children often focus on the size of the objects instead
of the exact number of objects (for example, when comparing 3 elephants to 6
mice, children often mistakenly say that there is a greater number of elephants
than mice). The ability to flexibly pay attention to both numerical and spatial
magnitudes and then determine which magnitudes are relevant for a given
situation is referred to as “flexible attention to magnitudes” (FAM). This
project aims to understand the development of young children’s flexible
attention to magnitudes skill and how it can best be supported by specific
experiences in early childhood. It is hypothesized that this skill is essential
to later mathematical thinking and is an important skill for many mathematical
activities, such as number line estimation and proportional reasoning.

The proposed studies are designed to identify specific mechanisms that lead to
improvements in flexible attention to magnitudes (FAM) skills. The first aim of
these studies is to examine the roles of mathematical language and visual
experience as potential causal mechanisms that drive improvement in this skill
in young children. The second aim is to determine whether improving flexible
attention to magnitudes skill has a causal effect on mathematics achievement.
The third aim is to test whether an intervention leads to durable improvements
in flexible attention to magnitudes skill and mathematics achievement, and far
transfer to executive function skills. The fourth aim is to explore whether the
impact of flexible attention to magnitudes instruction depends on students’
socioeconomic status (SES) and initial number word knowledge. These aims will be
tested with young children ages 3 - 5 years via three experimenter-led studies
using pretest-intervention-posttest designs. Each study will compare reading
books with specific types of FAM content to each other and to an active control.
Study 1 will test the effects of mathematical language and Study 2 will examine
the role of visual experience on FAM skill and mathematics achievement. Study 3
will examine gains in FAM skill and mathematics achievement at a delayed post-
test, and far transfer to executive function skills. Study 4 will pool data from
Studies 2 and 3 to provide a well-powered test of SES and number knowledge as
moderators of the effects of FAM intervention. These studies will build a
theoretical model of how FAM skill develops and impacts other skills, while
simultaneously laying the foundation for larger-scale interventions aimed at
improving children’s mathematics skills.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.