* 2301538
* SBIR Phase I:  Terahertz Imaging Radar for Law Enforcement
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Nathan Monroe, CAMBRIDGE TERAHERTZ INC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,927.00

This broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve public safety by furthering
terahertz radar imaging technology for concealed threat detection. With
increasing cases of weapons violence and mass casualty events across the nation,
and an increase in the difficulty of detecting non-metallic weapons such as
3D-printed firearms and ceramic knives, a significant gap exists in threat
detection technologies. This solution addresses a recognized need in an
approximately $2 billion market which includes law enforcement and event venue
security. Existing approaches (such as airport scanners and walkthrough metal
detectors) are expensive, intrusive, and inconvenient or leave large gaps in
detection capability. Terahertz radar imaging promises the performance of gold-
standard airport scanners in a consumer grade, portable, and discreet device. By
demonstrating a terahertz radar transceiver, this Phase I effort will de-risk a
key technical element of this technology, which is critical for security
applications and beyond. If successful, this project represents a significant
step forward in addressing society’s concealed threat detection issues.

The intellectual merit of this project revolves around the design,
implementation, fabrication and testing of a terahertz radar transceiver, a key
component in the approach used in a personnel screening device. No such
transceiver is currently available to purchase on the open market, let alone at
the costs and volumes required for the proposed commercial applications. When
paired with other elements of the imaging system, the result will be a three-
dimensional radar imager which is capable of “seeing through” dielectric
materials such as fabrics and detecting concealed weapons and contraband, both
metallic and non-metallic. The transceiver design effort will feature
development of components such as frequency multipliers, amplifiers and mixers,
and their electrical, mechanical, and thermal integration into a larger imaging
system. This design phase will prioritize achieving cost, yield, and scalability
metrics compatible with mass manufacture and widespread deployment. Key
considerations involved in this effort are the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and
Dynamic Range (DR) of the system, both important metrics in imaging performance
and therefore weapons detection capability. The project leverages recent
advances in terahertz integrated circuit technology. The anticipated result is
the experimental demonstration of such a component for integration into the
fully functional imaging systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.