* 2301870
* ERI: Study of quantum entanglement and spatially different photon pair generation through intermodal four-wave mixing in few-mode and multimode fibers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Mina Esmaeelpour, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,910.00

Substantial efforts are underway to expand the capacity of telecommunication
systems utilizing spatial division multiplexing (SDM) as the demand for secure
quantum communication systems combined with optical communication systems
continues to grow. Propagating quantum states of light through current optical
communication networks or future SDM systems can fulfill this demand and meet
the essential consumer requirements for secure communication. The overarching
aim of this research is to advance this objective through the Production and
transmission of entangled photons over optical fibers. In the past, entangled
photon pairs were created using bulk periodically poled crystals and waveguides
utilizing their second-order nonlinearity. However, this method results in
additional loss from fiber coupling and suffers from low photon yield at
telecommunication bandwidths. The generation and transmission of entangled
photons through optical fibers are desirable for a variety of applications.
Nevertheless, the current approaches pose several challenges, including
complexity, limited data generation, reliance on bulky and high-powered pulsed
lasers, and the introduction of quantum noise. This study proposes the
utilization of various modes of few-mode and multimode fibers to produce a pair
of entangled photons, which will provide improved control over entanglement
properties and better integration with SDM systems. This approach is expected to
alleviate the challenges mentioned earlier. As part of the research and
education integration, a graduate student working on this project will receive
training in nonlinear fiber optics and quantum laser sources. Furthermore,
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to participate in various
stages of the project through research credits and summer internships in order
to spark their interest in fiber-optic research at Missouri S&T, which is a
minority-serving university.

The proposed research aims to investigate the impact of intermodal
nonlinearities on quantum entanglement in few-mode and multimode fibers. This
project is both significant and innovative in that it will employ intermodal
nonlinearities to generate and transmit quantum channels across various spatial
modes within such fibers. By employing pumps in two different modes of the
fiber, spontaneous four-wave mixing nonlinear effect generates an entangled
photon pair each of which are in a different spatial mode traveling in different
channels. The project seeks to establish theoretical and experimental platforms
to investigate the underlying mechanisms of such intermodal entangled mode
generation. These platforms will be utilized to examine the basic processes of
such intermodal entanglement in fibers. Subsequent quantum correlation
experiments will be performed to characterize the generated photon pairs quantum
states. By directly generating entangled photon pairs in fiber, the coupling
loss will be eliminated and by the choice of fiber and the pump wavelengths, the
Raman scattering noise can be avoided. The primary objective is to improve
quantum communication over fiber by utilizing intermodal quantum entanglement in
few-mode and multimode fibers and could have a transformative impact on quantum
communication and sensing utilizing SDM-compatible fibers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.