* 2301012
* ERI: Design of Reliable Autonomous Engineering Systems with Active Failure Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Zhen Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,710.00

The objective of this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project is to create
a design framework using computer simulations to design reliable autonomous
engineering systems (AES) that can proactively prevent catastrophic failures
during operation. Autonomous engineering systems, such as autonomous vehicles
and industrial robots, are emerging engineering systems that are replacing
humans in many aspects of society. It is envisioned that AES in the future
should have the capability of not only autonomously accomplishing a mission, but
also proactively preventing failures in operation (i.e., active failure
prevention). Through simulation-based design under uncertainty, this research
will incorporate post-design active failure prevention into the early design
stage of AES, thus reducing the probability of failure when the designed AES is
put into operation. The research will establish a theoretical foundation that
enables: (1) efficient and accurate analysis of the reliability of AES equipped
with active failure prevention in the presence of uncertainty; and (2) co-design
of AES physical and cyber systems for active failure prevention subject to
specific reliability requirements. This research will enable the design of AES
with assured reliability. It will accelerate the development of AES by reducing
the reliability certification effort in the design process. Additional
deliverables of this project include improvement of reliability and design-
related curricula, research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students,
and outreach initiatives for students and under-represented minorities.

The overarching goal of this project is to create a new design paradigm shift
from the conventional reliability-based design of engineered systems through
passive reliability assurance to the model-based design of reliable AES to
account for both passive reliability assurance at the population level and
active failure prevention at the individual level. Personalized active failure
prevention and autonomy set AES apart from conventional engineered systems and
make current design under uncertainty methodologies inapplicable to AES. The
research draws upon model-based design, statistics, machine learning, and
optimization to fill the gap in the current methods. It will create innovations
in reliability analysis by tackling the computational challenges through a
first-passage method and co-simulations, while accounting for active failure
prevention, along with innovations in design optimization by decoupling and
decentralizing reliability-based co-design problems. The research has broad
societal impacts by enabling the design of AES with active failure prevention
with the consideration of reliability, which accelerates the development of
next-generation reliable autonomous engineering systems to replace humans in
safety-critical or dangerous mission/working environments. The integrated
education plan involves curriculum improvement, engaging undergraduate students
in research, dissemination of research results, and outreach to K-12 students
and teachers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.