* 2301217
* The Influence of Climate, Social Networks, and Cultural Models on the Retention of Women and Racially/Ethnically Marginalized Engineers in Graduate School and the Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Ellen Puccia, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 08/31/2027
* USD 450,592.00

This project follows engineering graduate students, professors, and those in
industry to learn about their experiences when it comes to the climate they face
in engineering and the factors that relate to their persistence. Specially, this
research involves multiple explanatory angles to understand persistence,
including the knowledge and beliefs engineers have, the people whom they go to
for advice and resources, and the climate they experience in engineering. This
advances scientific knowledge about the multiple intersecting phenomena that
shape social trends when it comes to how the engineering workforce (industry and
academia) does not represent the broader U.S. population demographically. This
knowledge can help craft more inclusive engineering environments and broaden
participation in the field. A more representative engineering workforce can
improve society in multiple ways, such as by supporting advancements in
engineering practice and education made possible by diverse perspectives
therefore making peoplesâ€™ lives better both inside and outside of the academy.

This study builds upon an existing dataset, following a previous cohort. The
project revisits approximately 2,100 participants from 11 universities who were
enrolled in their first year in an engineering degree program in 2014. The
previous project followed them for five years through annual surveys and two
rounds of interviews with a subsample of 55 women and underrepresented students.
In the new project, we follow the large cohort again using two more surveys, and
also conduct interviews this time expanded to a total of 120 interviewees.
Altogether, the new project expands the dataset into what will become a 12-year
longitudinal project that began with students reflecting on their last year of
high school to then following them into their first few years of graduate school
or engineering occupations. The new project additionally provides outcome
information for many respondents from the first study who were still enrolled in
their engineering program at their fifth year. Further, the new project
introduces added dimensions of identity measures (beyond binary gender as well
as sexuality) to further capture how diversity is likely subsequently tied to
climate and persistence. Using Ego Network Analysis, Logistic Regression, and
Reflective Thematic Analysis, findings from this work can show how institutional
climate intersects with cultural models and social networks to impact
persistence in ways that likely vary for engineers with a range of identities,
including those of race/ethnicity, binary gender, gender diverse, and sexuality.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.