* 2301490
* ERI: Characterizing and improving algae-derived biofuel droplet burning
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Yunye Shi, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2025
* USD 196,995.00

Algae-derived fuels bring great opportunities for reducing the consumption of
petroleum-derived liquid fuels without competing with current agricultural land
use. Although the production of algae-derived fuel and its performances in full-
scale engines have been extensively studied, fundamental droplet burning
characteristics is still lacking. This project aims to gain fundamental insights
on algae-derived fuel droplet burning dynamics such as droplet evolution during
burning, burning rate, and sooting propensity. The study will also identify ways
to improve combustion properties by utilizing additives. This will be an
important step in employing algae-derived fuels as alternatives to existing
liquid fuels without any significant modification to existing engines. Results
from this project will contribute to the development of renewable energy
utilization. The project will support undergraduate and graduate students,
especially encouraging underrepresented students to participate in this
research. The supported students will receive a broad research experience in
experimental design, droplet combustion, image processing, and data analysis.

This project aims to characterize the algae-derived renewable liquid fuel
droplet combustion process and identify ways to improve combustion properties by
using polymer and nanoparticle additives. The study employs an experimental test
rig of a fiber-supported isolated droplet combustion system to perform four
tasks: i) for algae-derived renewable liquid fuel, characterizing droplets
evolution during a combustion process in terms of droplet size, burning rate,
and soot formation; ii) identifying combustion property differences between
conventional petroleum-derived fuels and algae-derived fuels; iii) learning
droplet burning dynamics with the change of different blending and blending
percentages; and iv) determining impacts of additives on such fuel droplet
combustion properties and dynamics. Results from the study will improve our
understanding on the feasibility of algae-derived fuels as “drop-in”
environmentally sustainable fuels to decrease fossil fuel dependency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.