* 2301365
* SHINE: Understanding the Impact of Solar Energetic Particles and Forbush Decreases on the Global Electric Circuit
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Gang Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2027
* USD 353,707.00

Solar Energetic Particle (SEP) are identified as the top space weather hazard.
These particles, when propagating to the Earth, create risks to astronauts,
electronics onboard satellites, and to other human-built infrastructure and
technology. Previous studies have suggested that SEPs can even influence Earth’s
climate. As these particles precipitate down in the Earth’s atmosphere, they
deposit their energy through ionization, modify atmospheric chemistry, and lead
to cloud formation. The coupling between SEP-related space weather phenomena and
tropospheric climate can be essential for the human environment, and this
coupling exists, in part, through the Global Electric Circuit (GEC). A thorough
understanding of this coupling requires a thorough understanding of how the GEC
responds to SEPs and Forbush Decreases (FDs), and requires collaborative efforts
from researchers from heliospheric physics, cosmic ray physics, and atmospheric
physics. This project is an interdisciplinary study to increase understanding on
how SEPs affect the GEC and terrestrial weather or climate. This proposal will
support one postdoc and a summer graduate student, therefore helping to train
the next generation of space plasma and atmospheric scientists.

This work aims to understand the effect of SEPs and FDs on the Global Electric
Circuit. It will focus on how the measured potential gradient (PG) in fair
weather conditions responds to SEPs and FDs across the globe and how lightning
respond to SEPs and FDs. The methodology will involve both data analysis and
numerical simulation. To achieve the science goals the team will, 1) Examine the
correlation between PG increases in fair weather conditions and station altitude
and magnetic latitude; 2) Identify the possible relationship between the
characteristics of SEPs and solar wind and the PG increases in fair weather
condition; 3) Identify the possible relationship between Forbush Decrease
characteristics and PG increases in fair weather conditions; 4) Understand the
global ionization profiles during SEP events by comparing observations of PG
increases with Monte-Carlo simulations; and 5) Investigate the relationship
between SEP events and lightning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.