* 2301087
* Diesel Technology Pathway to Postsecondary Certification or Associate Degree
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* John Motto, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2026
* USD 625,861.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating new integrated and
streamlined pathways from secondary career and technical education (CTE) diesel
programs to postsecondary certificate or associate degree programs in diesel
technology. The goal is to address the growing unmet need for high school diesel
students to continue their education beyond the high school CTE level. The
skills gap in the U.S. has caused the diesel equipment industry to hire CTE
diesel students directly into the workforce, but there is a great need for
employees with postsecondary training. Meeting this demand will help U.S.
commercial trucking and industrial equipment companies to remain competitive
globally. In addition, improving the pathway from CTE to postsecondary training
also increases the possibility of career advancement and higher lifetime
earnings for students from underserved backgrounds and those underrepresented in
STEM, as postsecondary training and education helps workers remain current and
adapt to ever-changing technologies. The project will revise the current
postsecondary curriculum to remove any redundancy with the CTE programs and will
recognize prior CTE learning, thus reducing the number of credits and the
tuition needs each semester. Additional activities are a virtual career
awareness course for CTE students, professional development for CTE diesel
instructors, and a diesel skills competition to attract students to the field.
Such activities will strengthen secondary CTE diesel programs that feed into
postsecondary diesel offerings and will compose a replicable model that can be
adopted in other technician education fields or at other institutions.

This project will implement and evaluate a new pathway between CTE and
postsecondary education that uses articulation credits to reduce the need for
students to take redundant content, thereby minimizing their time and financial
commitment once they enter a postsecondary program. Students at Pennsylvania
College of Technology (Penn College) will earn a postsecondary two-semester
certificate or four-semester associate degree in an electric power generation or
heavy construction equipment diesel technology program. Project goals will be
accomplished through the following activities: (1) collaborating with CTE
instructors toward enhancing CTE programs and improving instructor training; (2)
revising Penn College diesel courses to enable articulation credit to be awarded
for content learned in CTE programs; and (3) increasing awareness in high school
students and their families, CTE instructors, and high school guidance
counselors about diesel technology careers and the long-term benefits of the new
CTE-postsecondary pathway. The project will implement and evaluate a skills
competition and a new virtual workshop for CTE students that will increase
awareness of careers in heavy equipment and power generation and further the use
of a virtual platform for productive learning. The project team will investigate
the benefits of the revised pathway for students, especially if it leads to
increased program completion, and will contribute to existing literature that
seeks to improve pathways to technical education. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nationâ€™s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.