* 2301570
* ERI: Understanding Austenite Refinement Mechanism in Nickel-Alloyed Ductile Cast Irons
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Jingjing Qing, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2025
* USD 195,574.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant enables fundamental
understanding of refining austenite grain structure in nickel-alloyed ductile
irons. Compared to steel and non-ferrous alloys, ductile iron castings are easy
to manufacture by established metal casting processes. Ductile irons are widely
used to produce structural components in automotive, agriculture, mining,
construction, municipal water/sewer, and defense industries and are easily
recyclable. This research is aimed at providing an economical method to improve
mechanical properties of the as-cast ductile iron via refining its grain
structure without the need of large amounts of expensive alloying element
additions or energy-intensive heat treatment. This award supports fundamental
research to provide the needed knowledge for the development of a robust in-situ
grain refinement process for austenitic ductile iron. The refined grain
structure improves the strength and toughness of the ductile iron, which leads
to the development of higher strength-to-mass ratio castings and thinner section
and lighter weight components. The benefits of lightweight ductile iron cast
parts are reduced energy consumption and carbon emission during production,
service, and recycling, which benefits the U.S. economy and society. This
research involves several disciplines including metallurgy, materials science,
and manufacturing. The multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden participation
of women and underrepresented students in research and positively impacts
engineering education.

Refinement of austenite in ductile iron can result in a finer final
microstructure improving its mechanical properties. However, the approach to
achieve in-situ austenite grain refinement during the melting and solidification
process and the associated mechanisms are not well understood. A nickel-alloyed
ductile iron is designed with thermodynamic equilibrium calculations to retain
austenite structure during solidification. Four elemental additions, cerium,
titanium, aluminum, and bismuth are selected. The selected alloying additions
are hypothesized to refine the austenite microstructure either by promoting
heterogeneous nucleation of austenite grains, or by impeding austenite grain
growth. To determine the grain refinement mechanism, partially solidified iron
is quenched to capture early formation of austenite on nucleation sites and
retain growth front of austenite grain in contact with liquid. Samples are
analyzed using electron back scattered diffraction, scanning electron
microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray, transmission electron microscopy, and
selected area electron diffraction to understand the austenite grain refinement
mechanism. The project evaluates processing-structure-property relationships in
the grain refined nickel-alloyed ductile iron in the as-cast state. This
foundational research is generalizable and could be applied to understand grain
refinement mechanisms in other cast irons such as gray iron, compacted graphite
iron, and white iron.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.