* 2301475
* ERI: Wind Field Estimation and Path Planning for Uncrewed Aerial Vehicles in Urban Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Artur Wolek, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,904.00

The use of uncrewed aerial vehicles in urban centers will benefit society and
national security through applications such as commercial/medical package
delivery, public safety, military surveillance, and infrastructure inspection.
However, operating small, lightweight, aerial vehicles at building-level
altitudes remains a challenge, especially in the presence of strong winds that
exacerbate the risk of collision with people or property. Complex wind patterns
around buildings and other structures can result in sudden unanticipated
disturbances, increased power consumption, and degraded vehicle performance and
stability. This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award aims to improve the
fundamental understanding of how aerial robots with limited computational
capabilities can collaboratively estimate and exploit a complex urban wind field
to plan safer and more efficient flight paths. New algorithms will be designed
and analyzed that combine information relating the layout of buildings with
physics-based simulations of wind flows to create a realistic and
computationally efficient wind field estimation algorithm. A path planning
technique will also be established that uses the wind field estimate to more
accurately predict vehicle motion to improve safety. The knowledge generated by
this project can be adopted to enable future aerial vehicles to operate in urban
wind fields that are prohibitive for existing systems. Additionally, this
project will include outreach activities to inspire interest in STEM among
middle-school-age children and will recruit undergraduate students in the
research program with focus on underrepresented groups.

The specific objective of this research is to establish and analyze novel
algorithms that enable multiple aerial robots to collaboratively build spatial
maps of complex urban wind fields and exploit them for path planning at
building-level altitudes. First, a modern data-driven estimation approach, such
as Gaussian process regression, will assimilate local along-path wind
measurements to predict the global wind field and its associated spatial
uncertainty. Each measurement will consist of a spatial position, wind velocity,
and an environment feature vector that characterizes local building morphology.
Hyper-parameters of the estimator will be trained utilizing computational fluid
dynamics simulations of urban wind fields to produce a physics-informed wind
estimator that is cognizant of the environment geometry. Second, a chance-
constrained path planning algorithm will be established to minimize energy usage
subject to collision-risk constraints that are quantified using the predicted
wind-field, its uncertainty, and the closed-loop path following vehicle
dynamics. The wind mapping accuracy, computational efficiency, and reduction in
collision risk of the planned approach will be assessed through numerical
simulations and small-scale outdoor flight experiments with anemometer-equipped
quadrotors.

This project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in
Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering
(ENG) and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.