* 2301379
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: The fate of landslide-derived sediment following tropical cyclones: a case study of Hurricane Fiona in Puerto Rico
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Kenneth Hughes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2023
* USD 21,750.00

From September 18-20, 2022 Hurricane Fiona delivered more than 64 cm of rainfall
to the island of Puerto Rico. This excessive precipitation caused mass wasting
and flooding across the island, similar to the effects of Hurricane Mar√≠a in
2017. Both events represent extraordinary opportunities to study the impact of
tropical cyclones on the evolution of a high relief, tropical landscape. This
project will support two deployments of scientists and equipment to collect
time-sensitive and perishable data from two catchments in southern Puerto Rico
strongly impacted by mass wasting after the hurricane. Using these catchments as
a model study area the investigators will: 1. survey the topography of landslide
deposits, scars, and post-landslide river aggradation using drone-based
structure-from-motion photogrammetry; 2. collect samples of river sediment
downstream of landslide areas for grain size analysis and cosmogenic nuclide
tracing of landslide-derived sediment, 3. monitor and record the movement of
still-unstable landslides and actively aggrading river channels with time-lapse
cameras. The project will be collaborative with co-investigators based in Puerto
Rico and coordinated in concert with federal and local scientists working in
hazards assessment and prevention. Field work deployments will engage at least 3
graduate and 3 undergraduate students.

For more than sixty years, geologists have debated the contribution of large,
yet infrequent storm events to the long-term evolution of eroding landscapes.
For large storms like tropical cycles, the immediate geomorphic impact to
tropical landscapes may be obvious: mass wasting and flooding. However, the
extended response of tropical landscapes to the storm event is often more
complex, and measurement of landscape response requires repeated observations
across a catchment area, beginning immediately after the storm event. This
project supports collection of time-sensitive and perishable data to explore
three hypotheses concerning the response of a tropical landscape to landslides
and flooding caused by a tropical cyclone. Specifically, the investigators will
address the questions: 1. Where (and why) do storm events destabilize
hillslopes? by surveying landslide scars and deposits in-person, monitoring
still-unstable hillslopes with time-lapse cameras, and mapping landslides
regionally with remotely-sensed imagery; 2. How do river networks adjust to an
influx of landslide-derived sediment? by measuring channel aggradation/erosion
patterns with repeat drone-based topographic surveys and direct tracking of
coarse sediment transport using time-lapse images of channels downstream of
landslide areas; and 3. What is the residence time of landslide-derived sediment
in a tropical landscape? by repeated measurement of cosmogenic radionuclide
concentrations in river sediment to detect changes in the flux of landslide-
derived sediment over the following year.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.