* 2301778
* ERI:Interference-Aware Constellation Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mojtaba Vaezi, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 196,230.00

Wireless networks have seen an exponential increase in the number of users
requiring access, making it impractical to allocate a dedicated spectrum to each
user. To address this issue, non-orthogonal transmission has been proposed as a
potential solution. By sharing spectrum among multiple users, more devices can
access the spectrum or more bandwidth can be committed to each transceiver,
achieving higher data transmission rates. However, non-orthogonal transmission
suffers from interference among users, and effective transmission and decoding
methods are needed for its successful deployment. The primary goal of this
research is to develop such methods and advance the field, which has significant
value for next-generation wireless networks and applications like the Internet
of Things (IoT). In addition, the project will provide education opportunities,
including involving undergraduate students in research on deep learning for
communications and designing graduate-level course material. The findings of
this research will be shared with both academic and industrial communities. This
project aims to address inter-user interference by proposing a novel end-to-end
learning-based digital modulation design. Digital modulation techniques are used
to achieve a balance between high bit rates and low bit-error rates for
information transmission. A particular focus of this research is on designing
new superimposed constellations for non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) that
take into account both noise and interference during the design phase. Unlike
traditional constellations such as quadrature amplitude modulation, the proposed
transform results in non-uniform constellations that can adapt to different
interference levels and work effectively in their presence. This approach
provides new insights and tools for multi-user constellation design, which has
the potential to improve spectral efficiency, reduce bit-error rate, and
decrease latency in communication for next-generation wireless networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.