* 2301265
* Improving Access, Recruitment, Retention, and Attainment in IT
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Richard Walsh, Laramie County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,851.00

The demand for Information Technology (IT) professionals in Wyoming (and
nationally) continues to outpace many other technical and STEM fields. In
Wyoming, the need for Computer User Support Specialists, Network and Computer
Systems Administrators, Information Security Analysts, Computer Network Support
Specialists, Datacenter Technicians and Data Analysts outpace all other IT
positions in the state. Employment growth projections in the IT field
demonstrate positional growth of nearly 14,000 positions in the Laramie County
Community College (LCCC) region. This project will help address the demand for
IT professionals by improving access, inclusion, and persistence in community
college IT coursework. Through the proposed activities, the IT pathway will
broaden its impact on underserved populations, while preparing qualified,
skilled, and diverse professionals to benefit the regional workforce and assist
with Wyomingâ€™s goal of diversifying its economy.

The goals of this project are to expand access for rural/remote students, engage
and retain underserved populations and emphasize the advanced
skills/certifications required to promote marketability in an increasingly
competitive field. Specific activities include the deployment of a self-
sustaining student resource model, that will ensure rural/remote students are
equipped with computing equipment consistent to that of industry and can
participate in practical lab exercises to prepare them for career expectations.
Recruitment and experiential learning activities will focus on engaging and
retaining women and career-changing adults in the IT Pathway. Summer bootcamps
and a fully remotely accessible IT Professional Club will be utilized to
increase student participation, collaboration, and success. Project deliverables
will be communicated and shared with other Wyoming community colleges, as well
as nationally and uploaded to ATE Central, including aggregated data on the
assessment of recruitment of females and rural/remote students and their
performance in the IT Pathway. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.