* 2301196
* Collaborative Research: Using Complex Systems Theory and Methods to Gauge the Gains and Persisting Challenges of Broadening Participation Initiatives
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Corey Schimpf, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2026
* USD 297,281.00

During the last decades, there have been significant investments in Broadening
Participation Initiatives (BPIs) aimed to increase the participation of
marginalized groups in engineering. Yet the plethora of factors that influence
the success of BPIs and persistent challenges faced by BPIs complicate a strong
grasp of their impact. Not understanding the aspects that make BPIs effective,
limits their potential for institutional change. BPIs are often implemented
within higher education institutions, which are complex systems with intricate
dynamic interactions among multiple people and factors. Therefore, to gauge the
impact of BPIs it is necessary to adopt systems approaches that acknowledge such
dynamic complexity. This project adopts two well-established complex systems
methods to bring theoretical and practical value to harness the impact of BPIs
in higher education institutions: (1) Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) to
create a comprehensive theoretical model of the complex dynamics and distinct
configurations of factors that lead to the outcomes targeted by a BPI; and (2)
Systems Dynamics Modeling (SDM) to refine the theory of drivers and barriers to
the BPI goals. The research outcomes of this project include the refinement of
institutional change theories that advance women faculty in engineering and
identify barriers and areas that can be leveraged for women’s success.

The goals of this two-phase project are to (1) test the capabilities of QCA and
SDM in refining theories for institutional change, and (2) innovate in the
translation of qualitative evidence into quantitative performance measures that
could support the complex system modeling of BPIs impact. This project focuses
on an exemplary, well-established BPI case: the ADVANCE initiatives to influence
the success of women faculty in engineering. In phase 1, Acker’s Inequality
Regimes will be used as a theoretical framework, and publicly available data
will be collected from 15 research one (R1) institutions that were early ADVANCE
grantees and 15 comparable institutions that were not. Qualitative data will be
transformed into quantitative measures through content analysis and discourse
analysis. QCA models could identify the different theoretical paths leading to
outcomes related to the recruitment and retention of women, particularly women
of color. In phase 2, the theory of ADVANCE impact will be further refined
through SDM. First, by identifying dynamics in the system illustrated in Causal
Loop Diagrams (CLDs) through qualitative data collected from interviews with
women faculty and administrators from a subset of the selected institutions in
phase 1; and second, by enriching and strengthening the developed CLDs through
Group Based Modeling performed in focus groups. The research outcomes of this
project will include (1) refined theories of institutional change for the
advancement of women faculty in engineering, including potentially new and
confirmed causal relationships, as well as identification of persisting barriers
and points of leverage for women’s success, (2) methodological innovations in
translating qualitative data to quantitative performance measures, and the use
of complex systems methods to study institutional change. The project results
will be shared with practitioners through webinars, virtual workshops, and
participation in relevant summits and conferences, in particular those appealing
to the ADVANCE community, such as AIM and ARC, as well as women in engineering
networks, such as WEPAN.

This project is supported by NSF's EDUCore Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.