* 2301725
* ERI: An Artificial Intelligence-based Computer Aided Manufacturing Framework for Hybrid Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Niechen Chen, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 198,574.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant supports research that
contributes new knowledge in manufacturing process planning automation and
promotes the progress of fundamental science in the fields of advanced
manufacturing, computer science, mathematical modeling, and geometric reasoning.
Hybrid manufacturing integrates different manufacturing processes in one system,
enabling the creation of a ready-to-use functional part directly from raw or
stock material. Hybridizing two advanced manufacturing processes, additive and
subtractive manufacturing, potentially unleashes nearly full manufacturing
capability by providing the freedom of adding and removing material in three-
dimensional space. This permits the realization of part designs of complex
shapes and functionality for a variety of applications. However, this
extraordinary manufacturing capability also introduces unprecedented challenges
in toolpath planning and motion control, impeding the broader application of
hybrid manufacturing. This award supports fundamental research to explore and
develop artificial intelligence (AI)-based methods to facilitate smarter and
better computer aided manufacturing (CAM) tools for hybrid manufacturing
processes. The project advances the understanding of automated manufacturing
toolpath planning and control and enables goal-oriented autonomous fabrication
of parts of any geometry. This research advances digital manufacturing, enhances
sustainability, and trains the future skilled workforce, which benefits the U.S.
economy and society. The project benefits several industries such as aerospace,
defense, healthcare, energy, agriculture, and others.

This research lays out a new fully automated computer-aided manufacturing (CAM)
framework for advanced High-Degree-of-Freedom (i.e., 5 or more axes operation)
hybrid manufacturing processes. This framework leverages state-of-the-art
artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms for computer-aided design (CAD) geometry
analysis and CAM toolpath planning and control. A generalized model for various
manufacturing processes and the AI approach that provides the best solution is
the thrust of this research. The data format of the model allows inherent
support for AI methodology. New AI algorithms that are built on neural networks,
evolutionary algorithms, and reinforcement learning are investigated for
automated toolpath planning. This work advances the knowledge base in advanced
manufacturing by filling the knowledge gap on how human knowledge and production
data can be harnessed and extended to realize new manufacturing capabilities.
The research team plans to hybridize a 5-axis milling subtractive process and a
5-axis material extrusion/directed energy deposition type additive manufacturing
process, explore the AI-CAM framework’s capability to expand from one to two and
then to multiple processes, and establish a standard training and testing
methodology for AI-CAM for further expansion and generalization of the
framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.