* 2301090
* Conference: 2023 Chemistry Education Research and Practice Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Ellen Yezierski, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 46,080.00

This project seeks to serve the national interest by advancing and propagating
knowledge of chemistry teaching and learning as well as the application of this
knowledge in undergraduate chemistry learning environments. The Summer 2023
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Chemistry
Education Research and Practice (CERP) will feature cutting-edge chemistry
education research. They will bring researchers and chemistry teaching scholars
together to discuss recent methods and findings as well as applications of the
research in instructional practice. The 2023 CERP GRC builds on a successful
tradition of GRCs while it innovates in the areas of diversity, equity,
inclusion, and belonging. COVID-19 and recent social movements have prompted an
increased amount of scholarship on equity, social justice, and inclusion in
chemistry teaching and learning. The conference organizers will leverage this
new scholarship, recruit speakers and conferees from groups and institutions
that have been traditionally underrepresented in the chemical sciences, and
highlight a programmatic focus on diversity, equity, inclusion, and belonging.
2023 also marks the first year of a CERP GRS convening, which will provide
unique professional development opportunities for new and early scholars who
conduct chemistry education research. These scholars are not only the next
generation of chemistry education researchers, but they are also among the next
generation of college and university faculty. By participating in the GRS and
GRC, they will build the necessary professional and communal networks to support
research-based reforms in chemistry teaching and learning. For the field of
chemistry education, the combined 2023 GRC and GRS on CERP will advance access,
quality, and reform in undergraduate chemistry teaching and learning.

The Summer 2023 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Chemistry Education
Research and Practice (CERP) will: (1) stimulate more and better chemistry
education research and scholarly teaching in chemistry with increased
coordination among research programs and the intentional implementation of
evidence-based teaching innovations; (2) build a more diversified group of
scholars carrying out chemistry education research and scholarly teaching in
chemistry; and (3) broaden early scholars’ expertise in framing research
questions, employing diverse research methods, and applying theoretical
orientations by deliberately organizing sessions on the alignment among these
core research skills. These three goals will be attained through a carefully
designed program and diverse and highly qualified speaker and discussion leader
selection complemented by the intimate conference environment afforded by a GRC
and a GRS. Specifically, the GRS provides a special opportunity for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to form professional networks, receive
feedback on their work, and engage with leaders in the field from outside of
their own research groups. The GRC program includes transformative concepts,
particularly in the areas of diversity, equity, inclusion, and belonging as well
as scholarly responses to the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on chemistry education
research and practice. The structure and content of the Gordon Research Seminar
and Conference on Chemistry Education Research and Practice are carefully
conceived and organized to achieve its three goals. More broadly, the diverse
group of speakers and discussion leaders, the inaugural CERP GRS, and the GRC
Power Hour will contribute to all conferees’ development and build awareness to
support those who have been historically excluded in science. Additionally, the
concurrent programming and networking segments will further conversations about
unconscious bias, mentoring and sponsorship, and strategies for addressing
harassment and inappropriate behavior. Such discussions and interactions will
help seed the culture change needed to support the professional growth of all
chemists. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.