* 2301374
* Geometry of analytic and algebraic varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christopher Hacon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

This research project is in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the core
areas of pure mathematics whose roots date back to the ancient Greeks. At its
heart, algebraic geometry studies the geometry of the solution of polynomial
equations. These are the simplest possible equations and so, not surprisingly,
they play an important role in almost any scientific discipline. In particular
algebraic geometry has close ties with differential and analytic geometry,
commutative algebra, topology, number theory, physics, theoretical computer
science, cryptography, and many areas of applied mathematics. The most
fundamental problem in algebraic geometry is to classify all geometric objects
defined by polynomial equations. The minimal model program is the most
successful approach to this classification program and has recently had
extraordinary success in classifying complex varieties, i.e. solution sets
consisting of complex numbers. It is hoped that these techniques will extend to
other contexts such as varieties defined over fields of positive characteristics
and to complex analytic varieties. The PI will involve graduate students and
post-docs in various aspects of this project.

This project will generalize the results of the minimal model program over the
complex numbers to the case of varieties over algebraically closed fields of
positive characteristic (and to the case of mixed characteristics) as well as
the case of Kahler varieties. In particular, the PI will show that the minimal
model program holds for compact Kahler klt threefolds and fourfolds and will
develop the theory of generalized klt Kahler varieties. The PI will investigate
the minimal model program for threefolds in characteristic 3 and the
pluricanonical maps of projective 3-folds over algebraically closed fields of
large characteristics. The minimal model program in mixed characteristic will
also be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.