* 2301474
* Algebraic Geometry of Hitchin Integrable Systems and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Junliang Shen, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2026
* USD 90,752.00

This research project focuses on algebraic geometry and moduli spaces. Algebraic
geometry is the study of varieties, which are in turn the sets of solutions of
polynomial equations. Moduli spaces are parameter spaces of varieties, which
concern the behavior of varieties as the defining polynomials vary. In the last
few decades, fundamental connections have been found relating moduli spaces in
algebraic geometry to other fields including representation theory, topology,
and quantum field theory in mathematical physics. This project aims to study
several classes of moduli spaces which lie at the crossroads of central areas in
mathematics and physics. The investigator will develop new tools concerning
these varieties, attack long standing questions, and explore new connections.
These projects will increase communication between the communities of
enumerative geometry, topology, Hodge theory, and mathematical physics. The new
developments will generate more activities and offer questions for graduate
students and postdocs who are interested in these areas. Graduate students will
be supported by this award.

The research of the investigator will center around three projects: (1) to study
the P=W phenomenon and the topological mirror symmetry for general reductive
groups. This will bridge more systematically symmetries of groups in
representation theory and symmetries of moduli spaces in algebraic geometry;
moreover, a local version of P=W will be explored concerning several conjectures
relating algebraic geometry of singularities to knot invariants in topology; (2)
to study Hodge theory of Lagrangian fibrations. This will connect the general
theory of perverse sheaves and Hodge modules to concrete and interesting
examples of integrable systems and symplectic varieties; (3) to study perverse
sheaves in enumerative geometry. This concerns relating Gromov-Witten and
Donaldson-Thomas invariants to the more mysterious work of Gopakumar and Vafa.
This direction will provide new perspectives in understanding the connections
between algebraic geometry and quantum physics. To achieve these goals, the
investigator together with his collaborators and students, will develop a set of
tools including support theorems associated with the decomposition theorem,
vanishing cycles techniques, localization methods, techniques in algebraic
geometry of positive characteristics, and symmetries in hyper-Kähler geometries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.