* 2301349
* ERI: Reaction Mechanisms Against Cyberattacks Designed to Result in Voltage Collapse in Smart Power Distribution Systems: Modeling and Experimental Validation Frameworks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Arash Asrari, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,542.00

Despite high levels of security redundancy in the U.S. bulk electric power grid,
it is acknowledged that a sophisticated cyber attack could potentially bring
down the U.S. power system. Strengthening the cyber security of national
infrastructures such as the power grid is of major concern. This has led to a
significant research literature on power systems cybersecurity. Most of this
literature focuses on cyberattack prevention and less on dealing with attacks
aimed at bypassing the detection stage. Hence, this research will study reaction
mechanisms to remediate incidents on power systems that are caused by
cyberattacks bypassing the detection stage. The developed remedial action
frameworks in this project will yield new insights that will be valuable to
researchers/engineers working on resilience improvement for smart distribution
systems against non-detectable cyberattacks. The outcomes of this research will
be shared with professional engineers (PEs) via industry seminars, providing
professional development hours and updating their knowledge on vulnerability of
power systems to cyberattacks. In addition, the project will broaden
participation in engineering through summer workshops to involve K-12 students
from underrepresented groups for the purpose of diversifying the STEM leaders
for modern operation of the U.S power grid.

The focus of this project is to address the following research issue: “How to
react to cyberattacks on the load tap changing (LTC) mechanism of
autotransformers within power distribution systems to tackle an intended voltage
collapse.” Within this scope, the first objective of the research is to
investigate vulnerability of LTCs to cyberattacks targeting voltage collapse in
distribution systems. Reaching this objective for a distribution system operator
will result in a sophisticated attack model that bypasses state estimation-based
bad data detection, based on which realistic remedial actions can be developed.
The second objective is to design primary/backup reaction mechanisms to mitigate
the voltage collapse resulting from the attacked LTCs. To attain this objective,
several algorithms will be created to design a primary remediation technique
based on distribution network reconfiguration customized by a deep learning
framework. The primary reaction scheme will be supported by a backup electricity
market-based mechanism, where distributed synchronous generators will optimally
contribute to mitigation of cyberattacks in the regions of the system not fully
alleviated by network reconfiguration. Finally, the third objective of this
research is to perform hardware-in-the-loop experimental validation of the
proposed remedial actions on a lab-scale smart microgrid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.