* 2301804
* ERI: Investigating the Continuum of Cell Spheroid Biomechanical Behavior with Spheroid Size
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Joanna Dahl, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,952.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant supports research to increase
our knowledge of how human bodies work and to increase the power of tissue
engineering. Tissue engineering includes growing skin, muscle, and other tissues
in a laboratory to use in repairing the body. Other industries such as
automobile manufacturing use computer simulations to design safe and effective
products. Unfortunately, tissue engineering cannot do this yet due to the
complexity of growing human tissues. This project supports fundamental research
into designing and predicting the mechanical stiffness of engineered tissues.
This will make it easier to build tissues which are mechanically strong enough
to use in the body. The work has the potential to benefit society by improving
human health and broadens participation in scientific research by involving
diverse undergraduate students from in research experiments and sharing their
experience with peers.

Better predictive modeling and rational design of engineered biomaterials would
help advance the field of tissue engineering. However, natural and engineered
tissues are incredibly complex, and a unified biomechanical theory that captures
observed tissue mechanics across length scales has not yet been developed. An
important step is understanding the mechanical behavior of simpler multicellular
systems that partially recreate biological complexity. This project will fill in
a gap in knowledge around the critical biomechanical transition zone between
single cells and multicellular aggregates that approach the tissue level and
provide insights for theoretical modeling of multicellular biomechanical
systems. The research team will use microfluidics to systematically measure the
viscoelastic mechanical properties of cell spheroids ranging in size from single
cells (10 micrometers in diameter) up to mesoscale multicellular spheroids (1
mm) and create a finite element model that captures the observed spheroid
biomechanics in flow conditions. These experimental and modeling tools will be
used to investigate the contributions of individual cells and cell-cell
adhesions to the biomechanics of spheroids of different sizes, cell stiffnesses,
and adhesion strengths.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.