* 2301491
* ERI: Friction Stir Processing for Durability of Cobalt-Chromium-Molybdenum Biomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Quentin Allen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,717.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant supports research generating
new knowledge of advanced manufacturing techniques for biomedical applications,
with significant economic and technological benefits, as well as improved
patient outcomes. Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloys are used as the bearing
surfaces of prosthetic joint replacements because of their hardness, toughness,
and biocompatibility. However, wear and corrosion of prosthetic implant
materials in the human body remain serious problems for many patients. Friction
stir processing is an advanced manufacturing technique that uses friction from a
rotating tool to alter the metal surface, resulting in mechanical and corrosion
properties that are highly desirable for bearing surfaces. Improved knowledge of
the friction stir processing advanced manufacturing technique benefits the U.S.
economy and medical device manufacturing industry. It also benefits millions of
patients who undergo total joint replacement surgeries each year. Extending the
durability of a prosthetic joint implant has an enormous impact on the quality
of life of these patients and could be the difference between an implant that
lasts a lifetime and complicated revision surgeries to replace failed implants.
This research is multidisciplinary and provides education and outreach
opportunities to encourage increased participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering research.

Friction stir processing can increase the wear and corrosion resistance of
materials by controlling the microstructure through extreme deformation and
precise control over the thermal history of the material. This research
elucidates how the cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloy microstructure such as grain
size, carbide precipitation, and phase transformations can be controlled, and
how they affect both wear and corrosion resistance. Extreme deformation causes
dynamic recrystallization and martensitic phase transformations, resulting in
fine grains with high hardness and wear resistance. Mechanical stirring and
controlled temperature cause micron-sized, uniformly distributed carbides that
strengthen passive oxide surface layers to bolster corrosion resistance. The
research team performs friction stir processing experiments on the cobalt-based
biomaterials with a polycrystalline cubic boron nitride/tungsten-rhenium alloy
tool, and determines optimum processing conditions such as rotation speed,
traverse speed, and applied load. Pin-on-disk wear tests and potentiodynamic
polarization/electrochemical impedance spectroscopy corrosion tests quantify the
wear and corrosion resistance of the different processed surfaces using
different loads, sliding speeds, and biological lubricants selected to mimic an
in-vivo prosthetic hip implant. Numerical simulations capture the gained
knowledge of the basic science and physical mechanisms in play during friction
stir processing of cobalt-based biomaterials and enable processing plans for
medical devices made from this important biomedical alloy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.