* 2301869
* ACTIVITIES OF THE POLAR RESEARCH BOARD
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Amanda Staudt, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 02/28/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Dramatic environmental changes are taking place in the polar regions and have
profound implications for the United States in terms of environmental protection
and sustainability, natural resource stewardship, the health and well-being of
communities in the Arctic, national security, and economic growth. As a result,
there is a growing need to assure strong national capabilities to observe and
understand such changes and their impacts, and to be able to translate new
scientific insights into understandable, actionable information for a wide range
of stakeholders. Founded in 1958, the Polar Research Board (PRB) is the focal
point within the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine for
providing scientific advice to the nation on issues related to the Arctic,
Antarctic, and cold regions in general. In the next three years, the PRB will
build on its long history of working closely with federal agencies and the
research community, to help the nation understand and respond to the changing
conditions in the Arctic and the Antarctic.

The PRB provides a forum for leading scholars, federal agencies, and other
stakeholders to explore needs, challenges, emerging issues, and opportunities
for polar science, including around complex and controversial issues. Primary
activities include biannual board meetings, development and oversight of ad hoc
studies and workshops, often held in collaborating with other National
Academies’ boards that bring complementary expertise. The PRB is also engaged
with the international community by acting as the U.S. National Committee for
the Science Committee on Antarctic Research and the International Arctic Science
Committee. In the next three years, the board will initiate a series of
“convergence dialogues” aimed at cultivating relationships and connecting
researchers and policy makers in new ways across a broad range of topics
relevant to the polar regions, to enhance the guidance the PRB can provide to
the nation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.