* 2301987
* ERI: Autonomous Personalized Control of Lower Limb Exoskeletons using Impedance Regulation and Trajectory Shaping
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Mojtaba Sharifi, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,946.00

The use of powered exoskeletons to assist persons with physical disabilities and
neurological impairments can provide consistent and long-term assistance in
comparison to conventional physical therapy methods. Although exoskeletons are
now deployed for assistance and rehabilitation, ensuring compliant and flexible
interactions between the robot and wearer remains an unresolved issue. Current
exoskeletons often do not account for the interaction between the wearer and the
robot, relying on pre-planned walking motions. This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project aims to spur research into the development of real-
time, personalized locomotion strategies for lower limb exoskeletons. The
outcomes of this research could lead to safer and more compliant rehabilitation
robotic systems.

In this project, autonomous locomotion planning and impedance control strategies
will be designed and implemented with two challenging purposes: 1) online
shaping of personalized walking trajectory to enhance human comfort and 2) real-
time adjustment of the exoskeleton impedance during human-robot interaction.
Accordingly, intelligent control strategies will be developed for lower-limb
exoskeletons to facilitate a balance between exoskeleton autonomy and human
safety, which is technically challenging due to the non-passive and
unpredictable behaviors of humans that make the detection of their intention and
ensuring the flexibility of the exoskeleton's response harder. The control
strategies that will be pursued in this research project will advance the
trending interdisciplinary research on various lower-limb human robot
interaction tasks such as movement therapies, assistive locomotion, and human
behavior assessment augmented by an exoskeleton. Accordingly, this research will
advance the field of assistive robotics to have a widespread impact on the
quality of life for a variety of people with disabilities and neurological
conditions caused by spinal cord injury, stroke, and other injuries/diseases.
This research has a broader impact to assist occupational workers in performing
heavy manual activities with loading on their lower limbs, which will decrease
and prevent their primary and secondary injuries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.