* 2301964
* AccelNet-Design: Global Futures Oriented Research Collective on Education for Sustainability (G-FORCES)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Iveta Silova, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The multifaceted nature and urgency of the climate crisis require
interdisciplinary and collaborative approaches to transform education — and
consequently stimulate cultural shifts — toward more sustainable global futures.
This challenge cannot be solved through research solely focused on technical
solutions, but requires a critical interrogation of underlying assumptions about
knowledge, education, and social change. The Global Futures Oriented Research
Collective on Education for Sustainability (G-FORCES) aims to bring together
international sustainability-oriented research networks from the natural
sciences, social sciences, and humanities to rearticulate the role of education
for planetary sustainability in formal and non-formal lifelong learning
settings. G-FORCES aims not merely to improve, but to fundamentally reshape the
relationship between education and sustainability research across global
networks in ways that effectively integrate different knowledge ecosystems,
bridge the research-practice divide, and prioritize education for planetary
wellbeing and ecological justice.

G-FORCES is a dynamic, multi-team collaboration across representatives from 10
diverse, globally leading research networks that share a common commitment to
mobilize the power of education for planetary sustainability. Leveraging design
approaches that enable structured but robust collaboration across networks,
G-FORCES establishes a shared vision and strategic operational links across
established research communities to engage in transdisciplinary convergence
research that advances a comprehensive vision of sustainability education and
climate literacy – encompassing scientific, energy, media, and ecological
literacy – under a unified framework. Furthermore, it aims to maximize the
impact of research on education policy and practice, create enduring local-to-
global networks of scholarship and action, and address institutional barriers
and structural limitations that presently limit integrated interdisciplinary
climate research by creating new opportunities for inclusive research leadership
for early-career scholars and from historically marginalized populations,
particularly from the global South. Starting with a mapping exercise to identify
gaps, connections, and synergies between networks, project activities will
include annual research assemblies to set agendas for potential convergence
research; a series of virtual co-design workshops to develop operational
mechanisms for collaboration; and ongoing knowledge mobilization activities to
engage relevant stakeholders to promote the transformation of educational
systems for planetary sustainability. In addition to generating innovative
research synergies and creating new spaces for sharing knowledge across
different research networks, G-FORCES enhances connectivity among the world's
leading scholars and education practitioners in enacting change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.