* 2301202
* Implementing Game-Based Learning to Enhance Training for Cybersecurity Technicians and Recruit a Diverse Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kyle Jones, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 646,713.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by producing more qualified
technicians to meet workforce demands in cybersecurity. Keeping computers and
information systems secure is a critical need and a major challenge in business,
industry, and government. The growth of cyber-threats has created a need for
many more workers who have the knowledge and skills to protect both existing and
emerging technologies. The use of challenges, competitions, games, puzzles, and
similar highly interactive and team-oriented activities has proved to be an
effective means of exciting students about cybersecurity and improving their
understanding of cybersecurity concepts. These tools can supplement traditional
pedagogical approaches, and they can sometimes engage students that the
traditional approaches do not. In this project, educators from Sinclair
Community College and Moraine Valley Community College will refine, test, and
disseminate a hands-on, minds-on learning game called "Sticker Heist," in which
teams of students solve cybersecurity puzzles to complete the shared quest of
opening a locked box to retrieve "stickers." This quest is supported by an
immersive story that locates the players in an alternate time and identity. This
cybersecurity simulation game encourages teamwork, communication, and leadership
while it teaches principles and skills in the cybersecurity curriculum. Role-
playing and simulation games, especially escape games like "Sticker Heist," are
broadly appealing to people of various ages, educational backgrounds, races, and
genders and can be used to expose people of all ages to new career fields,
especially cybersecurity and other areas of STEM. The learning activities in
this project will increase students' engagement, promote learning outcomes,
support recruitment into the cybersecurity profession by encouraging
participants to picture themselves in a cybersecurity career, and address the
critical need to attract more students from underrepresented populations into
the cybersecurity workforce.

"Sticker Heist" is a hands-on learning game that consists of a self-contained,
portable security system protecting a locked box of laptop stickers. The
interior box is a simple, locked container containing a number of laptop
stickers related to Defcon, hacking events, etc., which are often collectibles
to enthusiasts. The surrounding box contains the systems that secure the first
-- currently a Raspberry Pi 4, Arduino Uno, network, and other components (RFID,
keypad, buzzer, lights). However, the box is not 100% secure; several common
security flaws and vulnerabilities have been built in. This allows teams of high
school and college students to work together to gather information
(reconnaissance) on the system and then use free, open-source tools to expose
and exploit the security flaws to access the system, open the box, and collect
the prize. In this challenge, students work together as a team and think
critically and creatively while learning the basics of cybersecurity. In the
project, the investigators will pursue four related goals. First, is to refine
the "Sticker Heist" learning tool, ensuring its alignment with the National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce Framework
as well as industry-recognized cybersecurity credentials. Second, is to deliver
professional development training on the tool to high school and college faculty
so that they can effectively implement the tool in their classrooms. Third, is
to promote use of the tool as a means to attract underrepresented students into
cybersecurity through demonstrations, recruitment events, and clubs. Fourth, and
finally, is to assess the effectiveness of the tool for improving engagement and
attracting a broader and more diverse population of students to cybersecurity
careers. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.