* 2301114
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Longitudinal Development of Pre-Service Elementary Teachers’ Equitable Noticing of Children’s Mathematical Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Cindy Jong, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 406,865.00

Preparing teachers to create equitable mathematics classrooms is an ongoing
challenge for teacher education. This begins with helping teachers focus on
children's strengths and identities as mathematics learners. Then, teachers need
to be able to respond to children's experiences, knowledge, and mathematical
reasoning when planning and teaching. This is particularly important for groups
that have been historically marginalized in mathematics (e.g., Black, Latinx,
Indigenous, Asian American Pacific Islander). Teachers also need to consider how
they can create change in their schools and districts for equitable mathematics
teaching and learning. There is a need for resources for teacher education
programs to help pre-service teachers learn about equitable mathematics
approaches to teaching and learning. The project will also develop modules,
resources, and tools for exploring how teachers' understanding of equity changes
from their last year of the preparation program into their first year of
teaching. The tools and resources can be shared with other teacher education
programs.

The project builds upon prior research about the use and development of
micromodules to help preservice teachers develop positive attitudes towards
mathematics, practice equitable noticing of mathematics and understand the
sociopolitical influences on teaching and learning. An important component of
equitable noticing is helping teachers recognize how children's identities,
language and mathematical reasoning are central to learning. The research
questions examine how instructional experiences for preservice teachers
influence their equitable professional noticing and how teaching practices
continue once they are first-year teachers. The longitudinal study uses an
embedded mixed methods approach that collects data in mathematics teaching
methods courses, student teaching and the first year of teaching. The research
will incorporate the following data sources: an assessment suite called Multiple
Assessments for Noticing Equitably (MANE), a video-based think-aloud protocol,
semi-structured interviews, and other artifacts of the teacher education
experience.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) Program and the
Discovery Research preK-12 Program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.