* 2301983
* Equivariant birational geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yuri Tschinkel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

This award is focused on the study of systems of nonlinear algebraic equations
in many variables. Of particular interest are problems concerning the existence
of simple parametrizations of solutions and of hidden symmetries of such
solution spaces. Apart from intrinsic importance to the field of algebraic
geometry, this research has potential applications to theoretical computer
science, and as a consequence to problems in cryptography, information
processing, and management of large data structures. Furthermore, it is
potentially applicable to theoretical physics, where nonlinear systems play an
important role. Moreover, it stimulates the development of efficient algorithms
for the computation of discrete invariants of such systems, and provides many
concrete problems and examples for the next generation of geometers. The PI will
continue to train graduate students and engage in outreach activities bringing
mathematical awareness to a broad audience. Specifically, the proposed research
would combine in novel ways arithmetic and geometric insights to significantly
advance our understanding of rationality and stable rationality in small
dimensions, as well as linearizability and stable linearizability of actions of
finite groups on algebraic varieties. Rationality constructions often involve
the study of fibrations and thus the study of rationality over the function
field of the base, a nonclosed field. In turn, geometry over nonclosed fields is
tightly linked to equivariant birational geometry, as there are strong parallels
between the action of the absolute Galois group and the action of automorphisms.
Exploring these connections between geometry, arithmetic, and group theory is a
major thrust of this proposal. One of the long-term goals is to obtain a full
classification of such actions on rational varieties in dimensions up to three.
Another goal is to explore the range of applicability of recently discovered
invariants in birational geometry, in presence of actions of finite groups,
volume forms, and other structures. A third goal is to develop the theory of
universal torsors in the equivariant and orbifold context, and to apply it to
produce new examples of stable birationalities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.