* 2301204
* Success In Mathematics through Project-based Learning Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tim Haynes, Independence Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 233,905.00

A growing number of American industries have voiced a need for a large pool of
skilled technicians to fill available and emerging jobs in a variety of economic
sectors. Community Colleges are uniquely suited to align with regional
industries to train the skilled technical workforce. Many career and technical
education (CTE) courses require pre-requisite mathematics courses that have been
a barrier for students. There is a well-documented fear of mathematics that has
been shown to keep otherwise capable students from pursuing degrees and
certificates in CTE programs. Independence Community College (ICC) will use an
evidence-based, hands-on approach that will leverage the capabilities of a 3D
fabrication lab to provide context for CTE specific mathematics courses. Through
active learning strategies, the team will encourage students to embrace relevant
connections between mathematical concepts and skills that are essential in
fields like advanced manufacturing. Independence Community College will
establish a Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT) to further guide and
contextualize mathematics content to address the needs of regional employers.
Over the three-year period, ICC expects to increase success rates in mathematics
courses, and persistence rates in CTE programs.

Two parallel strategies that inform this project are: 1) the establishment of a
BILT, and 2) utilization of an on-campus Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) certified fabrication laboratory to contextualize mathematics instruction
using active learning strategies. In addition to curriculum guidance, the BILT
will augment CTE programs with mock interviews, guest lectures, and other
personalized interactions. The ICC fabrication laboratory will make use of their
digital fabrication equipment, design software, and studio space to add context
to traditional mathematics instruction for students in CTE programs. The ICC Fab
Lab is a member of the International Fab Lab network, originally initiated by
MIT. The Fab Lab manager at ICC will work with ICCâ€™s mathematics instructors to
develop curricula that aligns with skills desired by regional industry, and the
natural curiosity of students. Successful practices from this project will be
disseminated throughout the state, and beyond through the International Fab Lab
network. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.