* 2301038
* Opportunity Matters: Investigating the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the STEM Career Pipeline
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jennifer Hamilton, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 657,725.00

The COVID-19 pandemic fundamentally changed the educational landscape of the
United States, overwhelming schools and leaving high school students with fewer
opportunities to learn math and science content. This was particularly true for
students from historically marginalized groups including students living in
poverty, students of color, students with disabilities, and students whose
primary language is not English. Reduced opportunities to learn math and science
content has profound implications for the pipeline from high school, through
college, to STEM careers, narrowing it to only students with the necessary
resources to ensure continued access to learning opportunities. Building on
prior research, this study is designed to explore disruptions in math and
science high school course taking during the COVID-19 Pandemic, focusing on high
school students from historically marginalized groups in the United States.

The project draws upon Opportunity to Learn theory and a multidimensional
conceptualization of cultural capital which incorporating Bourdieu's concept of
hysteresis and Yosso's theory of Community Cultural Wealth. The project is
designed to advance foundational knowledge about studentsâ€™ access to and
engagement with science and math courses at different time points before,
during, and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Researchers from the National Opinion
Research Center will partner with Infinite Campus, a leading supplier of student
information and learning management systems, providing researchers with access
to data on over 1.8 million high school students across the United States. The
large-scale data set will enable analyses of populations often excluded from
research because of their small populations, as well as intersectional groups
with multiple social identities. The project team will use weighting techniques
designed to warrant claims about public high schools with enrollments larger
than 50 students. Data will be analyzed using concept grounding, latent class
analysis, and intersectional techniques. Findings from this study have the
potential to be critical for schools and districts as they work to more
equitably address disparities in student outcomes in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.