* 2301910
* Wet Particle Collisions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert Davis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2026
* USD 373,000.00

Collisions and flows of solid particles covered with thin liquid layers occur in
natural phenomena such as avalanches, mud slides, and pollen capture. They are
also prevalent in industrial processes such as coating pharmaceutical powders,
fertilizer pellets, and chocolate candies for storage and controlled release of
these products. To better understand these phenomena, it is necessary to predict
the conditions under which the particles stick together or bounce apart after
colliding. Similarly, it is important to know when a dense suspension of wet
particles will flow when subject to forces and when it will instead lock or jam.
This award will use laboratory experiments and computer simulations to elucidate
the fundamental physics of collisions of wet particles and to develop predictive
models of flows involving wet particles.

The goals of this award are (1) to develop new microphysical models for
collisions of two or more wet particles, (2) to utilize new experimental
approaches to verify and refine the models, (3) to incorporate the microphysical
models in a discrete element method for simulating the flows of many wet,
colliding particles, and (4) to train students who are well prepared as future
researchers and leaders. The modeling approach will employ a natural coordinate
system for each interacting pair of particles, resolved into normal and
tangential motions and including lubrication, capillary, centrifugal and solid-
contact forces. It will determine microphysical outcomes such as sticking and
bouncing, so that macroscale phenomena of wet granular flow, including jamming
and agglomeration, may be predicted. The experiments will use an air table and
high-speed camera to observe collisions of wetted spheres mounted on hockey-type
pucks, thereby avoiding limitations imposed by strings in pendulum-based
experiments. The outcome of this award will allow researchers to effectively
model wet granular flows and provide new understanding of the role of liquid
forces in substantially changing the behavior of these dense particulate
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.