* 2301334
* SHF: Small: Software and Hardware Support for Robust Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Abdullah Muzahid, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2026
* USD 199,999.00

Deep neural networks have made unprecedented strides in recent years, making
them a ubiquitous component of any modern computing system. Deep neural networks
and their hardware will be commonplace in future in various systems ranging from
simple tasks to safety and security-critical systems. Therefore, it is
imperative to have specialized support to improve the robustness of deep neural
network models so that users and developers can trust the predictions provided
by those models. Towards that end, this project presents novel algorithms for
robust deep neural networks.

The project aims at ensuring robust operations of deep neural networks. The
project, called GuardiaNN, has two components - dynamic monitoring schemes and
testing schemes. The goal of dynamic monitoring is to determine whether a deep
neural network model can misbehave during inference at a production setting. Two
novel monitoring algorithms are considered in this project - neuron pattern and
model-based monitoring. Neuron pattern-based schemes work by first extracting
simple neuron activation patterns and then, later at runtime, checking whether
those patterns are satisfied or not. Model-based schemes work by first
determining a minimal set of data points to monitor and then, using an advanced
model to detect if those data points show any anomalous pattern or not. The goal
of testing schemes is to determine how the model might behave in corner case
scenarios. Testing allows users to explore the behavior of the model without
understanding the internal details of the model. Together the monitoring and
testing approaches will provide trust in deep neural network operations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.