* 2301264
* Sieves and primes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kevin Ford, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2026
* USD 121,032.00

Questions about properties of the positive integers have fascinated people for
thousands of years and have recently found applications in computer science,
information security and signal processing. In this field, known as number
theory, the prime numbers play a central role. Fundamental questions revolve
around patterns in the primes, gaps between primes, and how primes of special
types are distributed. Since the early 20th century, sieve methods have been one
of the chief tools we have for analyzing these problems, but the limitations of
these methods are poorly understood, and discovering the limitations is a major
open problem in the field. This award will enable the PI to continue his work
understanding and exploring sieve methods and the distribution of primes.
Success in this endeavor will help unlock many of the mysteries of prime numbers
and have a significant impact on many areas of mathematics and information
theory. Grant funds will also be used to train and mentor graduate students
working in number theory.

The PI will develop new methods of probing the limitations of sieve methods for
detecting primes in a general sequence of integers. The emphasis will be on
developing a new, unified theory of sieves that allows one to say if the main
hypotheses on the sequence, known as Type-I bounds and Type-II bounds, are
sufficient to show that the sequence contains many primes. The strength of these
hypotheses are governed by three parameters. In particular, we will prove, for
the first time, that in a certain range of these parameters, there are sequences
which satisfy the Type-I and Type-II bounds yet contain no primes. The primary
goal is to determine precisely in which range of the parameters the main
hypotheses imply that the sequence always contains many primes. We will also
investigate in finer detail the problem of counting primes in short intervals.
The PI will also continue his investigations into further understanding the
concentration of divisors of integers. The primary goal is to determine
precisely the measure of the concentration function of divisors of typical
integers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.