* 2301153
* I-Corps: Development of decentralized anomaly detection for industrial facilities
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Fan Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that will aid digital controllers in detecting and
identifying anomalies in industrial systems. Every industrial sector relies on
industrial control systems to function. There is significant commercial interest
in technologies which reduce the risk of unplanned failure and improve worker
knowledge and operational effectiveness through data-driven insights. Existing
solutions share common issues around cybersecurity, cost of installation,
workforce knowledge on how to use the solution, and the ability to explain
unusual observations. By separating from the cloud and focusing on the
autonomous and explainable capabilities of the technology, technicians using
this technology may be able to perform their jobs rapidly and more effectively
without needing be experts in artificial intelligence / machine learning (AI/ML)
themselves. Adopting a “plug-and-play” approach will reduce the barrier to entry
for deploying analytics on smaller systems, thereby enabling better awareness of
facility states and avoiding facility degradation before it becomes urgent. The
technology will also benefit underrepresented entities in the current industrial
solutions landscape as the solution may reduce the cost of implementation and
the infrastructure redesigns. This technology may reduce industrial downtime and
improve overall facility and process reliability, thereby reducing costs of US-
based manufacturing.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an autonomous, edge-based
analytics technology for decentralized and scalable fault detection. The core
technology is an efficient software which can detect faults in an industrial
control system autonomously using on a very small computational footprint. Such
a solution will make the deployment of analytics possible even for small-scale
systems which are normally overlooked in analytics initiatives. The proposed
technology autonomously collects, analyzes and builds analytical AI models based
on data from digital industrial assets in the field and then uses these models
to continuously monitor for signs of anomalous behavior corresponding to
equipment degradation or malfunction, all with no connection to the cloud. The
software is derived from kernel-based regression methods, such that all
predictions and decisions can be directly introspected and explained. These
capabilities are paired with a simple and easy-to-understand user interface
which can be interactively used to identify the root signals driving a given
alarm system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.