* 2301350
* Excellence in Research: Tunable hybrid photonic materials at strong coherent coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 945,926.00

Nontechnical

Interesting phenomena happen when light interacts with materials with nanoscale
features. For example, the brilliant colors of butterfly wings arise from
nanoscale photonic structures. The emerging field of nanophotonics puts such
light-matter interaction to use in applications such as generating clean
electrical power and improving the efficiency of chemical reactions. In this
project, investigators will design and fabricate tunable hybrid nanostructures
based on coherent coupling between optically active molecules and the nanoscale
environment. Investigators will combine state-of-art experiment and modeling to
explore the complex phenomena associated with light-matter interactions in
precisely designed and controlled nanoscale environments. The aim is to achieve
precise control of light-matter interactions and thereby enable novel
technologies. This collaborative project will be carried out at two HBCUs,
Norfolk State University and Jackson State University. The extensive educational
component will strengthen the graduate and undergraduate programs in STEM at
both institutions via collaboration, student exchange and co-advising.
Investigators will involve students from underrepresented minorities in cutting-
edge research and thereby enrich their education.

Technical

Interaction of light with the ensembles of molecules that are strongly coupled
to surface plasmons excited in metal surfaces and nanostructures gives rise to a
host of phenomena which can cause dramatic changes in the optical response at
the nanoscale. This collaborative research project involves (i) Experimental
studies and modeling of optical properties of hybrid photonic materials
involving large ensembles of optically active molecules whose optical properties
are defined by their strong coupling to the plasmons excited in the systemâ€™s
metallic components, (ii) Developing novel designs for hybrid photonic materials
with potential applications in light technologies; and (iii) Significantly
expanding the research capacity at the participating minority institutions (JSU
and NSU) by combining research and educational efforts, including joint
seminars, student co-advising, and student exchange. The experimental studies
will be performed at NSU Labs while the modeling will be carried out at JSU. The
results obtained in the course of proposed research will be disseminated via
publications, presentations and patents. The proposed project consists of four
distinct tasks which have potential applications in organic photovoltaics, opto-
electronic nanocircuitry and signal processing. It is expected that nearly a
dozen graduate and undergraduate students will be impacted by the program,
directly or indirectly, over a three-year span of the project. The synergy
between the research, education and outreach activities planned in this project
could profoundly impact the minority students at participating institutions and
provide an example of a fruitful collaboration between HBCUs in cutting-edge
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.