* 2301692
* ERI: Engineering self-assembled responsive materials by employing light-driven shapeshifting of colloidal particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Nabila Tanjeem, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,934.00

Microscopic responsive materials that can change their shapes in response to
stimuli from the environment have many transformative applications. The current
technology of manufacturing responsive microstructures faces significant
challenges due to the cost of expensive tools, such as high-resolution 3D
printers, and limitation in the diversity of target 3D shapes. This award will
investigate the potential of an inexpensive alternative manufacturing method
based on self-assembly process. In a self-assembly process, the small building
blocks of a material organize themselves into a functional structure without
human intervention. By using responsive building blocks, the shape of a self-
assembled structure can be reconfigured on demand. Because self-assembly
provides access to the material response at a building-block level and the
flexibility to assemble and disassemble on demand, it is a promising candidate
for solving the engineering challenges of responsive material design at small
scales. This award will provide opportunities to train undergraduate and
Mastersâ€™ students at CSUF (a Hispanic-serving Institution) into highly skilled
researchers and future leaders of engineering research. It will also engage the
broader community in cutting-edge soft materials research. Colloidal particles
that change their shape in response to light will be employed to investigate
responsive self-assembly, with a focus on shaping the global structure using
local tuning of particle shapes. A new experimental system will be developed
that allows for static and dynamic patterned light illumination on colloidal
assemblies. The specific goals of this award are (1) to test the hypothesis that
ordered colloidal crystals can be shaped through emission and migration of
dislocations, and (2) to investigate shapeshifting of disordered colloidal
clusters. In addition, a numerical model will be developed to understand the
impact of colloidal interaction range and strength on the shapeshifting
dynamics. To date, experiments on responsive self-assembly have been studied
only in the context of global shape reconfiguration. This award will allow
testing of theoretical predictions suggesting that control over local particle
shapes will lead to intriguing global behavior with applications in defect
engineering, colloidal robotics, and the study of active matter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.