* 2301149
* Center: DeafTEC Resource Center Renewal Grant
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Linda Bryant, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,649,965.00

Although progress has been made, people with disabilities continue to be
employed at rates much lower than the rest of the population. This lower
employment rate is especially true of Americans who are deaf or hard of hearing
(D/HH). The most recent available data from 2019 shows 44% of deaf and hard-of-
hearing (D/HH) people have opted out of the labor force, at more than double the
rate for the general population (21%). College graduation can provide major
economic benefits for D/HH individuals who have the potential to earn 67% more
than non-college graduates. Being employed in STEM provides an even greater
benefit, since D/HH individuals in STEM occupations earn 24% more than their
peers in non-STEM fields. The ATE Technological Education Center for D/HH
Students, DeafTEC, works to increase the access of D/HH individuals to career
information, to technician education, and to gainful employment. The goal of
DeafTEC is to increase the number of D/HH individuals in highly skilled
technician jobs in which there continues to be underrepresentation and
underutilization of these individuals in the workplace.

The DeafTEC Resource Center will continue to build on and utilize the exemplary
materials and network that have been developed as well as achieve sustainability
and institutionalization of our key functions. The Center will: (1) leverage
partnerships to broaden professional development opportunities onsite and online
for high school teachers, community college faculty, and employers to improve
access to learning and technician employment for D/HH students; (2) expand,
enhance, and broadly distribute DeafTECâ€™s innovative online resources available
through its website that serves as a national resources for teaching D/HH
students and military student veterans with hearing loss in technician education
programs; and (3) collaborate with PIs of current ATE projects and centers on
creating inclusive environments for D/HH students and student veterans with
hearing loss. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.