* 2301051
* Advancing Technical Career Pathways for Uniquely Abled Adults
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert Simon, Dallas College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2026
* USD 640,677.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a unique
collaboration between educators, autism specialists, social service agencies,
and the machine technology industry to create vocational opportunities for
uniquely abled, Level I Autistic individuals. The project will leverage this
dynamic network of experts to prepare students to enter high-demand technical
careers as Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machinists, a career pathway in
American manufacturing that matches with the unique abilities of most adults
with Level I Autism. Eligible students will be supported to enter college,
navigate a customized technical education program and transition into a job as a
machinist. As a result, the project will increase the number of trained CNC
technicians in the North Texas Region and increase the number of Level I
Autistic individuals in the technical workforce. Ultimately, the project intends
to fill significant gaps in customized training programs and employment
opportunities for the autistic community in the local Dallas-Fort Worth area and
serve as a model for the implementation of technical programs at the national
level.

This project will develop and implement a credit, CNC Mill & Lathe Operator
Level I career pathway for uniquely abled, Level I Autistic students. This novel
career pathway will focus on the following five critical areas to meet the needs
of the target population and build a fast-track path to the workforce: 1)
partnership development, 2) student support and resources, 3) curriculum
improvements, 4) professional development, and 5) awareness for families,
faculty, staff, employers, and community organizations. The project will convene
a collaborative of industry partners, vocational rehabilitation providers, local
independent school districts, and Dallas College internal stakeholders to
establish the foundation for identifying, recruiting, and serving Level I
Autistic individuals. In addition, the pathway will integrate a career readiness
course to support the development of professional skills and better prepare
participants for the workplace. Industry partners will provide experiential
learning opportunities, host on-site tours, and provide classroom guest
speakers. The Dallas College Student Care Network will provide extensive support
and resources to participants such as mental and physical health services,
childcare, transportation assistance, and access to food pantries. A learning
laboratory will be designated exclusively for participants to ensure skill
attainment in an environment that is tailored to their unique needs and growth
in the project. Creating a technical career pathway for Level I Autistic
individuals will enhance the diversity of the workforce and offer long term
careers that provide a living wage. Through dissemination efforts as part of the
North Texas Consortium of Community Colleges, this model will be introduced to
other colleges and universities especially in the Dallas area and has the
potential to be translated to other programs and careers. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.