* 2301960
* Collaborative Research: Incorporating secondary foundation species in coastal restoration efforts to increase ecosystem regrowth, biodiversity recovery and climate resistance
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Brian Silliman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 04/30/2026
* USD 255,423.00

Ecological restoration is an important tool to combat habitat degradation,
biodiversity loss, and climate change. However, ecological restoration is
extremely challenging. It requires building partnerships across researchers,
conservationists, and managers to co-develop, test, and refine new science-
informed solutions that will improve restoration success, lower costs, and
increase efficiency. Restoration in coastal systems has historically taken a
single-species approach that focuses on reducing environmental stress, avoiding
competition, and excluding interactions with other organisms. Previous work by
the investigators is challenging this paradigm and has demonstrated that
beneficial interactions among and across species are key to organismal and
ecosystem resistance to the high physical stress that is common in restoration.
Harnessing mutually beneficial, or positive species interactions has the
potential to increase restoration yields at little or no extra cost. This
project unites non-profit restoration practitioners with scientists to test and
systematically incorporate mutually beneficial interactions in large-scale
restoration to increase habitat growth, resistance to environmental stress, and
re-establish biodiversity. This work will occur in three invaluable coastal
ecosystems that have severely declined due to anthropogenic activities and
therefore are the target of extensive conservation efforts – oyster reefs, salt
marshes, and seagrass meadows. Results of this work will inform restoration
strategies and be integrated into easy to understand training materials (e.g.
step-by-step guides and workshops) that will be distributed to interested
stakeholders. This work will support and train a number of conservation
scientists across the research institutions and other organizations, and provide
hands-on training and demonstrative case-studies of new and easy to implement
restoration techniques.

Foundation species, such as salt marsh grass, seagrasses, and oysters, are
habitat-forming organisms that create locally stable conditions for other
organisms. Secondary foundation species (SFS) are habitat-forming organisms that
establish after and within a primary foundation species (PFS) that further
modify and enhance ecosystem functions and structure. Inclusion of facilitation
between co-occurring primary and secondary foundation species in restoration
designs has the potential to increase ecosystem regrowth as well as elevate
biodiversity of inhabitants and climate resistance. The overarching objective of
the proposed research is to work in concert with conservation organizations to
test and co-design evidence-based approaches that restore secondary foundation
species to increase the growth of primary foundation species and site
biodiversity, while enhancing key ecosystem functions (e.g., climate resistance
of restored habitats). Specifically, this project will: 1) Test how enhancing
previously restored sites with either complementary or similar SFS at both low
and high abundances affects PFS growth, local biodiversity, and key ecosystem
functions, 2) Co-restore PFS with either complementary or similar SFS at both
low and high abundances in a fully-factorial experiment to test for the relative
ability to increase PFS growth, local biodiversity, and important ecosystem
functions in newly restored systems, and 3) Survey previously restored habitats
and reference sites to quantify and correlate SFS abundance and complementarity
with changes in PFS abundance, local biodiversity and ecosystem function to test
the generality of SFS effects.

This project is being supported via a joint program involving the Divisions of
Environmental Biology and Integrative Organismal Systems and the Paul G. Allen
Family Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.