* 2301294
* Preparing STEM Technicians for Bioscience Data Acquisition and Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Candy Mintz, Merritt College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,997.00

Addressing global challenges in health, climate, energy, and agriculture
requires a highly skilled STEM workforce that is knowledge-based and science-
driven. Benchtop multimode plate readers, digital imagers, and RNA/DNA
sequencers, generate enormous amounts of data requiring employees to be data
literate. Life Science employers are looking for employees who have expertise in
lab bench skills and in computing, data analysis, and bioinformatics. The goal
of this project at Merritt College is to develop a Bioscience data analysis
certificate program that will prepare students to perform data analysis in
applied bioscience research. The program will train STEM students to design, set
up and execute experiments; operate and collect data from automated equipment;
and conduct data analysis of large data sets. This project will help fill the
Bioscience, Biotechnology and Life Science pipelines with well-trained
individuals with both experimental and data analysis skills that are in high
demand by industry.

This project will educate STEM technicians to design bioanalytical, sequencing,
and imaging assays on High Throughput and High Content equipment. Students will
collect, clean, and organize the resulting large data sets and conduct data
analysis utilizing biostatistics, Excel, Tableau, and the programming languages
R and Python. Three specific aims will guide the work of the project. First is
to develop a new Bioscience program with three integrated courses leading to a
Certificate of Achievement. Second is to design and implement physical and
digital infrastructure to support the program. Third, and finally, is to put in
place a sustainable recruitment and retention plan to fill each new cohort of
students, with an emphasis on increasing the number of underrepresented
minorities enrolling and completing the Bioscience Data Acquisition and Analysis
Technician Certificate of Achievement program. The results of this work will be
disseminated locally, regionally, and nationally through websites, social media,
industry advisory meetings, and conferences. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.