* 2301163
* Collaborative Research: A Solar and Wind Innovation and Technology Collaborative for Hawaii (SWITCH)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Aaron Hanai, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2026
* USD 349,991.00

This Track 2 ATE project aims to serve the national interest by cultivating the
next generation workforce to lead Hawaii’s transition to 100% renewable energy
by 2045. A central challenge in renewable energy generation is it often
confronts other basic needs such as food, water, and culture, as its distributed
nature demands a lot of space. As such, large-scale deployments of renewable
energy generators in our country would be unthinkable without establishing wide
social acceptance. Studies have suggested that greater public participation in
planning and designing of renewable energy solutions can increase their
transparency and gain more public trust and community support. However, the
current paradigm of technical education in the field of renewable energy lacks
essential elements for teaching students how to address public concerns with
technological solutions and then communicate the engineering results to
stakeholders. This project will supplement these elements to existing courses in
community colleges and use the social environments of public schools as testbeds
for students to learn and practice those “soft skills.”

In partnership with five high schools in Hawaii, Kapiolani Community College
(KCC) and the Institute for Future Intelligence (IFI) will develop innovative
educational programs that engage community college and high school students to
learn the knowledge and skills needed to take on the renewable energy challenge.
These programs will use students’ own homes, schools, and communities as the
application scenarios for designing hypothetical solar and wind energy
solutions. Students will learn how to meet the diverse needs of their families
and communities while minimizing adverse effects on local ecosystems, cultures,
and economies. To consolidate the pathway of career and technical education from
the secondary level to the tertiary level, the project will designate KCC
students who have successfully completed these programs as teaching assistants
to teachers and design tutors to students in collaborating high schools to help
them implement customized versions of the programs. The project will be
empowered by Aladdin, an open-source, Web-based computer-aided design tool
developed by IFI as a citizen science platform that supports public
participation in renewable energy engineering and planning. Aladdin allows
anyone to design their own renewable energy solutions for their communities,
share the proposed solutions via social networks, and draw public interest in
crowdfunding their construction. KCC will run annual professional development
workshops to introduce the curricular and technological innovations of this
project to secondary teachers in Hawaii. Interested teachers will then partner
with KCC to implement these innovations in their schools. This project will be
overseen by an Advisory Board consisting of experts in the fields of renewable
energy, technical education, and policy making. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.