* 2301732
* AccelNet-Implementation: SZNet - A Coordinated Global Effort to Understand Subduction Geohazards
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,999,834.00

Our limited understanding of the fundamental drivers behind earthquakes,
tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, and landslides hinders our ability to anticipate
these globally significant hazards. Subduction zones provide the opportunity to
systematically investigate multiple hazards simultaneously in locations that
generate some of the largest risk from geological events. In addition, the
geometry of subduction zones permits unusually well-controlled natural
experiments that can be used to isolate and study key factors driving
geohazards. The study of subduction zones is intrinsically an international
enterprise because: (1) Comparison across regions allows for insights about the
controlling factors of the tectonic, volcanic and landscape systems. (2) Large
geohazards are inherently rare events that require a portfolio approach globally
to guarantee the correct observations are made systematically. Significant
investments in subduction zone geohazards are now being made internationally.
Active networks in Latin America, Europe, North America, Oceania and Asia are
currently pursuing complementary science agendas and building large-scale
deployments. Coordination between activities is needed to ensure that the
maximum science is obtained from these efforts. SZNet would combine 14 networks
across 5 continents with a particular emphasis on improving observations in
Chile, which hosts one of the world’s most geologically active and accessible
subduction zones. Multiple projects on and offshore are working to establish the
large-scale data collection and research effort required to study this exemplary
system and coordination is needed to optimize the scientific output both here
and globally. The goal of SZNet is to develop an intellectual community with
three missions: 1. to compare observations of subduction zones around the globe
with a common dataset and understanding, 2. to cooperate to consistently
instrument critical subduction zones that can provide key and transferrable
insights, and 3. to develop and nurture an international and diverse cadre of
early career scientists that is equipped to make the necessary breakthroughs.
These missions will be supported through a combination of workshops, webinars,
data exchanges, field schools, pilot projects and student exchanges. We
anticipate that these activities will allow a portfolio approach to observations
to enable geographical coverage that will both create the necessary baseline
data and maximize the chances of capturing earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and
landslides. In addition, the exchange of ideas will benefit partner networks
while stimulating coordinated deployment and research strategies. Understanding
geohazards has direct societal significance for the inhabitants of the Pacific
Rim and other subduction zones around the world. The lack of understanding of
the fundamental controls on when and where impactful earthquakes, eruptions and
landslides can happen is a major impediment to focussing resources and
mitigation efforts. Developing this understanding through an international
network would connect the disparate experiences and expertise of experts in each
subduction zone to provide a unified framework through missions 1 and 2. Mission
3 would broaden the geoscience community by supporting international early
career scientists with a program of field schools, pilot projects and student
exchanges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.