* 2301446
* ERI: Rethinking Traffic Flow in the Era of Electric Vehicles with Driver Assistance and Automation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Xingan Kan, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2025
* USD 195,079.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project will support fundamental
research to help understand electric vehicles’ potential benefit to traffic flow
and operations, and to provide valuable insights on the important implications
in transportation planning, traffic management, and transportation
infrastructure design in an era of increasing electric vehicle adoption. Unlike
vehicles with internal combustion engines, electric vehicles offer responsive
and easily accessible performance because electric powertrain can deliver peak
torque and swift acceleration almost immediately and decelerate immediately via
regenerative braking unique to electric motors. These powertrain advantages can
enable today’s advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) and future vehicle
automation technologies to operate more efficiently, and potentially reduce
traffic congestion, improve safety, and reduce overall energy consumption and
emissions of the entire vehicle fleet. Ultimately, these benefits to the
transportation sector could improve productivity, enhance economic vitality and
quality of life, mitigate environmental impact, and reduce energy dependence.

This award focuses on electric vehicles equipped with today’s commercially
available Advanced Driver Assistance Systems such as Adaptive Cruise Control.
The research will (i) develop standardized procedures to collect empirical data
at the trajectory level, (ii) analyze the comprehensive car following behavior
of electric vehicles with Adaptive Cruise Control by conducting field
experiments using production vehicles from different manufacturers, (iii)
develop new microscopic level models to capture the car following behavior that
encompasses the full speed range, and (iv) implement the microscopic models in
simulation to perform prospective analysis, develop macroscopic models such as
the fundamental diagram, and explore possible implications for traffic control
and management as well as other aspects such as traffic safety and emissions
impacts. The research will prepare transportation practitioners and future
graduates for emerging technologies in vehicle automation and electrification to
ultimately accelerate the adoption of knowledge gained from this research into
real world transportation engineering practice. This research will provide
invaluable empirical datasets, models, and initial insights to the community of
transportation researchers and practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.