* 2301485
* Fundamentals of turbulent swirl-stabilized combustion of ammonia/hydrogen blends for carbon-free energy applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Noel Clemens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2026
* USD 555,000.00

Due to the negative impact of carbon dioxide on climate, decarbonization of
electricity production is a societal imperative. Replacement of fossil fuels
with carbon-free alternatives is an expedient and practical solution because it
would leverage existing gas turbine technology with limited modifications. While
ammonia and hydrogen are two most viable carbon-free fuels, their combustion
behavior and pollutants emissions in regimes relevant to applications are
unexplored, hindering progress. This project will provide a comprehensive theory
of the combustion of such blends, thereby supporting their deployment for
carbon-free combustion-based electricity production. Despite their importance,
key aspects of power generation, such as its impacts on economy, health, and
climate change, are largely outside of the public discourse. Proposed work will
lead to more awareness and understanding of key issues in combustion-based
electricity generation by leveraging podcast content production.

The proposed work will accelerate the deployment of ammonia/hydrogen fuel blends
for combustion-based electricity production by meeting two specific objectives.
The first research objective is to generate a comprehensive database of key
turbulence-chemistry interactions in turbulent flames of ammonia/hydrogen blends
in practical configurations via large-scale high-fidelity Direct Numerical
Simulations and experimental measurements with laser-based optical diagnostics.
This objective will be achieved by considering rich premixed swirl-stabilized
turbulent flames relevant to Rich-Quick-Lean staged combustion and isolate the
effects of turbulence on flame propagation and formation of oxides of nitrogen
(NOx). The second research objective is to leverage numerical and experimental
data to formulate generalizable dimensionless scaling laws for turbulent flames
of ammonia/hydrogen blends by applying an innovative statistical learning
approach based on similarity theory. The approach combines classical error-in-
variables statistical models with the theory of similarity in asymptotic
parameters. Hypotheses on regimes of similarity will be evaluated via Bayesian
model selection. If successful, proposed research will lead to the systematic
understanding of critical turbulence-chemistry interactions in ammonia/hydrogen
mixtures and demonstrate an entirely new approach to statistical learning,
whereby the objective is to discover limit forms of dimensionless scaling laws
in asymptotic parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.