* 2301246
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Math Skills through Playful Communication in the Home Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Meredith Rowe, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 04/30/2026
* USD 137,579.00

Having a strong foundation in early mathematical knowledge is of critical
importance for children’s later mathematical achievement and moving forward in
STEM fields. One context for promoting early mathematical development is the
home environment. Informal activities and interactions with adults can provide
children with extensive mathematical information through the communication about
math that families provide to their young children. Additionally, numerous
factors can influence children’s early math-related experiences at home. For
example, parents’ mindsets and beliefs about child development can impact how
frequently they engage in math-related activities with their children. The goal
of the project is to examine the benefits of parent-focused math-related
communication trainings to improve children’s math skills. The focus of the
research is on families from lower-income backgrounds because children from
higher-income households consistently outperform their peers from lower-income
households in mathematics, even as early as preschool. The family trainings will
build on the strengths of families by enhancing the math-related talk and
gestures that families use during their daily routines and play with their
children. Findings from the research will provide insight into whether and how
math-related communication at home can promote learning and will produce low-
cost tools to benefit early mathematical development for young children.

The proposed study will examine the benefits of math-related communication
trainings with low-income families from diverse backgrounds (n = 300). The
central aims are to examine: 1) whether home-based trainings over a 3-month
period that focus on the benefits of math communication (with and without
gesture) will promote the math talk and gestures used by parents and their
preschool-age children; 2) whether the home-based trainings improve preschool
children’s math skills and whether these improvements are stable 3 months later;
3) whether the effects of the math communication trainings differ for families
where parents hold different mindsets about the malleability of math skills. In
the study, families will receive one of three trainings that focus on promoting
both math-related talk and gestures, math-related talk only, or talk during
play. The first two trainings will provide families with tools and information
through a video and materials for incorporating math communication into play and
daily activities with their children. The changes in math talk and gesture use
for parents and children over the 3-month intervention period will be examined
during parent-child interactions. Children’s early math skills also will be
assessed prior to the training, after the 3-month intervention period, and again
in a 3-month delayed posttest. Moreover, an individual differences approach will
be taken to determine whether the effectiveness of the trainings differs for
parents (and children of parents) who hold varied mindsets about the
malleability of math skills. Overall, this research will advance knowledge by
enhancing the mathematical engagement of families in the home environment to
improve the mathematical knowledge of young children, and by examining the
benefits of resources for parents to help incorporate math talk and gestures
into their play and routine activities with their children.

This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.