* 2301776
* ERI: Using Ambient Vibrations to Circulate Liquid Coolant in Electric Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Vijaya Venkata Malladi, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,401.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables
improvements in the efficiency and safety of battery thermal management systems
for electric vehicles by leveraging ambient vibrations for cooling onboard
electronic components, reducing energy predators, and extending the life of
batteries, thereby promoting the progress of science, and advancing the national
prosperity. Electric vehicles have become increasingly popular, but their
reliance on liquid-based battery thermal management systems to dissipate heat
generated by electronic components requires additional power consumption and
reduces battery life. To make electric vehicles more practical, cost-effective,
environmentally friendly, and longer lasting for consumers, this project
investigates a novel and potentially transformative cooling strategy that
harnesses ambient vehicular vibrations to produce flexural waves that generate a
propulsive force field in a fluid medium and circulate heat transfer fluid for
more efficient battery cooling. Alongside the advancement of knowledge, the
project will contribute to broader societal benefits through the development of
educational modules and course projects, research opportunities for
undergraduate students, and outreach activities through the Michigan Tech Summer
Youth Programs for students in grades 6-11.

This research aims to develop the foundations for a new energy transfer
mechanism that leverages ambient vibrations to produce anechoic, directional
traveling waves in a structural wave guide and propel fluid within the wave
guide. To this end, the project seeks to determine whether anechoic structural
waves can be generated from the stochastic vibration profile typical of a moving
vehicle, as well as which critical parameters affect the induced fluid flow.
Experimental and theoretical investigations will be carried out to identify the
optimal nonclassical damping profile that needs to be added to a flexural beam
to transform ambient vibrations into broadband steady-state propagating waves
and induced fluid motion. Physics-based models will be developed to numerically
study the dynamics of beams with multiple localized Kelvin-Voigt damping
elements in air and when immersed in water. Experiments will be used to validate
theoretical findings and explore features not available through the theoretical
modeling, including boundary effects and other sources of damping.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.