* 2301063
* Diazirines and Diaziridines as Nitrogen Transfer Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Justin Lopchuk, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Justin Lopchuk of H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Cente in Tampa, Florida is studying the
development of new methods and reagents to form carbon-nitrogen (C-N) bonds.
This work is expected to have broad impact because nitrogen-containing compounds
are valuable in pharmaceutical science, agricultural chemistry, chemical biology
and in many materials/polymers. The methods being developed use a single reagent
to create high value C–N bonds from a range of commercially available starting
materials. Students doing this work will be trained in fundamental chemical
principles, catalysis and the synthesis of complex organic molecular scaffolds
of relevance to therapeutics. The broader impacts of the funded project include
the creation of a diverse, nitrogen-rich compound screening library for chemical
biology/biological discovery that will be made available to other researchers
along with educational workshops and recurring virtual conferences. These latter
efforts are being developed to provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to network and to receive wider exposure for their research.

This project is expected to expand the scope of amination reagents and
contribute to both the late-stage amination of complex scaffolds and to
developing a more diverse set of N-containing architectures, including
N–containing heterocycles. More specifically, the Lopchuk group is focused on
the use of diazirines and diaziridines (three-membered rings with two nitrogens
and one carbon) as novel amination reagents. In this approach diazirines will be
used in reactions with structurally diverse starting materials to form
diaziridine intermediates that are subsequently converted into amines (including
15N stable labeled amines), hydrazines, and nitrogen-containing heterocycles
such as pyrazoles, indazoles, and pyrroles. The use of diazirines and
diaziridines avoids many of the drawbacks that have been seen with other
electrophilic and radical amination reagents including their instability, their
lack of functional group tolerance, and/or the harsh conditions needed for
processing them downstream of C–N bond formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.