* 2301565
* Collaborative Research: Addressing knowledge and capacity shortfalls to advance conservation science and action for endangered native  Hawaiian land flora and fauna.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Andre Cavalcanti, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 04/30/2026
* USD 186,319.00

On average, an estimated 200 species of plants and animals go extinct each day
because of habitat destruction, overexploitation, invasive species, disease, and
climate change. Many of these species existed long before humans. They evolved
to fill critical roles in ecosystems on which humanity relies for food, clean
air, clean water, fertile soils, and a host of other services that make life
possible and comfortable on this planet. For decades conservation efforts have
focused primarily on saving select species. Unfortunately, such approaches do
not encompass the bulk of biodiversity or the more complex interactions among
species. These approaches leave gaps in scientific understanding of ecosystem
level processes and interactions needed to implement effective conservation
actions. This is especially evident for high diversity but poorly studied groups
like snails, which account for the highest number of recorded extinctions in
human history. Hawaiian Island land snails include some of the most diverse
groups of snails on the planet. They are also among the most heavily impacted by
extinction, with more than half of the more than 750 known species already lost.
Saving the remaining species and restoring these jewels of the Hawaiian forests
requires knowledge of species interactions and their ecological requirements.
Understanding why land snails live where they do, what they feed on, and what
their other habitat requirements are is critical to successful captive rearing
of the remaining species and to returning them to the wild in protected and
restored habitats. In addition, this project will help fill the human resource
capacity shortfall by providing conservation experiences and broadening
participation of groups underrepresented in science and conservation
specifically. Students and researchers will engage and contribute to a broader
understanding of ecology, applied conservation, and the biology of lesser-known
groups like snails. At a deeper community level, this will expand knowledge and
engagement with indigenous practices and ways of understanding. Hawaiian land
snails hold deep cultural presence and Hawaiians hold generations of natural
history insights about the natural world. This project will help bridge
biocultural land snail knowledge with physical objects, natural history data,
and genomics. Collectively, this will increase stewardship and sustainability of
environmental resources, support conservation management efforts through
indigenous value systems, and instill appreciation and protection of our
precious resources for generations.

Researchers will incorporate studies in microbial genomics, field ecology, and
captive rearing diets that address the most urgent knowledge gaps in Hawaiian
land snail ecology. By examining resource preferences and feeding ecology of
Hawaiian lands snails this project will 1) determine snail feeding preferences
on bacteria and fungi that grow on their native host plants; 2) characterize the
microbial communities that likely form key components of snail diets; and 3)
identify preferred plants and microbial communities that improve snail
survivorship and breeding in captivity. The data gathered will be used to expand
captive rearing capacity, restore degraded habitats with preferred plant
resources, and build long term capacity for effective land snail conservation in
Hawaii. Knowing which microbial assemblages enhance snail survivorship, growth,
and fecundity will provide conservationists with a powerful tool to assess
quality of snail habitat. It will also enable restoration practitioners to
create habitats to support extant populations in the wild.

This project is being supported via a joint program involving the Divisions of
Environmental Biology and Integrative Organismal Systems and the Paul G. Allen
Family Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.