* 2301723
* ERI: The Role of a Novel Mechanosensitive Channel Modulator in Inflammation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Chilman Bae, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will support research on how
cells detect mechanical loading (mechanotransduction). Mechanotransduction
converts mechanical load into a biological response. Mechanically triggered
openings in the cell surface (mechanosensitive channels) are the best-known
cellular force-sensing systems. They are important for the senses of touch and
hearing and have effects in many human diseases. A research challenge for the
field is discovering molecules that can selectively trigger a mechanosensitive
ion channel. Some molecules are known for triggering these channels but how they
function in not known. Knowing how these artificial molecules function could
help in many ways, including acceptance of them as a drug for treating diseases
in people. The research supported by this award has the goal of discovering the
mechanism of action for a new mechanosensitive channel modulator. Results from
this research could be used to understand channel-associated diseases, producing
benefits for society. Further benefits will be achieved through the multi-
disciplinary research activities that will engage multiple underrepresented
groups in research.

Piezo (Piezo1 and Piezo2) mechanosensitive channels are non-selective cation
mechanosensitive channels, playing important roles in diverse physiological
processes, including hearing, touching, and inflammation. The goal of this
project is to investigate the roles of new Piezo1 modulator on inflammation.
This aim will be achieved by: i) identifying and characterize a novel Piezo1
activator, which will generate a fundamental platform for future
mechanosensitive channel studies; ii) development of a capacitance clamp
technique that is critical to study the biomechanical properties of
mechanosensitive channels and provides an electrophysiological platform for
studying ion channels; iii) development of a cultured astrocyte cell model for
inflammation studies; and iv) providing the underlying mechanism of
inflammation. The major outcome of this project will be the discovery of a novel
therapeutic strategy for treating inflammation by targeting Piezo1 that will
promote research and education in neuroscience, developmental biology, and
immunology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.