* 2301488
* ERI: Fertilizer-Based Liquid Desiccants: New Possibilities for Energy Efficient Dehumidification and Water Recycling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Maisonneuve, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Increasing food production to sustainably feed a growing population requires
innovation to improve the efficiency of energy, water, and fertilizer use in
agriculture. One promising solution for sustainable food production in indoor
plant environments is the novel concept of using fertilizer as a
dehumidification agent for climate control. In this process, fertilizer-based
liquid desiccant is used to draw water vapor out of the humid environment for
delivery to the plants. In this way, water is recycled while the indoor
environment is dried, and significant energy savings are achieved by avoiding
the need for intensive regeneration cycles that are common to most liquid
desiccant systems. To realize the goal of unlocking the potential of fertilizer
desiccant for efficient dehumidification and water recycling, this project
addresses two fundamental scientific and engineering challenges: (1) to develop
operational protocols for the real-time control of liquid desiccant temperatures
so as to maintain high dehumdification rates and low specific energy use
throughout the dynamic recirculation batch process; and (2) to identify
mechanisms for improved performance by advancing fundamental understanding of
polarization when it occurs across multiple concurrent domains. In addition,
this project will support the development of sustainability hubs in Detroit and
Pontiac through collaboration with student, community, and industry partners on
a series of outreach and education initiatives.

A computational model of polarization across multiple concurrent domains will be
developed to describe temperature, vapor concentration, and individual ion
concentrations. Because polarization across multiple concurrent domains occurs
in a great many different membrane processes, the models developed from this
work may have far reaching utility to the membrane science community to improve
treatment of polarization analysis. Likewise the analysis of fertilizer
dehumidification performance in response to desiccant temperature, and then the
subsequent development of appropriate control protocols, will provide insight
into batch process dynamics and thermal management strategies more generally.
Fertilizer-based liquid desiccant dehumidification can open up new possibilities
for energy efficient closed-loop water recycling and humidity control of indoor
plant environments, and thereby contribute to a sustainable farming future. In
addition, an important teaching and outreach component of this project is
included to complement research activity and help align scientific progress with
the needs of society. A series of at least 6 student-led volunteer projects will
support community gardens and other sustainability initiatives throughout
Detroit and Pontiac. Involvement of at least 60 university students is targeted,
and will be facilitated by student clubs. This will help to connect students to
their communities and foster lasting partnerships between student clubs and
community organizations. In addition, new curriculum focused on energy
engineering will be developed in close collaboration with industry partners, to
help prepare the next generation of engineers for a sustainable energy future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.