* 2301720
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negation strategies in an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Brent Henderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 03/31/2025
* USD 22,746.00

It is a universal of human language that if something can be expressed, it can
also be negated. Yet the ways that languages encode the negation of sentences
and smaller phrases varies quite a lot between languages and even between
different types of utterances in the same language. This doctoral dissertation
project enhances linguists' understanding of this variation by documenting the
use of negation strategies in an endangered and under-documented language. Using
this documentation, the co-PI describes and analyzes how various types of
clauses and phrases in the language are negated and compares this with other
negative strategies that exist in the world's languages. The project helps
linguists to understand variation in negation and how negation interacts with
other aspects of the language being documented. This analysis and documentation
of a central but poorly understood and unusual aspect of the language's grammar
provides an important resource for the community to preserve its language. The
project also trains community members in documentation and data processing
techniques, empowering them to study their own language and diversifying the
field of linguistics.

Using established methods for language documentation and fieldwork, both
naturalistic and elicited speech are recorded in the target language. These
recordings are transcribed, translated, and analyzed in consultation with native
speakers. Data from related languages as well as other languages from around the
world are used for a comparative analysis, contributing to the typological study
of negation strategies. The language under study has clausal negation makers
that show agreement with the subject of the clause, so the research advances
linguists' understanding of how agreement and negation are connected. This
doctoral dissertation project is made as part of a funding partnership between
the National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities
for the NSF Dynamic Language Infrastructure â€“ NEH Documenting Endangered
Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.