* 2301184
* Northeast Consortia for Advanced Integrated Silicon Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Stephen Leone, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,790,053.00

The expansion of data networks and centers, safer autonomous driving vehicles,
and more efficient food production cannot be sustainably met by electronic
microchip technology alone. However, combining electrical devices with
integrated photonics provides a more energy efficient way to increase the speed
and capacity of data networks, reduce costs and meet an increasingly diverse
range of needs across various industries. This transition is critically reliant
on the incorporation of silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs) for ultra-
fast, low-loss optical data transmission. Silicon (Si) PIC fabrication has moved
quickly from the laboratory to high-volume manufacturing. However, the U.S.
skilled technical workforce (STW) is not currently positioned to support this
expansion and risks losing domestic manufacturing capability and U.S. global
leadership in this key technology area. This project aims to respond to this
need and will establish the Northeast Consortium for Advanced Integrated Silicon
Technologies (NCAIST) with a mission of educating the STW for advanced silicon-
manufacturing with an emphasis on Si-based PIC technologies and electronic-
photonic integrated circuits (EPICs).

Working closely with AIM Photonics, a U.S. Manufacturing Innovation Institute
(MII), NCAIST will coordinate and accelerate the transition of technician
education content and teaching methodologies from key AIM-affiliated U.S.
universities to community and technical colleges in the northeast U.S. This will
include hands-on training of students and teachers from community and technical
colleges in Si-PIC and EPIC fabrication, testing and packaging, incorporation of
PIC/EPIC technician education content directly into existing for-credit courses
and degree programs, and introduction of career pathways and PIC- education
content to regional high school teachers. NCAIST is comprised of a network of 16
community colleges and technical colleges, and 4 universities across NY, MA, and
PA with a common goal of rapidly developing and disseminating technician
education content in PIC/EPIC technologies. In addition to working with AIM
Photonics, NCAIST works with the NEATEC, NACK, LASER TEC and MNT-EC ATE centers
to enable dissemination of content across the U.S. NCAIST will: (1) Develop and
disseminate of Si PIC education kits incorporating custom-designed, packaged
PIC/EPICs and full lab-ready packages for sustainable and economical
incorporation in existing technician education courses and programs; (2) Co-
develop with consortium community colleges PIC/EPIC learning modules; (3)
Introduce virtual reality-based training modules for PIC testing and packaging
equipment for online and in-lab education; and (4) Evaluate the efficacy of
short-term training to prepare students for direct transition to PIC/EPIC
manufacturers with immediate workforce needs, and the sustainability of industry
mentorships/internships as a future pathway for students entering the workforce.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.