* 2301782
* ERI: Ultrafast Transiently Nucleated Laser Bubbles for Realistic Phenomenological Boiling Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Navdeep Dhillon, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Nucleate boiling is a phenomenon of utmost importance in major industries such
as power generation, desalination, chemical processing, and thermal management.
However, it remains poorly understood due to its inherent physical complexity
and the random nature of vapor bubble formation on hot surfaces, preventing
meaningful performance enhancements. Advanced high-speed optical and infrared
imaging techniques have recently become available to experimentally study the
dynamic and thermal behavior of growing bubbles. The problem, however, is the
experimental difficulty in focusing on an individual bubble growth event amidst
a huge mass of randomly forming and mutually interacting bubbles. By studying
the physics of ultra-fast microscale liquid-vapor transitions, this project
seeks to develop a novel laser-based technique to generate a controlled vapor
bubble that is identical in its thermal and growth characteristics to randomly
forming bubbles in nucleate boiling. This will enable ground-breaking parametric
and phenomenological studies in boiling, potentially leading to large scale
energy efficiency and throughput improvements in many thermal systems critical
for the nationâ€™s defense, infrastructure, and energy security. The project also
encompasses significant educational and outreach activities, including research
training of diverse undergraduate and graduate students at CSULB, development of
a web-based engineering applications platform to promote scientific
computational and programming skills, and outreach to local high school and
community college students.

The goal of this research study is to develop and characterize a novel laser-
based controlled bubble generation technique and to illuminate the physics
underlying laser pulse-induced homogeneous nucleation at a solid-liquid
interface. The mechanism of this ultra-fast non-equilibrium nucleation, which
acts as an artificial nucleation site for the controlled bubble, has largely
been unexplored, both experimentally and theoretically. This project undertakes
rigorous experimental studies and theoretical/CFD analysis to implement the
laser-based phenomenological-boiling-studies platform and fill significant
scientific gaps in the understanding of near-wall non-equilibrium homogeneous
nucleation in two specific aims: (i) Demonstrate laser-induced artificial bubble
generation and characterize the key laser parameters and (ii) Identify the
critical near-wall homogeneous bubble nucleation temperature using parametric
nucleation experiments and modeling. On the experimental side, optical high-
speed imaging studies will be performed using a focused-laser setup and an
advanced pool boiling facility. Theoretical analysis and CFD simulations will be
used to model the thermal evolution of the laser hotspot in nucleation. Results
of this study will lay the groundwork for a new theory on near-wall non-
equilibrium homogeneous vapor nucleation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.