* 2301392
* ERI: Progressive Formation and Collapse Mechanisms of Sinkholes Caused by Defective Buried Pipes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Fei Wang, Tarleton State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award supports research that aims to
understand why and how sinkholes form above defective buried pipes. Sinkholes
induced by defective buried pipes have become a substantial threat to community
safety, resulting in fatalities, damage to buildings and infrastructure, and
economic loss. However, the collapse mechanism of sinkholes above buried pipes
remains unclear, making prediction of sinkhole collapses difficult. In this
project, the research team will identify the most susceptible soil and water
flow conditions around defective pipes leading to sinkhole initiation and
develop models to predict their growth. Currently, the US has more than one
million miles of pipes nearing the end of their service lives that pose a
sinkhole risk to their communities. This project will expand our understanding
of formation and collapse mechanisms of such sinkholes to provide predictive
capabilities. The research will also be complemented by establishing a
responsive and flexible educational and outreach program based on curriculum
development and K-12 summer camps that can motivate young students to pursue
their college education in STEM fields.

The research goal of this project is to predict sinkholes caused by defective
buried pipes based on understanding of progressive formation and collapse
mechanisms. To achieve this goal, the objectives are to (i) identify critical
hydrogeological parameters leading to initiation of soil internal erosion around
defective pipes through soil erosion tests in the laboratory; (ii) model the
time-dependent progressive evolution of sinkholes induced by defective buried
pipes using a sinkhole simulator; and (iii) develop an analytical method to
predict the collapse timing and size of sinkholes considering external loads
based on time-dependent soil arching models. This project will test three
hypotheses: (1) internal soil erosion around defective buried pipes initiates
when the ratio of hole diameter to D85 (i.e., 85% percent fines) of soil infill
surrounding the pipe reaches a threshold value related to the hydraulic
gradient; (2) sinkholes in a submerged zone will be cone-shaped with an angle
from the horizontal direction that equals to the surrounding soil friction
angle; and 3) sinkholes above the submerged zone will be dome-shaped, and
collapse of the dome will be exaggerated by external loads. This project will
allow the PI to advance knowledge of the sinkhole formation and collapse around
defective buried pipes and to lay a firm foundation for his long-term career
focused on safety and sustainability of buried civil infrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.