* 2301919
* ERI: The impact of ionizable lipid chemistry and targeting ligands on biological interactions of lipid nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Rachel Riley, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Lipid nanoparticles are ultrasmall drug delivery platforms that can package
therapeutics, making them safer and more efficacious than the free therapeutics.
In this project, the research team aims to understand how the design of lipid
nanoparticles impacts their ability to enable high levels of drug delivery to
cells and tissues. Although researchers know that the design of lipid
nanoparticles impacts their effectiveness, the precise mechanisms by which this
occurs remains elusive. Here, the research team will take a fundamental and
mechanistic approach to understand how the chemical structure of the lipids
impacts how the nanoparticles interact with cells and tissues. This award will
enable the inclusion of one graduate student and two undergraduate students on
this research, providing exceptional research opportunities to Biomedical
Engineering students at Rowan University. Further, the project will enable the
recruitment of one student from Rowan College of South Jersey, the local
community college, through a unique partnership. Ultimately, the successful
completion of this work will allow drug delivery researchers to specifically
design lipids for improved drug delivery for a wide range of biological
applications.

The goal of this project is to study structure-function relationships between
ionizable lipid chemistry and the biological interactions of lipid
nanoparticles. Lipid nanoparticles have emerged at the forefront of
translational drug delivery due to their use in the Pfizer and Moderna COVID-19
vaccines. Lipid nanoparticles are comprised of ionizable lipids, cholesterol,
phospholipids, and poly(ethylene) glycol complexed with therapeutic nucleic
acids. Despite the recent clinical advancements of lipid nanoparticles,
remarkably little is known about how their composition and physicochemical
properties impact their interactions with biological systems. It has been
established that ionizable lipid chemistry dictates how they interact with cells
and tissues to drive drug delivery efficiency. However, there is a major gap in
knowledge regarding the precise means by which ionizable lipid structure
influences how lipid nanoparticles interact with cells and tissues. Here, the
research team will take a fundamental and mechanistic approach to evaluate how
lipid nanoparticle composition impacts biological interactions at the molecular,
cellular, and tissue levels. The overarching hypothesis is that the degree of
saturation, alkyl tail length, and tail branching of the ionizable lipids drives
how lipid nanoparticles behave including stability, cell uptake, cytosolic
delivery, and tissue specificity and penetration. The research objectives are
to: (1) synthesize an array of new ionizable lipids and assess how ionizable
lipid structure impacts lipid nanoparticle stability and protein corona
formation, and (2) evaluate how ionizable lipid chemistry (branched/linear,
degree of saturation, tail length) impacts delivery, uptake, endosomal escape,
and tissue penetration. In addition to these research objectives, this project
has several educational goals. This award will enable the inclusion of one
graduate student and two undergraduate students on this research, providing
exceptional research opportunities to Biomedical Engineering students at Rowan
University. Further, this project will enable the recruitment of one student
from Rowan College of South Jersey, the local community college, through a
unique partnership. The work described herein has the potential to transform the
way lipid nanoparticles are developed and tested preclinically by enhancing our
understanding of how ionizable lipid chemistry impacts interactions in
biological systems. Ultimately, this will enable the drug delivery community to
engineer next-generation platforms created through an efficient and data-driven
approach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.