* 2301066
* Automotive Technician Education on Electrified, Automated, and Connected Vehicles
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Benigno Cruz, Macomb Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 649,999.00

Automakers are making increased investments in battery and Electric Vehicle (EV)
manufacturing in North America and will need more workers trained in EV,
Connected Automated Vehicles (CAV) and automated systems. However, there is a
critical shortage of EV and CAV technicians, especially in the non-original
equipment manufacturer (OEM), suppliers, and automotive shops. The workforce
need will be detrimental to the industry without interventions to increase the
applicant pool and retain employees. This project will leverage the EV
certificate program previously developed by the NSF-ATE, Resource Center for
Advanced Automotive Technology (RCAAT) to respond to the industry needs.
Curricula will be adapted based on an annual review with the Michigan EV Jobs
Academy, Employer-Led Collaborative (ELC) so that program changes align with the
pace and transition of industry. The project will target underemployed adults
and secondary students, in addition to women and minorities who are currently
underrepresented in the advanced automotive industry. The project will also
provide early exposure to careers for secondary students and expand
relationships with four-year universities to develop clear career pathways
allowing students to advance their education and careers.

This project will establish a new associate degree program in EV technology,
upgrade the current EV certificate program, and develop two new certificate
programs in CAV and cybersecurity. The project creates a co-leadership model
that requires administrators, faculty, industry, and educational partners to co-
develop curricula that meets workplace standards. It will also break down
traditional academic silos by requiring faculty from different disciplines
(engineering and automotive technology, and business and information technology)
to work together. This is crucial because cybersecurity and CAV technologies are
increasingly being integrated into new EVs. It is also important as educational
institutions shift from engineering technician education that is mechanically
based to a curriculum that is software and computer and power electronics based.
The project will collaborate with educators at high schools, industry, and
universities to develop clearly defined technician career pathways to advanced
education. The project will also develop and implement early exposure activities
for high school students, introducing them to careers in the advanced automotive
industry. The certificate programs in CAV and cybersecurity will be offered in a
compressed short course format for on-demand workforce\technician education that
will lead students quickly into sustainable wage employment. Pathways to
advancement that allow existing workers to upskill at a rapid pace will also be
available. Additionally, the curriculum will be shared and available via the
hybrid/virtual delivery Educational Programs in Collaboration (EPiC) consortium
platform through the Michigan Association of Community Colleges, which will
provide convenience and flexibility for learners. The EPiC Consortium provides
the ability to scale up training with potential talent pools throughout the
state. In the long-term, the project will lead to a better prepared workforce
that is more gender and racially diverse to address the technician skills gap
leading to greater economic impact for the region. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.