* 2301948
* ERI: Nondestructive in-situ Evaluation of Bio-printed Constructs Using Video-based Vibrometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jinki Kim, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,694.00

Bio-additive manufacturing (bio-AM) has shown great promise for the rapid
manufacturing of highly customized biomedical devices and implants. However, one
key barrier of bio-AM is that the print quality is substantially below the
required industrial standards, partially because of the lack of effective in-
situ monitoring and control methods for defect removal. This Engineering
Research Initiation (ERI) grant will support basic research that aims to
establish non-contact vibration-based monitoring to identify structural defects
of bio-constructs as they are being fabricated. The research outcome is expected
to create broad socioeconomic impacts on public health and biomedical fields by
realizing the potential of bio-AM and strengthening US competitiveness in
bioeconomy. The integrated research and educational program, aligned with the
national priorities of biomanufacturing and biotechnology, will stimulate
student interest in biomanufacturing, expose undergraduate and graduate students
to the research frontiers of bio-AM, and develop the next-generation workforce
ready for bioeconomy.

Understanding the formation mechanism of defects is critical for manufacturing
high-quality biomaterials. Most existing sensing methods for biomaterials
require that sensors be attached on the surface of additively manufactured
parts. Due to the soft and light-weight nature of bio-constructs, contact-type
sensors may not be suitable. The research objective is to understand how the
non-contact, video-based vibration measurements are correlated with various
types of defects. Three research tasks are planned: (1) identifying novel
feature-based composite damage metrics that incorporate vibration features
reflecting both dimensional and embedded defects; (2) establishing a reliable
numerical model to understand how the modal properties of bio-constructs are
affected by process conditions such as infill patterns and common defects; and
(3) identifying the dynamic properties of bioprinting materials such as
hydrogels via video-based vibrometry. The data generated from the project will
provide a benchmark for the research community to advance research in
biomanufacturing and biotechnology. If successful, this research will
tremendously improve the structural integrity of bio-AM organs and increase the
availability, ultimately saving lives. The proposed composite damage metrics
based on vibration features will provide a new tool for automated in-situ
assessment of defects and can accelerate sensing and analytics research in other
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.