* 2301348
* CAS-MNP: Origins of Secondary Nanoplastics and Mitigating Their Creation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2026
* USD 459,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

It is well-established that plastics degrade into micro and nanoplastics. These
environmental pollutants have been found at the ocean surface (e.g., the
Atlantic garbage patch) and now in the deep(est) ocean. While it is commonly
believed that these materials can have deleterious effects on marine life, there
is little understanding of how they form, their ultimate fate and most
importantly how their occurrence can be mitigated. This research focuses on
exactly this topic, in particular on semicrystalline polymers, which constitute
over 70% of all plastics used currently. The work will combine experimental and
theoretical tools to elucidate their degradation mechanisms when exposed to
mechanical forces, water, air and/or UV light. The research will thus bring the
well-established tools of polymer characterization towards delineating the
critical mechanisms underpinning the formation of nanoplastics. Going beyond
these aspects, this work anticipates mechanisms to mitigate the creation of
these environmental pollutants -- finding and optimizing them is the second
prong of the project. From a broader impacts viewpoint, design problems inspired
by this research will be showcased in interdisciplinary programs such as the
Engineering Design curriculum. The project will also facilitate undergraduate
research opportunities and the training of a diverse cohort of junior and senior
students at Columbia University. Understanding the routes to achieving decreased
nanoplastic creation, and communicating this knowledge to the outside world, are
the ultimate foci of the proposed work, which is thus deeply rooted in
contributing to global sustainability.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

It is now well-established that plastics degrade into micro and nanoplastics.
These environmental pollutants have been found on the ocean surface and in the
deep ocean. This research focuses in particular on semicrystalline polymers,
which constitute over 70% of all plastics used currently. When these polymers
environmentally degrade in the aqueous milieu (i.e., in oceans) experiments
consistently show that the chain segments in the amorphous phase break first,
while the crystalline population actually grows. This work proposes that
semicrystalline polymers form nanoplastics (100 nm and smaller) due to the
preferential fragmentation of amorphous-phase tie chains which originally
provided the connectivity between adjacent crystalline lamellae. By analogy to
the phenomenon of environmental stress cracking, breaking of these molecular
connectors leads to local material failure and the formation of nanoplastics.
The proposed work will combine experimental and theoretical tools to elucidate
the proposed degradation mechanisms of semicrystalline polymers of varying
chemistries when exposed to mechanical stresses, water, O2 and/or UV light.
Experimentally, it shall correlate nanoparticle creation with the initial
polymer chemistry and morphology. How these variables affect the size, structure
and properties of the resulting environmental pollutants are open questions that
this research shall critically address. Parallel theoretical studies will
predict the temporal evolution of the connectivity between adjacent crystals,
the mechanical properties of the degrading plastics, and hence the size and
number of nanoplastic objects that are temporally generated from a bulk polymer.
The work will thus bring the well-established tools of polymer characterization
towards delineating the critical physics underpinning the formation of
nanoplastics. Going beyond these aspects, it is proposed that the use of
copolymers or extruding the material can increase connectivity between crystals
and thus serve as an efficient strategy to mitigate their creation. Design
problems inspired by this research will be showcased in interdisciplinary
programs such as the Engineering Design curriculum. The project will also
facilitate undergraduate research opportunities and the training of a diverse
cohort of junior and senior students at Columbia University. The PI will develop
online learning modules related to the theme of this proposal for undergraduate
and K-12 students. This PI has already run a three-day virtual workshop at
Columbia University on the application of Machine Learning to materials science.
Achieving the goal of decreasing nanoplastic creation is the ultimate focus of
the proposed work, which is thus centrally focused on global sustainability. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.