* 2301938
* ERI: Learning to Operate Distribution Grids with Extreme Penetration of Inverter-based Resources (L2ODG)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Di Shi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The power grid is undergoing a significant transformation as it shifts from
centrally controlled systems to increasingly relying on inverter-based resources
(IBRs), such as solar and wind power. This change brings new challenges and
opportunities for how power systems are operated and managed. The proposed
research aims to develop innovative machine learning-based solutions to address
real-time operational challenges arising from integrating IBRs in power
distribution grids. By creating a suite of robust, scalable, and safety-critical
machine learning tools, this project will enable widespread adoption of clean
energy sources and transform distribution grids. The broader impacts of this
research include training the next generation of scientists and engineers
through interdisciplinary research and curriculum design that integrates power
engineering, machine learning, and the Internet-of-Things. Furthermore, the
project will develop open-source datasets and models while promoting STEM
education among underrepresented pre-college students through interactive
demonstrations. Successful completion of this research will accelerate the
adoption of clean energy resources, enhance power system resilience, and ensure
a just and equitable energy transition.

The proposed project seeks to develop a learning-based control and optimization
framework addressing real-time operational challenges associated with power
distribution grids and increasing integration of inverter-based resources
(IBRs). The research objectives include: 1) Sample-efficient Hybrid Learning
with Inaccurate System Models, combining deep reinforcement learning (DRL) with
simplified grid models and real-world trials for rapid learning and performance
improvement; 2) Graph Reinforcement Learning for Real-time Network
Reconfiguration, integrating DRL with Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to create a
novel learning architecture capable of adapting to and generalizing to arbitrary
network topologies, addressing issues like voltage violations, reactive power
distribution, and system loss minimization; and 3) Distributed Learning and
Control over the Grid Edge, establishing a scalable, distributed learning
framework that runs on resource-restricted edge devices by combining federated
multi-agent learning with deep compression techniques. The proposed framework
will be designed to be robust, adaptive, safe, and lightweight, offering real-
time optimization and control of grid topology while considering network
constraints to ensure system safety. This project will contribute to developing
scalable, learning-based control solutions for future distribution systems with
massive IBRs and dispersed measurements, fostering a more resilient and
sustainable power grid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.