* 2301925
* ERI: Fused Filament Fabrication of Thermoplastic-Composite Molds Embedded with Heating Wires for Energy-Efficient Production of Thermoset Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Kazi Md Masum Billah, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,522.00

High-performance polymer composites are attractive for many lightweight and
reinforced-structure applications as an alternative to metallic parts. However,
the associated cost with composite manufacturing, more specifically, the
extensive cost of mold-making and mold heating do limit their large-scale
production. The traditional autoclave heating of a mold requires tooling
assembly and a relatively long lead time, which add up the manufacturing cost
and pose significant challenges to widespread adoption. This Engineering
Research Initiation (ERI) award supports fundamental research to understand
additive manufacturing (AM) of thermoplastic-composite out-of-oven molds to make
thermoset composites. The research effort will develop and integrate a lower-
cost tool that enables the deposition of heating wires within parts made by
fused filament fabrication (FFF), in the presence of a nonpolar solvent, to
fabricate composite molds. If successful, such an innovation will eliminate the
necessity of costly and energy-intensive autoclave ovens, serving as
technological groundwork of composite manufacturing and enhance the U.S.
composite tooling competitiveness in the global market. This ERI project will
also engage a diverse group of students, including underrepresented minorities,
in new manufacturing technologies and provide hands-on experiences to develop
scientific, analytical thinking, and leadership skills. In addition, the team
will partner with school districts in the gulf coast area of Houston for
outreach activities that promote K-12 students to pursue a career in STEM-
related fields.

The overall goal of this research is to establish and understand a system for AM
of resistance heating wire embedded out-of-oven composite molds made of short
carbon-fiber reinforced polycarbonate. For embedding heating wires during 3D
printing, the project will investigate the fundamentals of thermoplastic
swelling due to nonpolar solvents by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance and
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The study will build the basis for the
development of a dual-extrusion FFF printer integrated with a resistance heating
wire deposition system to produce composite molds for the investigation into the
interaction between heating wires and thermoplastics. The effect of wire heating
on the temperature profile of the fabricated mold will be characterized by
infrared thermography and correlated with the mechanical evaluation of
fabricated composite molds. In addition, thermoset composite components made by
the heating-wire embedded molds and conventional autoclave molds will be
quantitatively compared. The findings of this research are expected to generate
new knowledge on material-extrusion based AM of embedded heating composite molds
for energy-efficient composite manufacture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.