* 2301207
* Enhancing DNA Subway 2.0 as a Shared Resource for Bioscience Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jason Williams, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 648,741.00

Data science is one of the ten fastest growing careers in the US, and the
outlook is also bright for bioinformatics technicians. However, there is a
significant gap in the bioinformatics skills of students entering emerging,
multidisciplinary, bioscience industries. With initial funding from the NSF
CyVerse cyber-infrastructure for biology research, DNA Subway was developed in
2010 as a learner-centered set of online tools to introduce students to
bioinformatics and big data analysis. This project will update DNA Subway 2.0 as
a more flexible, accessible, and capable resource to prepare students for the
modern bioscience workforce. By adopting a “mobile-first” approach, it is
expected that this will be the only set of high-level bioinformatics tools to
run smoothly on a smartphone. Integrating new tools for Nanopore sequencing and
data science will provide a coordinated package for anywhere/anytime DNA
sequence analysis—putting community college students at the cutting edge of the
bioscience big data revolution.

The project will be led by the DNA Learning Center at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, which is the designated Genomics Hub of the InnovATEBIO National
Biotechnology Education Center. An advisory board of bioinformatics industry
experts and faculty from diverse two-year institutions will ensure that DNA
Subway 2.0 is workforce ready. The redeveloped resource will rely on NSF’s
Jetstream2 cloud computing infrastructure, with systems expertise provided by
the Texas Advanced Computing Center and NSF’s Science Gateways Community
Institute. A mentor network will disseminate DNA Subway 2.0 at professional
meetings and summer workshops—at least half of which will be conducted at
minority-serving institutions. Making DNA Subway 2.0 responsive to bioscience
workforce needs will bring the benefits of participating in authentic scientific
research, increased retention in science and on-time graduation to a broad
audience of community college students. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.