* 2301010
* A Longitudinal Exploration of Relations Between Fractions and Algebra Knowledge: An Interdisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Martha Alibali, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 997,930.00

This project aims to improve understanding of the relationships between
students’ knowledge of fractions and their knowledge of algebra. Success in
algebra is an important determinant of life outcomes, from high school
graduation to college access and career and economic prospects. Unfortunately, a
broad swath of research has documented the struggles students face learning
algebra. Findings from both psychology and mathematics education research
suggest that enhancing students’ fraction learning may be one route to improving
algebra learning. Researchers from both fields have found that fractions and
algebra competence are closely related, but the basis of this relationship
remains unclear. This project will design measures that efficiently capture the
breadth and depth of students’ fractions and algebra knowledge and investigate
relations between fractions and algebra knowledge over a three-year period, from
grades 7 to 9. By investigating how students’ understanding develops over time,
this study will identify critical time points at which instruction might prove
especially fruitful.

The project will take place in two phases. Phase 1 is a measurement project in
which participants in grades 7-9 will engage in within-subjects assessments of
algebra knowledge and fractions knowledge using assessments adapted from prior
research. A subset of students will also be interviewed to gain greater insight
into their problem-solving approaches. Key covariates, including children’s
mathematics anxiety, whole number skills, and general cognitive skills, will be
measured in order to isolate the relations between fractions and algebra
knowledge. This allows for empirical examination of the factor structure of the
fractions and algebra domains and for development of efficient instruments with
optimal coverage of the constructs. Phase 2 will use the refined measures to
follow a new sample of children longitudinally over three school years (grades
7–9). Cross-lagged panel models will be used to simultaneously examine effects
of fractions knowledge on algebra knowledge and vice versa, while also
considering the role of covariates. Results will yield information about the
developmental relations between fractions and algebra knowledge. Data will be
collected online in both phases.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.