* 2301831
* Connectivity for a complex life cycle: Conserving the Crystal skipper butterfly in a coastal urban environment
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Elsa Youngsteadt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 04/30/2026
* USD 429,687.00

Species around the globe increasingly face multiple threats from disturbances
such as urbanization and climate change. Not all threats can be directly
addressed through local conservation actions. Instead, conservation may attempt
to reduce or offset the effects of a larger threat (such as climate change) by
managing local conditions (such as food availability). We still know very little
about whether and when these approaches should succeed. To address this problem,
this research and conservation project investigates effects of urbanization,
climate change, and habitat management on a rare butterfly, the Crystal skipper
(Atrytonopsis quinteri). This small insect is endemic to 50 km of North Carolina
barrier islands, where larvae and adults require distinct resources—host plants
and nectar—that may be disconnected in an urban landscape. All life stages also
face risks from weather and climate stressors. This project aims to improve
monitoring and management approaches for the Crystal skipper. In doing so, it
provides broader insights into how conservation management may interact with
climate in organisms with complex life cycles. This project also provides
integrative research and conservation training for a graduate student,
undergraduate students, and early-career conservation professionals, and
involves local stakeholders in monitoring and outreach.

The specific objectives of this project are to: (1) develop a rigorous,
sustainable, and unbiased survey methodology to estimate skipper population size
and trends, (2) evaluate the role of connectivity (ease of movement) between
host plants and nectar plants in limiting skipper populations, (3) assess
whether management can increase Crystal skipper populations and offset effects
of climate change, and (4) implement adaptive, robust, and strategic
improvements to the existing Crystal skipper conservation plan. This research
combines modern technologies (unmanned aerial systems to detect patchy nectar
resources), field surveys, and circuit theory to quantify how mobile organisms
use resources in an urban matrix. It also relates demographic rates to
environmental and climate variables and constructs a mechanistic population
model to test the effects of management interventions and weather/climate
variation on skipper population growth. Finally, it combines results of
research, monitoring, and stakeholder input to prioritize management actions and
develop an adaptive monitoring program that will resolve critical uncertainties
impeding Crystal skipper management.

This project is being supported via a joint program involving the Divisions of
Environmental Biology and Integrative Organismal Systems and the Paul G. Allen
Family Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.