* 2301736
* ERI: Integration of Computational Modeling and Machine Learning for Clot Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Jifu Tan, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,728.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will support research that will
contribute new knowledge related to the mechanics of blood clots. A clot is a
solid substance that can form spontaneously from the cells and proteins of
blood. Clots are essential to stopping bleeding from a wound, but also can be
dangerous if they improperly block a blood vessel causing, for example, a heart
attack or stroke. Decades of research have led to an understanding of the
biochemistry and cell biology of clot formation, but how clots are affected by
the mechanical forces of blood flow is not well understood. Clots that cause
heart attack and stroke often form in flowing blood, thus understanding how the
flow forces affect clot formation may be important to preventing or treating
these conditions. This research will develop a model for clotting. The project
will use artificial intelligence to make a generalized predictive model of clot
strength using clot composition data. The research will benefit society by
enabling patient-specific clot modeling with the goal of improving personalized
medicine. The project spans several disciplines including mechanical
engineering, computational science, biomedical engineering, and art and design.
The multi-disciplinary approach will be used as part of an outreach effort to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.

The objective of this research is to characterize clot mechanical response under
external load through integration of a novel mesoscopic model and machine
learning to extract its strength, toughness, and dynamic modulus. The novel
model will consider clot components such as red blood cells, platelets, fibrin
networks, and plasma. The specific aims of the research are to develop and
validate a multiphysics model for clot mechanics based on a hybrid particle-
continuum approach with heterogeneous components and apply machine learning
models to predict clot strength, toughness, and dynamic modulus under various
compositions using neural networks. The project will advance our knowledge of
how the interplay between individual components, including the time-dependent
platelet contraction, contribute to the overall mechanical response of the clot
and also to predict the clot mechanical properties with given composition by
developing novel open-source high performance computing mesoscale models and
machine learning models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.