* 2301922
* AccelNet-Implementation: The Global Network for Accelerating Synergies Through Research On Astronomy Culture, Communication, Education and Learning (ASTRO ACCEL)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,615,193.00

Since the dawn of our existence, people have gazed at the heavens and the
stories of the stars have captured our imagination and inspired humans across
the globe. Throughout history astronomy has also bridged communities, countries,
and cultures. Various research projects, and anecdotal evidence among educators
have shown that topics related to space and its big questions still have the
potential to engage people across cultural and political borders. The Earth-sky
connection has been a fundamental element in the development of both science and
culture, and observations of the sky have helped to define culture, religion,
agriculture, spiritual and even temporal points of view, as well as establish
calendars, units of measure, travel time, orientation, among many other elements
of modern life.

Today, astronomy remains an important part of our societal fabric. Numerous
organizations and networks around the world work to explore and develop research
and resources for the benefit of society. Astronomy is a connecting science that
brings people together. Through the practice of science for diplomacy, astronomy
and space sciences help to maintain open lines of communication between nations
through collaboration; improving overall national security for all. In addition,
astronomy is often referred to as a gateway science that inspires young and
diverse learners here in the U.S. and abroad to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and can result a STEM-literate
workforce that improves national prosperity and well-being.

The Global Network for Accelerating Synergies Through Research on Astronomy in
Culture, Communication, Education and Learning (ASTRO ACCEL) will build an
international network of networks (NoN) to accelerate research, resource
development, and resource sharing focused on culture, communications,
education/learning, and public engagement in astronomy. The result will be a
global NoN that advances our knowledge and understanding in these areas for
mutual benefit across the NoN. Further, in alignment with the NSFâ€™s programs,
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier, INCLUDES and Growing
Convergence Research, ASTRO ACCEL will build upon existing networks to
efficiently find creative solutions to complicated problems, and will bridge
global communities of researchers and practitioners to accelerate research,
improve practice, and further socioeconomic development, thus identifying new
areas for convergence research and increasing the number of children worldwide
with the resources and science capital required to pursue a career in STEM.

ASTRO ACCEL will use a structural folding and multimodal approach to bring
together stakeholders from around the world to build the human capital and
identify the cyber infrastructure necessary to support an international NoN of
individuals and institutions, accelerate research in the key areas of astronomy
education, engagement, culture, and communication, and accelerate the process of
research-to-practice in these key areas. In accomplishing its goals, ASTRO ACCEL
initially brings together ten well-established U.S. and international networks
to focus research and resource sharing in three broad areas including a) formal
astronomy education, b) informal astronomy education and astronomy
communication, and c) use of astronomy for economic and social development.
Throughout the three-year project additional organizations and networks will
join the effort. By project end, it is anticipated that approximately 20
networks from across the globe and 300+ individuals will be actively engaged
through ASTRO ACCEL.

Research on NoN development and sustainable practices will also take place.
ASTRO-ACCEL will include a variety of in-person and virtual meetings, as well as
other activities. Through a series of surveys and focus group interviews, ASTRO-
ACCEL will explore participant experiences and best practices necessary in the
creation of sustainable and robust NoNs. Data from the surveys and interviews
will help project leadership evolve the implementation of practices and
structures that facilitate long-term engagement of networks as well as
individuals. Findings and best practices will be shared with the broader STEM
enterprise through publications and professional conference presentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.