* 2301653
* ERI: A Computational and Experimental Approach to Establishing Multiscale and Multiphasic Structure-Function Mechanisms of Muscle Stiffness
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Benjamin Wheatley, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award supports research that will
create a model of muscle behavior at multiple scales. Muscle is responsible for
providing the power that is necessary to live our daily lives – walking,
communicating, and breathing are all possible thanks to skeletal muscle.
However, muscle injury, neuromuscular disease, and other impairments can reduce
a person’s mobility and cause significant pain because the muscles are too
stiff. This project is to investigate how the stiffness and biology of healthy
muscle is different from that of impaired muscle. In particular, it is currently
unknown how molecules that compose skeletal muscle contribute to the mechanical
properties, particularly to muscle stiffness. The project will investigate how
three key parts of skeletal muscle contribute to muscle stiffness – a) muscle
cells, b) a web-like tissue called the extracellular matrix, and c) the cellular
liquids in muscle. The research team will use experimental testing complemented
by computer models to generate data. This data will help scientists and
clinicians better to understand what specific mechanisms of a disease change
muscle stiffness. The results will contribute to improving treatments for people
who suffer from such muscle conditions. This grant also will support educational
outreach to mentor a diverse group of undergraduate student researchers and
support their professional development in careers in the sciences. This work
will establish critical structure-function mechanisms in passive skeletal muscle
by leveraging multiscale materials testing and finite element analysis. While
changes to muscle stiffness from impairments correlate to measurements such as
collagen content and type, predicting the hyperelastic, anisotropic material
properties of muscle in vivo is not possible. The research team will perform
multi-axial materials testing on individual muscle fibers, muscle tissue, and
whole muscle under both tensile and compressive conditions. These experimental
data will comprise the most comprehensive set of muscle material properties
collected to date and will be used for the calibration and validation of a
multiscale, biphasic, homogenized finite element model of muscle tissue that
links microstructural form to macro function. This model can then be used in
future efforts to study how microstructural changes to muscle tissue alter
muscle material properties and thus in vivo function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.