* 2301838
* ERI: Increasing the Fundamental Understanding of the Auxetic Behavior of  Graphene Oxide Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Yijing Stehle, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,994.00

When materials are stretched in one direction, it is typical that the dimensions
in the other directions tend to decrease. However, some advanced materials,
known as auxetic materials, exhibit a cross-sectional expansion that is
perpendicular to the force applied during stretching. Auxetic materials are
currently used in applications such as body armor, packing materials, knee and
elbow pads, and sponge mops. Graphene oxide membranes are identified with
auxetic behavior, which make them excellent candidate for a wide range of
promising separation and filtration applications in the biomedical, automobile,
and defense industries, and for clean energy. However, there is still a limited
understanding of the underlying mechanism in their auxetic behavior. In this
Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project, a series of experiments will be
carried out to gain a deeper understanding of the structure of graphene oxide
membranes that causes its auxetic behavior. This project will provide research
experiences for undergraduate students at Union College, especially those from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds. These research experiences will
prepare students for scientific and technical careers, and/or graduate studies
in nanotechnology-based industries. In addition, the research will be integrated
into Union’s mechanical engineering curriculum to improve engineering education.

The objectives of this project are two-fold: 1) to achieve a fundamental
understanding of the auxetic behavior of graphene oxide membranes by conducting
experiments based on two hypotheses - the “wrinkle” and/or the “auxetic
framework” are responsible for the behavior, and 2) to investigate how negative
Poisson ratio customization affects the mechanical properties, stability,
permeability, and potential applications of the membranes. Specifically, this
experimental research will explore the relationship between the negative Poisson
ratio and the size, orientation, and deformation of wrinkles, as per the
"wrinkle" hypothesis. It will also investigate the correlation between the
negative Poisson ratio and the oxygen/carbon atomic ratio of the "auxetic
framework" hypothesis. By combining experimental studies and dynamic analyses,
this project aims to not only identify the structural basis of graphene oxide
membrane's auxetic behavior but also devise techniques for customizing this
behavior to address a range of engineering challenges. This research project is
also expected to lay the groundwork for the PI’s future research endeavors in
the short and long term.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.