* 2301824
* ERI: Enhancing Life-cycle Resilience of Cable-Stayed Bridges to Extreme Winds through Areo-Structural Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Miguel Cid Montoya, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,992.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will address key challenges in
the life-cycle design of wind-sensitive cable-stayed bridges. Medium- and long-
span cable-stayed bridges are gaining momentum in use, given their capability to
span distances from 300 to 1000 meters. However, US coastal regions experience
hurricanes and other extreme wind events that affect the performance and safety
of cable-stayed bridges during construction, service, and long-term conditions.
Taking advantage of the digital revolution and the continuous improvement of
computer-aided simulations and data-driven design methods, this research will
recast the design method for cable-stayed bridges currently used in the bridge
industry based on heuristic experience-based design strategies that have relied
only on wind tunnel testing or in-situ performance evaluation. A new simulation-
based, multi-model, aero-structural design optimization methodology will seek
material reduction while keeping the bridge’s required life-cycle performance
and safety levels, thus achieving the desired reduction in carbon footprint.
This research will synergistically combine education and outreach activities at
a minority-serving institution, including curriculum development, training
demonstrations in wind tunnel testing, and student tours to local bridge
construction sites. This award contributes to the National Science Foundation
(NSF) role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. Data generated
from this project will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) DesignSafe
Date Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

This research will develop a novel computational methodology for the aero-
structural design optimization of cable-stayed bridges considering multiple
phases of their life-cycle under extreme wind loading. The overarching goal is
the development of a holistic design methodology that permits further exploring
the effects of deck shape modifications on the life-cycle performance of the
bridge under extreme winds to achieve a sustainable and cost-effective design
while improving the life-cycle aeroelastic performance. The research will
synthesize the state-of-the-art capabilities of bridge aerodynamics, linear and
nonlinear aeroelasticity models, computational fluid dynamic simulations,
machine learning, finite element modeling-based multi-model design, and
optimization algorithms. The research objectives include (i) develop linear and
nonlinear wind-resistant performance models for the life-cycle design of
bridges, (ii) develop multi-fidelity aeroelastic surrogates for the shape-
dependent emulation of fluid-structure interaction parameters, and (iii)
formulate efficient multi-model surrogate-based aero-structural design
optimization strategies. The research will address the aeroelastic life-cycle
performance of a cable-stayed bridge when changing the bridge deck cross-section
and other key design variables and the life-cycle aero-structural optimum design
of a cable-stayed bridge for a particular location, local climate, and project
specifications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.