* 2301453
* ERI: Wake interactions past two roughness elements in close proximity to a surface
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Ali Hamed, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 198,202.00

The turbulent flow over two roughness elements in close proximity on an
otherwise relatively smooth surface is encountered in environmental and
engineering applications (e.g., two dunes in close proximity and two protrusions
in close succession on an engineered surface). The interactions between the
upstream wake and the downstream wake govern important flow features including
drag and turbulence. This project aims to quantify and understand the wake
interactions between two roughness elements in close proximity under incoming
turbulent flow. For this purpose, flow measurements will be made for a wide
range of configurations using state-of-the-art instrumentation. The project will
be performed at an undergraduate institution providing foundation for
engineering research and enhancing undergraduate research training. The project
will provide engaging research experiences for undergraduate students who will
gain valuable research training and mentoring while working alongside faculty.

High-speed volumetric particle image velocimetry, a non-intrusive laser-
diagnostic flow measurement technique, will be used to measure the flow over two
cylindrical roughness elements positioned in close proximity and immersed in a
turbulent boundary layer. The cylinders will be positioned at various
configurations to vary the degree by which the upstream cylinder shelters the
downstream cylinder from the incoming high-momentum flow. The experiments will
allow for the characterization of rich flow physics: the interaction of two 3D
shear layers in the lower portion of a turbulent boundary layer. The objectives
are to 1) quantify the flow interactions between the wakes of the two
cylindrical roughness elements; 2) characterize the vortical structures shed
from isolated cylindrical roughness elements and identify the modifications to
these structures due to the introduction of an upstream cylinder; 3) investigate
the effects of additional upstream elements (i.e., sheltering by 2, 3, and 4
upstream elements) on the captured flow physics, 4) quantify the roughness-
induced perturbation to the boundary layer and its coherent structures; and 5)
distill a spatiotemporally-resolved flow description that illustrates sheltering
flow physics across a wide range of arrangements. The spatially- and temporally-
resolved measurements will aid in addressing a gap in the literature on the flow
over two roughness elements in close proximity, offer insight into the rich flow
physics involved, and provide benchmark results to aid other researchers in
their modeling and validation efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.