* 2301138
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Nanofabrication Lab Manual Featuring a Suite of Low-Cost Experiments to Enable Hands-On Training at Community and Technical Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Justin Starr, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 41,620.00

Semiconductors in the form of integrated circuits (ICs), or chips, are an
integral part of our technology-driven world. The need for chips has risen
sharply while the supply has fallen short of the demand worldwide. Before the
end of the last century the United States (US) led the world in chipmaking.
However, the US now provides less than 10% of the world need, and the leadership
of chip supply is dominated by other countries. Semiconductor products are
critical to our economic and national security and rank the fifth largest US
export sector providing approximately 250,000 jobs in the United States. This
project will explore an innovative way to increase the chipmaking workforce
numbers required to meet this national need by eliminating the expensive and
complex infrastructure (e.g., cleanrooms, fabrication equipment) traditionally
required to train and educate individuals in this area.

This project will develop a lab manual featuring low-cost experiments that
closely represent the methods used in the chipmaking industry. The manual will
feature experiments for students to demonstrate their learning in a hands-on
fashion. The lessons in the manual will specifically be designed to be
transferrable to any community college (CC) seeking to offer degree tracks in
micro and nanotechnology (i.e., chipmaking) to dynamically meet the local
industry demand. Instructor guides will include student assessment rubrics to
measure learning outcomes. After development, partnering CCâ€™s will review the
manual and evaluate the experiments. The manual will be further optimized and
evaluated before widespread dissemination through national conferences and
professional development activities. This manual will be used as both an
outreach tool and a training resource to help cultivate and develop the
workforce required to fill the US chipmaking sector. This project, in response
to the Enhancing Engineering Technology and Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing
Technician Education Dear Colleague Letter (22-120), is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.