* 2301357
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Computational Design and Application of Wearable Haptic Knits
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Tian Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2026
* USD 65,480.00

Social touch is a natural mode of communication between people and better
understanding of how to convey social touch mechanistically will result in new
forms of communication and increased capabilities of wearable devices that
improve human health and quality of life. The importance of social touch is
becoming more evident as we increase remote communication through email, text
messages and videoconferencing. Prior work has shown that social touch can be
replicated through wearable and holdable devices, but current devices are bulky
and impractical. This research will combine principles of soft robotics and knit
textiles of varying stiffness to design and fabricate a new kind of soft
wearable haptic device, in which careful specification of stitch size,
placement, and material in a knit sleeve will control the deformation of
pneumatic bladders that apply force to the wearer. Project outcomes will advance
knowledge in the field of social touch and human perception, and will lay the
foundation for a variety of other types of knit-textile-based devices, including
soft assistive devices. Additional broad impact will derive from activities
designed to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in engineering
through lab tours, outreach programs, and mentoring of students from groups that
are underrepresented in engineering, and by making project findings available to
a wide audience through an open-source materials library.

Current soft wearable devices are bulky and impractical because they need stiff
frames to ensure load transmission. The pixel-like control of material
properties afforded by multi-material and multi-stitch knit textiles, on the
other hand, can redirect force transmission to precise deformation modes
efficiently and with a low profile. This project approaches designing,
fabricating, and testing knit-enabled wearable devices in three thrusts. The
first thrust will model and optimize knits to achieve target load and
deformation profiles by using a combination of experimental material
characterization and multiscale modeling to harness the full capabilities of the
modern knitting process. The second thrust will design, fabricate, and test
wearable pneumatic devices, including consideration for donning and doffing,
actuator integration and interfacing, and device characterization. The third
thrust will implement and test social touch cues using the device with pre-
programmed haptic emojis and display of teleoperated social touch queues in real
time. Taken together, these thrusts will create new forms of communication and
lead to increased capabilities of wearable devices that improve human health and
quality of life.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.