* 2301912
* RET Site: Energize Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,997.00

The “RET Site: Energize Teachers (ET-RET)” program at Tennessee Technological
University (TTU) aims to offer real-world research experience to 30 teachers
from rural and other communities with high populations of underrepresented
individuals in STEM fields. Tennessee is home to the Nation’s largest public
utility, largest U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) national laboratory (Oakridge
National Laboratory), and a growing electric vehicle industry. These and other
electric power-related industries in Tennessee demand a highly trained workforce
in electric power generation, storage and distribution. At the same time,
Tennessee has large expanses that include many rural school districts in need of
teachers with high-level experience in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The three-year program focuses on a six week,
on-campus, hands-on research experience wherein teachers will work directly with
one of TTU’s engineering faculty in Electrical, Mechanical or Chemical
Engineering. During that time, the teacher participants will also develop
curricular modules for direct integration into existing or new courses that they
will teach in subsequent terms at their home schools. A “hub” of teachers,
university faculty and industry guests will be formed to establish a support
network for both the research-trained RET teacher-graduates and other teachers
to access. The hub will be a virtual entity where teachers can access input from
experts on a wide-variety of energy-related topics.

The “RET Site: Energize Teachers (ET-RET)” program at Tennessee Technological
University (TTU) aims to offer real-world research experience to 30 teachers
from rural and other communities with high populations of underrepresented
individuals in STEM fields. The RET faculty team at Tennessee Technological
University is actively engaged in research across a broad range of energy
related topics including novel battery materials, material and electrochemical
characterization and modeling of battery system technologies, novel methods for
recovery of waste energy from structures and low-level heat sources and wireless
power transfer technologies. These and other topics will provide a framework for
research training of three cohorts of 10 teachers each over a period of three
years. The goals are to improve the science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) literacy of the teacher participants in an effort to elevate
student competencies in the same areas and to increase the level of interest in
STEM disciplines among students in rural and underserved communities in middle-
Tennessee. The team plans to observe the RET-trained teachers and their students
to improve the efficacy of the training using cycles of continuous improvement.
A “hub” of teachers, university faculty and industry guests will be formed to
establish a support network for both the research-trained RET teacher-graduates
and other teachers to access. The hub will be a virtual entity where teachers
can access input from experts on a wide-variety of energy-related topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.