* 2301719
* ERI: Interphase Evolution and Electrochemical Behavior for Highly Reversible Zinc Metal Anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Lin Ma, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2025
* USD 207,000.00

Although lithium-ion batteries have been widely used for a wide range of
applications ranging from electric vehicles to grid storage of renewable
electricity, the high cost and limited domestic supply of lithium and transition
metal (e.g. cobalt) resources necessitate the development of aqueous
rechargeable zinc metal batteries as a “beyond-lithium” complementary
technology. However, unwanted reactions occur on the region between zinc metal
anode and electrolytes, which compromises the lifetime and durability of aqueous
zinc batteries. To improve the cell lifetime, it is important to understand the
relationship between the area between the anode and the electrode, the
interphase region, and the electrochemical performance of zinc metal anode prior
to the design stages. In this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project, the
PI and his research group will study the evolution of this interphase and its
effect on the zinc anode performance during cell operation. The project will
provide critical scientific knowledge to develop advanced aqueous batteries for
maintaining and advancing US battery technology leadership. The
multidisciplinary research project will provide ample educational and outreach
opportunities for high school, undergraduate, M.S. and Ph.D. students, including
those from underrepresented groups in STEM.

This ERI research project seeks to advance fundamental knowledge of the aqueous
solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) evolution driven by SEI defects and an
electron approachable thickness. A close integration of experimental and
modeling approaches based on pyrazole-based containing aqueous electrolytes will
be used to study key factors that impact SEI formation and to confirm the effect
of the SEI’s defects and thickness. Other unique elements of the research
project include 1) identifying the morphology and chemical compositions of zinc
anode SEI as a function of aqueous pH value, temperature and cell cycling time
using surface characterizations, 2) determining the mechanism of Zn2+ cation
transport through the SEI using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and
density functional theory (DFT) calculations in addition to SEI morphology and
chemical information, 3) identifying the dependence of zinc metallic dendrite
formation/growth and mechanical degradation of the SEI on the cycling history
using scanning electron microscopy, nanoindentation and a coupled
electrochemical-mechanical multiphysics modeling framework, and 4) identifying
the favorable reaction pathways of aqueous SEI formation/evolution using DFT
calculations combined with the electro−chemo−mechanical information of the SEI
obtained in the first three tasks. Through this project, the PI will catalyze
new research partnerships (both with internal and external collaborators) and
extend the research group’s capabilities in both theoretical modeling and
advanced characterization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.