* 2301952
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing logistics technologies (TX, OK)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Terrance Pohlen, University of North Texas
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joda Thongnopnua
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,650.00

This NSF Engines Development Award is focused on developing an inclusive
innovation ecosystem and economic development engine for logistics in the Texoma
region, spanning Texas and Oklahoma. The envisioned future engine has the
potential to transform innovation deserts in the region into strong economic
contributors and generators of high-quality employment opportunities. The region
of service includes 26 counties in North Texas and Southeastern Oklahoma.
Logistics represents the second largest business sector, with over 889 million
tons valued at $1.1 trillion moving through the region and employing over
450,000 workers. Like the national economy, the region is experiencing a
significant shortfall in skilled labor. In June 2022, over 500,000 logistics job
openings existed nationally, with the driver shortfall alone at over 80,000.
These shortages are particularly pronounced in the region as the second-largest
industrial and fourth-largest freight market. A collaboration of universities,
companies, government agencies, and workforce development organizations will
lead the activity, including the University of North Texas, Southern Methodist
University, University of Texas-Arlington, Dallas College, Southeastern Oklahoma
State University, Texas Research Alliance, Dallas Regional Chamber, the Choctaw
Nation of Oklahoma, Hillwood Properties, City of Dallas, Workforce Solutions,
and the Southern Dallas County Inland Port Transportation Management
Association. The project will solicit use-inspired projects from the logistics
community and address through research hubs located in disadvantaged areas to
translate emerging technologies into innovative systems, practices, and
workforce development programs. These hubs will conceptualize new products and
services, incubate start-ups, and facilitate commercialization. The envisioned
future engine will incorporate three major technical thrusts: autonomy,
electrification, and cyber. Autonomy integrates autonomous systems into
logistics networks by generating innovations in surveillance/sending, computer
vision, collision avoidance, object tracking, and smart city technologies. Cyber
advances the technologies necessary for integrating logistics functions, data,
and software across the supply chain, including artificial intelligence, machine
learning, blockchain, cybersecurity, optimization, and digital twins.
Electrification facilitates sustainable logistics by promoting innovations in
renewable energy generation and microgrids, energy storage, battery
technologies, hydrogen fuels, on-the-move EV wireless charging, energy
harvesting, and grid resilience. Workforce development overlays each thrust, and
the project will closely collaborate with regional workforce development
organizations to plan and develop new education vehicles and integrate these
innovations and industry input into workforce training programs. The Development
Award will enable the creation of the Engine by promoting collaboration across
universities, government and non-government entities, and logistics companies
throughout the region and providing the support essential for creating the
research hubs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.