* 2301301
* Excellence in Research: Development of a Fluorescent Assay to Measure LAT1 Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jacqueline Smith, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 557,643.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Excellence in
Research (HBCU-EiR) Program, Dr. Jacqueline Smith will investigate the transport
of small molecules through native transporters. Cell survival depends on the
delivery of nutrients such as amino acids, carbohydrates and other valuable
biochemicals into the cell. The delivery of the nutrients is enabled by
transporters, which are proteins located in the cell membrane. The study of
these proteins is challenging. Dr. Smith’s research seeks to create novel
chemical probes to study a transporter, specifically the large amino acid
transporter (LAT1). The research will also focus on the development of a method
for rapid identification of small molecules that are substrates for LAT1. This
project will give students at Bowie State an opportunity to explore protein
biochemistry and other modern chemical biology techniques.

The large amino acid transporter (LAT1) is a key nutrient transporter that is
highly expressed in the cells in the brain and placenta and in cells with high
energy demand in general. As a transmembrane protein, the structure of LAT1 has
been determined only recently and transport by LAT1 was traditionally measured
using radioisotope assays. Although computational methods have been used to
study LAT1, experimental methods for validation of the computational predictions
are lacking. Dr. Smith will pursue the development of proteoliposomes that
contain LAT1. The small molecule binding to LAT1 within the proteoliposomes will
be studied by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Newly developed fluorescent
substrates will be used to screen for molecules that can be transported through
LAT1. The tools developed in this study will be applied to gain a better
understanding of the binding to and transport of small molecules by LAT1.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.