* 2301333
* Conference: USA-Africa Workshop on Communications and Microwave Emerging Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Sara Ghayouraneh, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,990.00

Microwave and communications technologies have propelled the rapid growth of
Internet of Things for many emerging industrial and consumer applications, which
stimulates new research in the areas of analytical and experimental techniques
for device modeling and characterization. This workshop will provide a forum for
the multidisciplinary subjects of microwaves and communications engineering to
promote interactions and collaborations in research and education among
participants. Researchers and students from U.S. will be invited to participate.
The outcome is expected to contribute to advancing microwave and communications
technologies that will benefit developments of future smart cities and smart
villages. The workshop will be held in in Cairo, Egypt, on February 5-6, 2023,
and co-located with the IEEE International Microwave & Antennas Symposium
(IMAS2023) on February 7-9, 2023.

This workshop will bring together research scientists, educators, and students
to discuss new technological, experimental, computational, and theoretical
advances in the processing, characterization, and multi-scale modeling of
communication and microwave devices. It will focus on key technological
challenges to develop smart cities and smart villages including their wireless
infrastructure. The workshop will have multiple sessions with in-depth
discussions to cover various research areas that support the developments of
future smart cities and smart villages. Four themes/sessions of this workshop
are: (1) Technologies for Smart Cities and Smart Villages, (2) Radar Technology
for Civilian Applications, (3) Satellite and Space Communications, (4) High-
Frequency Semiconductor Devices. The workshop will provide an opportunity for
participants to network and explore international collaborations in microwave
and communications technologies to benefit the research community and the global
society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.