* 2301535
* ERI: Hydraulic Cylinder Diagnostics Using Nonlinear Inverse Model Estimation and Frequency Domain Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Yongsoon Yoon, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,865.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables
reliable operation and cost-effective maintenance of machinery in which
hydraulic cylinder actuators play a central role—of critical importance to the
transportation, manufacturing, construction, and agricultural industries—thereby
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity. Given
its high power density and large force capacity, the hydraulic cylinder is a
trusted workhorse across many industrial applications. By its design, it is also
vulnerable to a variety of critical faults, such as seal failures, leakage,
fluid contamination, and reduced load-carrying capacity, that may negatively
affect performance and efficiency, and result in high costs from downtime,
permanent damage, or operator injury. To ensure that such faults can be
accurately detected and identified, this project relies on a combination of
physics-based modeling and innovative frequency domain analysis to develop a
novel diagnostic methodology that accounts for system nonlinearities and closed-
loop operation. Such a diagnostic paradigm is also anticipated to find
application in a variety of energy and power transmission systems, including
electric vehicles. Efforts to disseminate research outcomes to local industry in
Southeast Michigan, undergraduate research opportunities, and integration of
modeling and systems diagnostics principles in coursework will produce broader
societal impact.

This research aims to develop the foundations for a comprehensive systems
diagnostics methodology for hydraulic cylinders that relies on physics-based
modeling rather than statistics and machine learning techniques, as has been
common in recent years. Such foundational contributions will be made through the
design of a new residual generator that extracts faulty features from sensor
measurements, as well as of a residual evaluator that makes a diagnostic
decision by comparing the residual with the prescribed threshold under a certain
operating condition. Several tasks will be pursued through a combination of
theoretical modeling, numerical simulations, and physical experiments, including
comprehensive fault analysis using a nonlinear, inverse, frequency domain
representation of the system dynamics, and formulation and testing of a
parameter estimation algorithm for such a nonlinear inverse model under closed-
loop operation using an adaptive digital twin. Hardware-in-the-loop simulations
will be performed to validate the methodology and investigate its robustness
also in the presence of multiple simultaneous faults.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.