* 2301014
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Broad-Spectrum Facial Image Protection with Provable Privacy Guarantees
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Dan Lin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 11/30/2024
* USD 673,162.00

With the growing ubiquity of smartphones and other mobile devices, image sharing
is gaining increasing popularity in social networks. Privacy protection has now
become a crucial issue to be addressed because sharing images can reveal
personal and social environments and details of private lives. While many social
media allow users to set privacy preferences, these are rarely sufficient due to
the limitations of the options, complexity of the problem, and the tedious
nature of privacy configuration. The objective of this project is to design an
intelligent and automatic broad-spectrum image protection system that offers
provable privacy guarantees for multiple parties involved in social image
sharing while maintaining image quality. Specifically, the researchers on this
project aim to overcome the following challenges: (i) Privacy protection for
human subjects and sensitive objects in the background of the images; (ii)
Consideration of location-dependent image sensitivities whereby images taken at
certain places (e.g., pubs, hospitals) may impact privacy, such as people in the
images who do not want their occurrences or co-occurrences at those locations to
be known; (iii) Strong enforcement of the privacy protection that conforms with
different privacy needs of multiple people in the same image. The success of the
proposed research will address the rising privacy concerns of image sharing on
social sites and benefit billions of social network users. A range of
educational activities will be also carried out including curriculum
development, professional training for college students and outreach to K-12
teachers and students, with emphasis on under-represented groups.

This project will greatly advance the state-of-the-art facial privacy protection
during online image sharing with the following innovative research ideas. First,
a new image privacy policy language and an efficient policy management system
will be designed for managing broad-spectrum privacy concerns of multiple
parties. Second, formal privacy models will be defined to quantify privacy risks
and provide provable privacy guarantees during policy enforcement. Third, new
deep-learning-based image modification approaches such as facial
modification/replacement and image cropping will be investigated to
simultaneously address different users' privacy needs regarding the same image
while preserving the aesthetics nature. Finally, a combination of interface and
incentive design will be conducted to obtain more accurate user feedback and
evaluate the effectiveness and practicality of the proposed system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.