* 2301298
* CAS: Spectroscopy and Unimolecular Dynamics of Reaction Intermediates in Atmospheric Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2026
* USD 605,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Marsha Lester of the University
of Pennsylvania and her team are using molecular spectroscopic and theoretical
methods to study the unimolecular decay dynamics of carbonyl oxide intermediates
generated through ozonolysis of alkenes. These reaction intermediates are an
important source of hydroxyl radicals, which result in the oxidation of most
volatile organic compounds, and are precursors to new particle formation in the
atmosphere. Professor Lester and her students will investigate novel
rearrangement mechanisms of the carbonyl oxide intermediates that lead to
different products. These studies could lead to a better understanding of the
generation of hydroxyl radicals in the atmosphere and other products that may
impact on new particle formation. These studies will provide a stimulating
environment for training and development of next generation scientists working
at the interface between physical chemistry and atmospheric science.

Professor Lester and her students will combine infrared laser activation of
carbonyl oxide intermediates with time-resolved detection of hydroxyl radical
products utilizing laser-induced fluorescence to measure unimolecular decay
rates and provide direct insight on transition state barriers leading to
products. The planned experimental studies and theoretical modeling will examine
unimolecular decay processes of carbonyl oxide intermediates via 1,3 ring
closure mechanisms. Extension to carbonyl oxides with greater carbon chain
length and/or heteroatom substitution will be explored, which may lead to new
low energy pathways with the potential for ring closure and secondary ozonide
formation. Additional studies will implement various laser spectroscopic
techniques to identify and characterize alternative products resulting from
intra-fragment roaming reactions in the unimolecular decay of carbonyl oxide
intermediates. In this case, the separating hydroxyl radical can reorient and
roam at long-range, potentially leading to a wide range of products via addition
and/or abstraction reactions, which may impact the yield of hydroxyl radicals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.