* 2301749
* ERI: Adaptive and Resilient Communication-Aware Multi-Robot Coordination
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Wenhao Luo, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant will support fundamental
research that aims to improve reliable coordination for a team of autonomous
mobile robots operating in realistic and possibly adversarial environments.
Robots that can collaborate have shown great potential in many applications from
search and rescue missions to precision agriculture. Due to limited sensing,
communication, and processing capabilities, autonomous robots in a collaborating
group often need to make collective decisions through communications in
proximity. For example, exchanging sensing data or control commands with
neighboring robots through range-constrained wireless communications. The
integral role of wireless communications requires robots to coordinate and react
to the changing environment for reliable information sharing in addition to
their original tasks. However, existing research paradigm often assumes that the
communication environment is well modeled and can be pre-programmed into robotic
systems for effective coordination without disruptions. This significantly
limits the capabilities of robot teams and makes them vulnerable in real-world
environments that can often be unpredictable. To address the challenges, this
project seeks to create a set of methods and tools that may augment many multi-
robot coordination tasks, by enabling robots to learn the environment on the
fly, adapt their motion to environmental changes, and maintain communications
when unexpected robot failures happen. The project will also support education
and outreach activities such as curriculum development, broadening participation
of students from underrepresented groups, and local community engagement in the
Charlotte metropolitan area.

The objective of this project is to create novel methods and algorithms that
enable the co-design of learning, communication, and motion control for mobile
robot teams. This may allow for robust operation of robots with provable
assurances on communication capabilities and multi-robot network resilience
adaptive to uncertain environments, positively supporting the primary task
execution. In pursuit of this goal, the project will make two main
contributions: (i) Developing data-driven methods for robots to collaboratively
learn the spatially varying realistic communication performance online, and (ii)
Developing new approaches that specify the impact of realistic communication
constraints and network resilience on the task-related robotsâ€™ motion, to enable
joint optimization for more efficient multi-robot coordination with performance
guarantees. The work will be evaluated in simulations and experiments on
physical robotic platforms.

This project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in
Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering
(ENG) and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.