* 2301389
* Hafnia-based platform for high-index visible and UV integrated photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Karan Mehta, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 446,998.00

Integrated photonics at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths stand to enable
applications spanning quantum systems based on individual atoms, ions, and
defects in solids, bio-chemical spectroscopy, and neural stimulation and
probing. Operation at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths requires different
material platforms and device architectures as compared to the comparatively
mature near infrared, where communications applications have spurred significant
development. The lack of wide-bandgap materials platforms transmissive to these
high energy photons has been a major limitation on development of integrated
photonics at these short wavelengths. This program develops a new CMOS-
compatible platform for ultraviolet and visible photonics based on thin-film
deposited hafnia, whose relatively high refractive index is a critical advantage
over the current alternative for ultraviolet integrated photonics, alumina. This
program explores strategies to inhibit crystallization of hafnia, which has been
a major obstacle to realization of low optical losses, by controlled
incorporation of other elements into films. The resulting composite films
maintain the bulk of hafnia's advantage in refractive index, while reducing
losses by orders of magnitude. The work further explores and develops materials
processing and fabrication techniques to pattern this material into low-loss
photonic devices, and develops novel photonic device concepts leveraging the new
platform motivated by application in atomic quantum systems. This work will
enable significantly higher performance photonics at blue/UV wavelengths, and
due to the CMOS compatibility of the proposed platform, enables rapid
integration into state-of-the-art manufacturing platforms. Undergraduate
education and participation in the research is a key component of the program,
as are outreach efforts exposing K-12 students to cutting-edge work happening in
optical and atomic science and technology. The program explores routes to
optimizing material loss and index in HfO2/Al2O3 composites formed by atomic
layer deposition, develops nanofabrication processes for these composites to
enable lithographically defined nanophotonics, and pursues detailed
characterization of the developed platform. The high refractive index of the
composite material as compared to the current best alternative, pure Al2O3, is a
significant enabling advantage for multiple photonic components including
grating couplers, photonic crystals, microresonators, and active electro- and
acousto-optic devices. Furthermore, this work introduces novel device
architectures leveraging the platform capability to address key challenges in
application to atomic quantum systems. In particular, a novel concept is
introduced to enable robust, broadband generation of pure circularly polarized
radiation (>99.9% purity in relative intensity) from passive integrated
photonics. This concept takes advantage of the high refractive index contrast
enabled by the developed platform, and will be pursued in theory and
demonstrated in experiment. The work also explores novel hybrid schemes for
blue/ultraviolet parallel electro-optic control enabled by HfO2â€™s high index,
via integration with bulk beta barium borate. This work opens future directions
in efficient integrated short-wavelength nonlinear optics, as well as
architectures for integrated acousto-optics in the blue/ultraviolet. The program
addresses key challenges in scaling quantum systems, with advances spanning
photonic materials/processing, as well as in passive and active optical
functionalities. Due to the material's compatibility with CMOS fabrication, this
work stands to rapidly impact integrated photonics for atomic quantum systems
and at blue/ultraviolet wavelengths more broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.