* 2301790
* ERI: Magnetic nanoparticles to fight biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Irene Andreu Blanco, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Bacteria often grow in dense, sticky colonies on surfaces, called biofilms.
Biofilms can grow on diverse surfaces, such as medical implants, food containers
or boat hulls. Unfortunately, biofilms can cause issues, and their removal can
be difficult. For example, in the case of structures or parts of boats that are
underwater, divers need to scrub the underwater surfaces. This research proposes
using magnetic fields and magnetic nanoparticles to remove biofilms from a
distance. Magnetic nanoparticles under the action of magnetic fields that
alternate direction will rotate and move to follow the magnetic field,
generating mechanical forces and temperature increases. These two effects will
be explored by using different magnetic nanoparticles and applied magnetic field
combinations to remove biofilms of a model marine biofilm, and the approach will
be tested in natural marine biofilms. This project has the potential to yield
innovative biofilm-removal technologies for other sectors, including the food
industry and healthcare, impacting societal wellbeing and the US economy.
Additionally, the research will involve undergraduate minority students,
fostering their scientific interests and opening doors for future scientific
careers. Researchers will also create easy-to-understand demonstration kits for
public distribution featuring magnetic nanoparticles interacting with magnetic
fields.

Bacterial biofilms have a wide range of negative impacts on the economy,
society, and human health, such as food spoilage, damage to military vehicles,
and infections associated with medical implants. Marine bacterial biofilms grow
on various underwater surfaces, like boat hulls and bridge foundations, and can
be detrimental for their performance. While physical methods are often needed to
remove biofilms, these are not always possible or practical, especially in cases
where expensive and risky diving operations are required to access underwater
structures. This project will investigate the use of magnetic nanoparticles
under alternating magnetic fields to remove marine biofilms. Laboratory grown C.
marina biofilms will be used as a model. Different magnetic nanoparticle sizes,
shapes and surface coatings will be tested against distinct alternating magnetic
field regimes. The biofilm integrity will be evaluated by quantifying the
microrheology of the biofilm before and after treatment using dynamic magnetic
susceptibility methods, and by analyzing the spatial distribution of bacteria
and extracellular polymeric substances using fluorescence imaging. Once an
optimal regime for magnetic nanoparticle application and treatment has been
established, this approach will be tested with natural marine biofilms. The
project will include undergraduate students underrepresented in STEM fields,
increasing their involvement in scientific research. Additionally, a demo kit
will be created to showcase the potential applications of magnetic nanoparticles
in biomedicine. The kit will be used in open public events to increase science
literacy among the general population and to raise awareness of scientific
progress. This kit will also be used in recruitment events among diverse
populations, encouraging diversity and inclusion, generating excitement towards
the pursuit of STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.