* 2301648
* ABR: Genetic Technology Development and International Security Efforts: Renewal
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Noah Tamarkin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 140,844.00

Genomics has become increasingly important for law and policing, as evidenced by
the proliferation of national criminal DNA databases throughout the world. New
national criminal DNA databases, once limited to high-income countries, are
becoming widespread in middle-income countries and they are also beginning to be
established in low-income countries. But DNA databases require infrastructural
resources and expertise to implement and maintain. How are places that are
marked by capacity challenges and conditions of scarcity establishing and
running DNA databases under these conditions, and how might their strategies
inform the global future of this phenomenon? How does DNA become transformed
into something that is reliable and useful in national legal contexts and in
international security efforts, and what are the consequences for how science
and citizenship are lived and experienced? This research project will address
these questions by investigating the intersection between genomics and law,
related infrastructural investments, and the networks of people who must work
together to transform genetic data into legally legible evidence. Further, this
project supports the methods and data analysis training of two graduate
students.

This research is supported as an accomplishment-based renewal of highly
successful project exploring how the use of genetic technologies in criminal law
might change experiences and forms of citizenship as well as social and cultural
understandings of science and what constitutes reliable evidence. This research
extends that completed through a previous grant by further investigating global
criminal forensic genetics as an emerging and expanding citizenship formation
with interconnected local, national, and transnational influences and
implications. The research will take place in a middle-income context that has
been implementing and expanding a 2015 law that creates a criminal DNA database
for which the police force has primary responsibility. The project will use
ethnographic methodologies to consider how a cross-section of people from
diverse socioeconomic backgrounds who have different forms of expertise and
different ideas about the meaning of science and justice are brought together
through their roles in enacting investments in forensic genetics. The project
will include police, forensic laboratories, courtrooms, and NGOs and private
companies that contribute to forensic genetics training and advocacy. In this
research context investment in genomics for law enforcement is new and actively
expanding throughout the research period. Those current investments raise
important questions about the global scope and scale, and the local specificity
and variation, of intersections between genomics and law. This research
therefore offers an actively emerging view into how DNA comes to matter in new
ways as it moves out of research laboratories and into a broader public sphere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.