* 2301629
* ERI: Solubility-Boosting Effect of Lattice Impurities in Anisotropic Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Gerard Capellades Mendez, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 199,897.00

Understanding particle solubility is critical for the design of industrial
crystallizers, semiconductor manufacturing operations, and separation processes
such as reverse osmosis desalination, where unwanted scaling is an operational
challenge. It is an important design consideration in the synthesis of
pharmaceuticals where control of solubility is required for optimal drug
delivery. The lack of solubility control also can be a limiting factor in the
formulation of food products and diet supplements. Past studies of the
solubility of crystalline materials have focused on the effects of crystal
lattice structure and liquid composition on solubility. These studies have
largely ignored the role composition variations within individual crystals play
in solubility, likely due to the difficulty of measuring these variations. This
project will investigate whether compositional variations within a crystal can
result in different solubilities among the crystal facets, resulting in uneven
growth or dissolution within individual crystals. The research will challenge
current models of crystal growth and dissolution processes and will produce new
insights into how impurities are released from crystalline materials, creating
new routes to extracting potentially toxic impurities from pharmaceutical
products. The project will contribute to the education of ten to twenty
undergraduate students and one Ph.D. student, who will gain hands-on experience
with crystallization processes and analysis of crystalline materials, a skillset
valued in the pharmaceutical industry but rarely found in graduates joining the
U.S. workforce.

This project presents a new approach to studying the effect of lattice-
incorporated impurities on crystal solubility. The proposal is based on the
premise that crystals can exhibit differing degrees of composition anisotropy,
with certain regions being entirely responsible for hosting impurities. This
motivates the research plan to investigate the effect that lattice impurities
have on crystal form stability and solubility, that these properties should be
studied with respect to individual crystal facets and not on powders (of
crystals) as a whole. This project sets out to prove the hypothesis that a
single crystal may present multiple solubility values across its lattice, and
that those differences can be leveraged in the design of novel impurity
separation strategies. This research project is divided in two research aims. In
Aim 1, research will concentrate on characterizing anisotropy of impurities
within single crystals and investigating how impurity gradients affect
dissolution and growth. Aim 2 will then expand to the study of crystal
suspension aging dynamics by investigating how coexisting pure and impure
lattices affect the dissolution and growth behaviors during suspension aging.
The research will make use of model anisotropic systems with transparent solutes
and opaque impurities, where the presence and extent of anisotropy can be easily
studied. The proposed research is integrated with an education plan that will
provide undergraduate and graduate students with specialized skills in
separation processes and materials science, as well as with experience working
in multidisciplinary teams. The undergraduate students will be divided into two
groups, aligned with the two Aims of the research proposal, resulting in an
effective mechanism for integrating the PIâ€™s research and education efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.