* 2301411
* ERI: Data-Driven Analysis and Dynamic Modeling of Residential Power Demand Behavior: Using Long-Term Real-World Data from Rural Electric Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Long Zhao, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2025
* USD 198,740.00

As distributed energy resources (e.g., rooftop solar, energy storage) continue
to grow among households, more houses will act as virtual power plants, sending
electricity back to the power grid and significantly changing power system
operations. Existing load analysis and forecasting models fail to adequately
reflect consumer characteristics, which are crucial for understanding
residential power demand patterns. To improve power system reliability and
stability, this project introduces a novel data-driven approach to analyze and
explicitly model power demand behavior at the household level using real-world
long-term data. This research has several significant impacts on both theory and
practice. First, the proposed model can be readily expanded to other domains,
such as water usage. Second, it significantly contributes to the marketing
literature by reconciling mixed findings on incentive effectiveness in changing
consumer behavior, particularly in green consumption. Third, a new "Smart Grid
and Data Science" curriculum will be developed, fostering student interest in
combining power engineering and social science. Annual data-driven modeling
competitions for K-12 students will be organized to encourage more students,
especially females, to study power engineering and data science. A joint power
engineering program will be developed to promote STEM research and education,
increasing Native American representation in STEM careers. This project can help
electric co-ops develop behavior-based demand response programs, reducing peak
demand charges and contributing to global decarbonization goals. Finally, the
project supports U.S. electric utilities in creating effective incentive
programs that ensure both firm profit and consumers’ sustainable use of
electricity.

The research goal is to develop a new data-driven approach to reveal macro- and
micro-residential power demand patterns, through matching 15-minute resolution
smart meter data with consumer surveys, along with local parcel data and
meteorological data, to achieve a comprehensive understanding of residential
power demand behavior at a disaggregated level. This will lay the foundation for
research focused on data-driven analysis and modeling for next-generation power
grids. The key tool employed in the project is utilizing the Singular-Value-
Decomposition (SVD) to identify and characterize power demand behavior. An Eigen
Demand Behavior Extraction method, based on SVD, is proposed for characterizing
demand behavior using 15-minute smart meter data. The primary contribution of
this project will be the development of a data-driven Temperature-Time-Day-based
(TTD) model for residential power demand behavior, relying solely on real-world
data. The power demand behavior will be represented as a discrete-time dynamical
system with outdoor temperature and time of a day coordinates evolving over
days.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.