* 2301884
* ERI: Harnessing Quantum-Classical Computing with a Cloud-Edge Framework for Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Ying Mao, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,708.00

Cloud-Edge computing for Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) and Quantum Computing have
evolved independently, each addressing unique challenges and opportunities.
Cloud-Edge-CPS research has predominantly focused on using classical resources,
with limited exploration of the potential benefits that quantum-equipped devices
may offer. This leaves a knowledge gap in understanding how quantum technologies
could enhance Cloud-Edge-CPS performance and capabilities. Simultaneously, the
quantum computing community has primarily focused on developing high-qubit,
stable hardware and refining the underlying technology, with insufficient
attention to broadening the application scenarios for low-qubit quantum
machines, which are more accessible in the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) era. This project aims to bridge the gap between these research domains
by incorporating quantum-equipped devices, such as quantum edge nodes and
quantum clouds, into a Cloud-Edge collaborative computing framework. It
highlights the potential of low-qubit quantum machines in resource-constrained
environments and introduces them to novel usage scenarios. Moreover, it fosters
collaboration between various research and development communities, encompassing
cloud-edge computing, cyber-physical systems, and quantum computing. The
proposed quantum-classical system emphasizes extensibility, creating a
supportive environment for researchers and engineers from these communities,
ultimately stimulating innovation and cooperation across these disciplines. It
will create opportunities for students to develop their quantum literacy at an
underrepresented institution.

This project will develop a quantum-equipped Cloud-Edge collaborative computing
framework to effectively manage heterogeneous participants, network channels,
and quantum noise on resource-constrained devices. The proposed framework
consists of three primary components: (i) cloud servers located in remote data
centers, providing ample quantum and classical resources; (ii) Edge nodes
positioned near end devices with fewer resources than clouds, which can be
categorized into two types - quantum-classical and classical-only edges; and
(iii) End devices that act as system consumers, possessing minimal resources and
potentially equipped with quantum processors. Based on the framework, it
provides various modules, including end device registration, resource
management, task modeling, and offloading estimation, exploring the potential
advantages derived from quantum features such as superposition, entanglements,
and teleportation. Specifically, the system builds a client profile for each end
device. When a computing job arrives, it models a specific task and generates
two execution plans, quantum-classical and classical-only. Based on predefined
quantum services that have the potential to provide significant benefits to end
devices (e.g., quadratic or exponential speedups), the system predicts the task
execution time according to the plans and selects the one that satisfies the
client's constraints and maximizes overall system performance. Due to the
limited access to quantum machines, the project will implement a distributed
quantum-classical Cloud-Edge-CPS simulator to conduct large-scale, cloud-based
experiments and support a high degree of heterogeneity. Additionally, it will
develop a runtime sampler to study quantum noise effects on resource-constrained
NISQ machines, detailing how clouds may help manage inherent noise and errors.
Ultimately, this project aims to enhance the performance, efficiency, and
capabilities of Cloud-Edge collaborative computing systems by incorporating
quantum-equipped devices and investigating their potential benefits in various
application scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.