* 2301815
* ERI: Investigating different types of drought across snowy regions and their impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Laurie Huning, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to advance knowledge of drought characteristics in snowy areas
needed for sustainably managing water resources. Gaps exist in understanding how
a drought propagates and intensifies across different components of the water
cycle, especially in snowy, mountainous areas. Seasonal snowmelt supplies
millions of people across the western U.S. with a significant fraction of their
water resources. This project aims to address open questions by characterizing
the rate of drought onset, its drivers, and how these factors influence drought
impacts. Rates of propagation among different types of droughts (e.g., a lack of
snow water equivalent [snow drought], streamflow [hydrological drought], and
soil moisture [agricultural drought]) will be quantified. The severity,
duration, timing, and intensification rate of how one type of drought influences
the characteristics and lag of another will be studied. How these relationships
vary in space and time using state-of-the-art data, models, and observations
will be elucidated. Findings from this research are targeted to help build more
sustainable communities, developing climate resilient infrastructure and
managing water resources in areas where snow is a vital freshwater resource.

The project will develop a new multivariate framework for understanding drought
characteristics and propagation in snowy areas. Investigating the impact of snow
variability, drivers of drought, and the rate of drought onset will inform water
management and drought monitoring. Given the lag between snow and streamflow
deficits, this analysis aims to yield insight into drought prediction. The
project will assess how and to what extent the onset rate, drivers of snow
drought, and antecedent conditions will influence the amount of water in other
states/fluxes (e.g., soil moisture, runoff). Also, new multivariate drought
indices from this research will enable quantification of drought severity in
snowy areas across the globe, which will be critical in a warming climate.
Findings and methods are expected to improve streamflow forecasts, sustainable
water resources management and engineering, and drought assessment at sub-
seasonal and interannual time scales. Results will be shared with the broader
community via presentations at scientific meetings, peer-reviewed journal
publications, and online data repositories (e.g., CUAHSIâ€™s Hydroshare). Since
snow and drought impact numerous areas beyond water management and engineering,
findings should impact other sectors of society and guide decision making in
agriculture, economics, and urban planning. The multivariate drought frameworks
from this research will be freely provided to the public so water agencies,
scientists, and engineers can benefit from their application. Also, a hands-on
Drought Education Toolbox (DET) to integrate novel snow and drought research
into engineering education will be developed. DET allows users to study the role
of snow in drought. The PI works with existing programs that promote diversity
in STEM and the development of minority students at California State University,
Long Beach, to mentor underrepresented students in research. The project will
train undergraduate and graduate students in hydrology, water resources
engineering, and drought and multivariate data analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.