* 2301816
* ERI: Human-Inspired Robotic Assistance to Prevent Slip-Induced Falls
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mitja Trkov, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project will contribute new knowledge
in the field of prevention of human falls, which is a significant global health
problem, and serve the national interest by promoting the progress of science
and advancing national health and welfare. The project will transform existing
slip and fall prevention approaches as it deviates from existing passive
approaches, which include monitoring the environmental factors and training
human neuromuscular slip response. This award supports fundamental research to
provide needed knowledge for development of active fall prevention
methodologies. Specifically, this research will demonstrate that slip-induced
falls can be prevented by using a wearable device that provides external
mechanical assistance to assist subjects during balance recovery and lead to new
resulting balance recovery strategies of subjects that would not be possible
without the device. Development of active fall prevention strategies can shift
the paradigm of fall prevention approaches that can result in a significant
reduction of falls and fall related injuries. The results of this research have
the potential to impact the healthcare sector by improving the quality of life
of the fall-prone population and reduce the associated economic and societal
costs due to falls.

This project focuses on the fundamental study of locomotor stability strategies
during gait perturbations and human co-adaptation to the external assistance
from robotic devices to prevent falls. Deviating from passive slip-and-fall
prevention approaches and existing empirically derived controllers, this
research will enable development of a complete control framework for active slip
prevention using hip and knee exoskeleton. The main objectives of this project
are: (1) to establish a fundamental understanding of the active fall prevention
strategies through human-exoskeleton cooperation during gait perturbations, and
(2) to create a novel bidirectional control framework enabling symbiosis and
transfer learning between human and device leading to emergent behavior during
slip recoveries. The control framework will integrate theoretical bipedal
stability and human-inspired intersegmental coordination with the human motor
control and neuromuscular responses. This project will advance our fundamental
understanding on preventing slip-induced falls and establish tools to design
controllers for safe and efficient assistive fall preventive strategies. This
research can impact cooperative, bidirectional controller designs of other
assistive device, exoskeletons, prosthesis, and robotic bipedal walkers in
robotics and rehabilitation engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.