* 2301707
* ERI: Fault-Tolerant Monitoring of Moving Clusters of Targets using Collaborative Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Gustavo Vejarano, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 196,993.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, have successfully been used to monitor
ground activity. However, using small drones for extended periods of time is not
yet possible, thus limiting their implementation. For instance, small
quadcopters that can be easily transported and deployed do not exceed forty
minutes of flying time in most cases and are susceptible to unexpected failure
such as damage from natural hazards. On the other hand, robust quadcopters
capable of longer flying times have larger dimensions and weight that prohibit
ease of deployment. As an alternative to a single robust drone, this Engineering
Research Initiation (ERI) award will support fundamental research to enable a
network of small drones to monitor ground activity with the goal of
uninterrupted operation and fault tolerance by sharing information with one
another including knowledge of targets detected. A demonstration of this concept
will be made through wildfire monitoring in collaboration with the US Forest
Service. This award will sustain research at a predominantly undergraduate
institution. Both undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the
research effort.

The monitoring problem under consideration in this research is related to the
well-known multiple traveling salesman problem and its variants, namely Vehicle
Routing Problem with Time Window and Multiple Depot Drone Routing Problem.
However, the solution to these routing problems cannot be used as-is because
they would consider drone tours that visit each cluster (region) only once, not
periodically. Moreover, they do not consider fault tolerance. This research aims
at a fault-tolerant solution that (1) characterizes target clusters via
distributed estimation of Gaussian Mixture Models, (2) coordinates flight
formations and search paths using game theory to avoid central control, and (3)
performs point set registration of adjacent images from drones to increase
accuracy of target locations. The research will not only promote progress in
wildfire monitoring but also for any other natural or human activity that can be
characterized with Gaussian Mixture Models.

This project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in
Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering
(ENG) and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.