* 2301243
* ERI: Impact of pore-scale heterogeneity on precipitation and transport in porous media
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Shima Parsa, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,955.00

The precipitation of solutes in porous structures and subsurface systems can
cause a cascade of unexpected issues, including clogging of pores, as in the
salt precipitation upon injection of CO2 in a brine aquifer. This award aims to
investigate the precipitation of water-soluble polymers in porous media and the
impact of medium heterogeneity on precipitation and transport across the medium.
Soft lithography will be used to fabricate two-dimensional porous environments
with different heterogeneities. Using optical microscopy, the changes in network
structure and flow distribution will be monitored upon injection of antisolvent
to precipitate the polymer. These studies will reveal how precipitation and
clogging regulate the flow distribution in the network of connected pores. The
broader impacts of this award include training graduate students and
undergraduates to study these timely problems and to develop a quantitative
understanding of transport in porous media. It will also enable new
demonstrations to inspire and engage K-12 students in the Science lessons
delivered at the local Boys and Girls Club.

This award will develop new experimental techniques and improved mathematical
models to generate a fundamental understanding of reactive transport in porous
media. The goal is to investigate how medium heterogeneity and dynamic network
changes due to precipitation impact long-term advection and reaction processes
in porous media. The following systematic aims are considered: 1) the study of
the role of local medium heterogeneity in the transition between advection-
dominated and reaction-dominated regimes, and 2) the self-limiting transport of
solute due to precipitation. The correlation between advection and precipitation
rates with the time scale of the response of the system to local changes will be
used to predict clogging due to reactive transport. The results will provide
foundational models of reactive transport based on bulk transport properties
accessible in industrial operations to maintain percolation and avoid clogging.
More broadly, this award will advance the understanding of self-regulating
growth at the interface of two miscible fluids in a confined and heterogeneous
environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.