* 2301248
* Collaborative Research: The Smart Playground: Computational Thinking through Robotics in Early Childhood
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Marina Bers, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2027
* USD 348,425.00

Technology and computing are increasingly central in the lives of children, and
building foundational skills in computational thinking in the early years is a
national imperative. Young children can learn best through play and in
educational environments that sustain their cultural practices and identities.
This Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) project will co-create and
study an outdoor robotic-augmented playground called the “Smart Playground” and
a corresponding series of classroom lessons. The Smart Playground will be co-
designed with Latinx families and educators to engage young children
(kindergarten) in developing computational thinking skills and learning about
robotics in a physical environment using a culturally sustaining approach. The
project will retrofit existing playgrounds in a low-income, predominantly Latinx
school district with circuit boards, sensors, and actuators. These boards will
allow young children to program their playground to interact with them in
different ways. By programming activities that use the playground structures,
children will learn foundational computational thinking skills. Further, through
co-designing with Latinx families and educators the project will center the
technology and activities in families’ routines, values, and cultural funds of
knowledge. Research and evaluation will examine whether exposure to the Smart
Playground and corresponding classroom activities have an impact on the
development of computational thinking in young children. This project will
contribute to the emerging field of robotics in early childhood education by
addressing the need for new approaches to teach with and about technology in a
developmentally appropriate and culturally sustaining way. This work will
increase awareness of early robotics, develop children’s computational thinking
skills and STEM identities, and integrate learning opportunities throughout
children’s experiences in playgrounds, classrooms, and public spaces. The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This project aims to create and test an innovative educational approach for
bringing STEM learning experiences to underserved youth. Using a culturally
sustaining approach, this project will co-design, augment, and evaluate the
Smart Playground to promote computational thinking with approximately 500 Latinx
kindergarten students and their teachers and families from Santa Ana, CA. Using
a Design Based Implementation Research approach and a variety of participatory
design techniques, this project will create several prototypes of the Smart
Playground and corresponding classroom activities. This work is guided by the
following research questions: 1.) What is the impact of engaging with the Smart
Playground on children’s computational thinking? 2.) How do varied design
elements in the Smart Playground support the development of different aspects of
computational thinking among children? 3.) In what ways do Latinx children,
teachers, and families in Santa Ana propose to integrate local, cultural, and
learning practices into the Smart Playground during co-design activities? A wide
range of quantitative and qualitative data governing student gains in
computational thinking during baseline, implementation, and follow-up phases
will inform the iterative process of design-test-redesign. The project will also
collect, transcribe, and analyze observations, interviews, and meeting records
to develop thematic insights into culturally sustaining designs and re-design of
the Smart Playground elements. Ultimately, this project will result in an
evidenced based set of prototypes and lessons that promote computational
thinking and build from the cultural strengths of Latinx children. Designs and
lessons will prioritize usable and scalable materials to create playful
computational thinking opportunities in classrooms and playgrounds across the
country and the world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.