* 2301377
* Enhancing cellulase activity through single-molecule imaging and protein engineering as a testbed for understanding and improving enzymatic deconstruction of insoluble substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Charles Anderson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2026
* USD 629,976.00

Plant-derived cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer on Earth. Cellulose is
used to make paper, clothing, and building materials. It is composed of chains
of glucose molecules. Cellulases are enzymes that cut these chains into their
sugar building blocks. One approach for reducing our reliance on fossil fuels is
to digest abundant, non-food plant materials like switchgrass and discarded corn
stalks into sugar molecules. These can be fermented into renewable biofuels. The
objective of this project is to use cutting-edge light microscopy to better
understand how cellulases work. The knowledge generated would be used to design
and test enzymes that may be more efficient, lowering the cost and increasing
the availability of renewable energy. In parallel with research, educational
materials to expose plant biology students to single-molecule biophysics and
biophysics students to plant biology will be developed and delivered. To
strengthen and increase the diversity of the bioeconomy workforce, students from
underrepresented populations will be actively recruited to participate in the
research project.

The ability of cellulases to break down plant cell walls is hindered by the
crystallinity of cellulose. The presence of other polymers such as lignin and
xylans are thought to coat cellulose and thus block access by cellulase enzymes.
This project will combine single-molecule fluorescence tracking, computational
modeling, and protein engineering to investigate cellulase mechanisms. The
proposed experiments build on ongoing work in which the investigators
constructed a custom multimodal microscope and used it to track cellulases
moving along cellulose with nanometer-scale precision. The work is divided into
three Aims that explore specific aspects of cellulase activity. The goal of Aim
1 is to uncover the key principles that regulate substrate binding and threading
of the cellulose polymer strand into the catalytic tunnel of the cellulase
enzyme to initiate cellulose deconstruction. The goal of Aim 2 is to uncover how
the substrate affinity and turnover rate of cellulases are tuned to maximize the
enzymeâ€™s catalytic activity while minimizing product inhibition and premature
substrate release. The goal of Aim 3 is to identify mechanisms by which
cellulases navigate complex mixtures of biopolymers, while achieving specific
digestion of their cellulase substrate, avoiding off-target binding, and
overcoming roadblocks imposed by cell wall complexity that hamper cellulose
degradation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.