* 2301589
* ERI: Memristor-based Neuromorphic Circuit Design for Closed-Loop Deep Brain Stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Hongyu An, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2025
* USD 198,463.00

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a brain disorder affecting millions of patients
worldwide each year. PD patients experience motor symptoms including
uncontrolled shaking or rigid muscles that may feel tight and difficult to move.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an effective therapy used to treat motor
symptoms of PD. DBS is a surgical procedure that involves placing a signal
generator in the chest to send electrical pulses to a specific region of the
brain. These electrical pulses from the signal generator control motor symptoms
by affecting the cells in the brain. The DBS system is life-changing for
patients, but the continuous and rigid electrical pulses cause unwanted side
effects, such as potentially blocking blood flow. Recently, scientists have
developed a new DBS system called Closed-Loop DBS (CL-DBS) where the generator
can send various electrical pulses back to the brain depending on PD symptoms to
avoid side effects. One challenge for a CL-DBS system is it requires a powerful
computer to generate the expected and various electrical pulses. However, these
powerful computers cannot be placed in the chest of patients due to their large
size. To solve this issue, this project aims to design a new type of computer
called a neuromorphic chip. This chip mimics human brains by using small spiking
signals for calculations to realize high energy efficiency. This new
neuromorphic chip will make CL-DBS smarter, smaller, and lighter, greatly
benefiting all PD patients. The project provides a unique opportunity for
college and high school students from the Copper Country region in the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan to participate in interdisciplinary research on
neuroscience, Parkinsonâ€™s disease, brain rehabilitation, artificial
intelligence, and microchip design.

The project aims to design a neuromorphic CL-DBS chip consisting of electronic
neurons and memristive synapses that adapts to user symptoms while substantially
lowering power consumption and device size. The severity of PD symptoms is
indicated by beta oscillations from the brain. Two Spiking Neural Networks (SNN)
will be placed at the feedforward and feedback branches of the closed-loop
system to recognize PD symptoms and generate stimulation signals accordingly.
The neurons and synapses in these SNNs will be implemented using complementary
metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology and memristors. The project will
focus on two tasks: (1) memristive synapse design; and (2) electronic neuron
design. Additionally, peripheral circuitries, including bandpass filters, low-
noise amplifiers, and reading/writing circuits, will be developed. The chip will
be taped out for further evaluation by comparing it with other CL-DBS systems
using different computational hardware, including Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) and Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), based on 1) power
consumption; 2) response time; 3) chip area. This research on neuromorphic
medical chips will significantly benefit the development of energy-efficient and
smart implantable medical devices by reducing their size, weight, and energy
budget while making them more intelligent and adaptive.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.