* 2301691
* ERI: Developing Ductility through Replaceable Concrete Anchorage Connections for Improved Seismic Performance of Mass Timber Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Gloria Faraone, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,638.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award supports research to develop an
improved seismic resistant timber-concrete connection using replaceable ductile-
anchor rods for rapid post-earthquake repair. Of growing interest in the United
States, mass timber buildings hold a relevant place in the history of world
architecture and construction. To meet the modern design philosophy in regions
vulnerable to seismic hazards, mass timber buildings are designed to remain safe
during large earthquakes by focusing damage, ductility, and seismic energy
dissipation in the connections. However, these mechanisms inevitably induce
building damage and affect the overall building post-earthquake occupancy,
functionality, and repairability, ultimately impacting community resiliency. The
improved timber-concrete connection will mitigate the impact of seismic damage
in timber structural components and enhance seismic resiliency by enabling a
reliable ductile mechanism to dissipate energy in the anchor connecting timber
components to the concrete footing and allowing replacement of the stretched
anchor rod after damage. Component testing will investigate the seismic behavior
of timber-concrete connections and a numerical study will expand these findings
to evaluate additional design parameters toward the development of design
suggestions and modeling recommendations suitable for engineering practice. The
research activities will be incorporated into an in-class course module in
structural engineering and will engage underrepresented groups in engineering
through outreach programs. Project data will be archived and made publicly
available in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

The main mechanisms of failure observed in timber-concrete connections include
plastic deformations of the small diameter fasteners connecting the steel plates
to the timber component and plasticization of the steel plate itself, with
consequent damage in the attached timber element. The improved ductile-anchor
connection focuses on the concept of anchor deformation to promote overall
enhanced structural robustness, ductility, and strength, limiting the damage in
the plate and in the connected timber component and accelerating the repair of
timber buildings in post-earthquake scenarios. The project research objectives
include exploring (1) the seismic behavior of the ductile-anchor connection and
its residual capacity after repair, and (2) analytical methods relating the
overall structural seismic demand to the connection capacity. Simulated seismic
tests of timber-concrete connection prototypes with ductile anchor and
replaceable thread rod will be conducted to investigate the new connection
design and the effect of anchor stretch length on the overall performance of the
connection. The response of a broader range of connection configurations will be
studied using experimentally validated finite-element analysis to inform design
and modeling guidelines for practicing engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.