* 2301882
* ERI: Vehicle-to-Grid applied to Demand Response
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Daniela Wolter Ferreira Touma, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,248.00

The use of electric vehicles (EVs) as well as renewable energy as power sources
for consumers will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Moreover, power utility
companies encourage consumers to reduce their consumption during peak-hours
(when most consumers use most power). Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) is a new technology
that allows EV owners to use their EV batteries to power their homes while
connected to the grid. Thus, EVs with V2G technology will become attractive for
consumers because their EV batteries can help to reduce their power demand from
the utility company at peak-hours. Artificial Intelligence algorithms are
powerful tools for forecasting complex properties and have been extensively
researched for applications in several areas of Power Systems. The proposed
research will answer important questions regarding the influence of V2G on
consumer power demand, using the Mobile, Alabama area as an example market so
that realistic financial and environmental considerations are used in the
simulations. The outcomes of this research will boost the motivation for
consumers to use V2G to reduce peak power demands, and will provide information
on making V2G more attractive, advancing national prosperity. The results from
this award will be disseminated to academic, community and industry stakeholders
through newspapers, technical peer-reviewed journal articles and conference
articles and reports, participation in conferences, and presentations in
webinars.

The goal of the project is to investigate the advantages and challenges of V2G
to support Demand Response (DR), by creating short-term Artificial Intelligence
(AI) algorithms to predict EV load demand statuses for a few minutes and hours
ahead, and a Simulation system to verify the best way to utilize EVs for DR and
evaluate the means to overcome challenges. An initial investigation of existing
EVs in the Mobile, Alabama region and their usage and power characteristics will
be used to verify the pros and cons of V2G and to supply data to AI algorithms
that will be designed to predict the EV characteristics needed to support DR.
The project will be developed in two phases: in Phase I, data about existing EVs
in the region will be collected and analyzed and a simulation will be developed;
in Phase II, the AI algorithms will be developed along with a workshop involving
ten high-school students to be selected from underrepresenting groups. This
workshop will support the dissemination of the project results, and will clarify
to the general public some common misconceptions related to EVs, V2G and DR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.