* 2301338
* Collaborative Research: SHINE--Exploring Reconnection-Driven Solar Explosive Events in Different Regimes through Modeling and Observation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Chuanfei Dong, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 100,147.00

Magnetic reconnection is the mechanism driving explosions on the Sun ranging
from nanoflares, ultraviolet bursts, to inter-planetary sized coronal mass
ejections. At the core of reconnection is a current sheet where magnetic energy
is converted to plasma kinetic energy. This project investigates how plasmoid
instabilities lead to reconnection and solar explosions. Magnetic reconnection
is a primary driver of space weather and an important fundamental physical
process important to space physics, fusion science, and astrophysics. The work
supports research of mid-career and early career scientists, including graduate
student support. The team will develop lectures to undergraduate students from
under-represented groups through NASAâ€™s Heliophysics Summer School.

Recent theoretical analyses and numerical simulations predict that reconnection
current sheets can spontaneously become unstable to the plasmoid instability.
The plasmoid instability fractures the reconnecting current sheet into secondary
current sheets, plasmoids, and flux ropes, facilitating the onset of fast
reconnection. Depending on the collisionality and global system size in relation
to kinetic scales, plasmoid-mediated re- connection can result in a variety of
dynamical behaviors. Appropriately capturing critical properties of the
dynamical behaviors is crucial for modeling explosive events. This project will
develop a deeper understanding of the onset and saturation of plasmoid-mediated
fast reconnection in various regimes through a concerted interdisciplinary
effort of numerical simulation and solar observation. This is accomplished by:
(1) Performing numerical simulations of solar explosive events including large-
scale coronal mass ejections in the solar corona and ultraviolet burst events in
the lower solar atmosphere. These events cover a broad range of length scales,
plasma densities, and temperatures, corresponding to reconnection in different
parameter regimes. Simulation results will be compared with observations. (2)
Investigating the onset and saturation of fast reconnection in different
parameter regimes. To establish a basic understanding of how various models
behave in different regimes, the team will conduct 2D and 3D simulations of
reconnection in a well-controlled current sheet using resistive
magnetohydrodyamic (MHD), Hall MHD, and multi-moment multi-fluid codes to test
how microscopic physics descriptions affect the onset and saturation of fast
reconnection at large, observable scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.