* 2301341
* Research Initiation: Facilitating Knowledge Transfer within Engineering Curricula
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Alexander De Rosa, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,998.00

Engineering students often have difficulty applying ideas from one course to
another and using their learning in new ways. The students do not see the same
links between their classes that their teachers see. This difficulty becomes a
problem when these students go into the workplace and need to use their
knowledge and learning in new ways for their career. We need to better
understand why students face these problems and to find ways to help students
transfer their learning to new settings. In this research, we will first seek to
understand why students have problems applying their knowledge. We will then
develop new ways to teach students that help them better transfer their
learning. These new ways of teaching will be tested in order to show their
effectiveness before being used to help teach future students. This work will
increase our understanding of how to better prepare engineering students to
apply their knowledge in their career.

Although it is well-established that students have difficulty transferring
theory and skills between courses in their undergraduate curriculum, many
college-level courses only concern material relating to the course itself and do
not cover how this material might be used elsewhere. It is unsurprising, then,
that students struggle to transfer and integrate knowledge from multiple areas
into new problems as part of capstone design courses, for example, or in their
careers. The proposed investigation builds on work in the field of knowledge
transfer which has noted the problems students often face in applying their
understanding in new and unfamiliar situations. Various authors in both
cognitive and disciplinary sciences have discussed these difficulties and noted
the need to develop tools and techniques for promoting knowledge transfer, as
well as to help students develop cross-course connections. This work will
address the barriers to knowledge transfer, and crucially develop the needed
activities and practices for promoting transfer by answering the following
research questions: (1) What are the primary challenges experienced by students
when tasked with transferring theory and skills from prior courses, specifically
mathematics and physics? (2) What methods of prior knowledge activation are most
effective in enabling students to apply this prior knowledge in new areas of
study? In this investigation, the prior knowledge and motivation of students
will be assessed using concept maps, concept inventories, and motivational
surveys. Various in-class activities developed to support and enable knowledge
transfer will then be piloted and assessed. The effectiveness of these
activities will be assessed by examining student ability to transfer the
knowledge required to solve these specially designed problems and by using
surveys. Overall, this study will help to improve our understanding of the
barriers to knowledge transfer, as well as developing promising practices that
promote transfer. The activities, teaching practices, and techniques developed
in this study will address the need for these tools identified in the
literature. These promising practices can then be used to better inform teaching
methods that aid the formation of engineers who are better equipped to transfer
their knowledge across a broad range of applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.