* 2301655
* AccelNet-Implementation: Global Ecosystem Research Infrastructure (GERI): Harmonizing Data to address Ecological Drought
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Ruddell, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,606,028.00

Drought is increasingly becoming more common due to climate change, human water
usage, and changes in land use. It has significant impacts on ecosystems and
people's well-being, but there is still much we don't know about its effects on
ecosystems and society. To deepen our understanding, Environmental Research
Infrastructures (ERIs) have been established worldwide to collect critical data.
These ERIs provide a unique opportunity to study how drought and other
environmental changes impact nature across different regions and over extended
periods of time. Six of these ERIs from different parts of the world have come
together to form the Global Ecosystem Research Infrastructure (GERI). GERI's
objective is to foster collaboration and information sharing among these
networks. The aim is to establish effective communication pathways between
different countries and cultures. This proposal builds upon their previous work
and seeks to capitalize on this global collaboration in several ways: Firstly,
this work aims to strengthen and expand international collaborations by working
closely with other research networks. The second focus will be on studying
drought on a global scale using the data shared across the partner ERIs. This
approach will enable them to gain insights into how drought impacts ecosystems
worldwide. Thirdly, this project seeks to accelerate scientific discoveries by
bringing scientists and stakeholders from different countries together. Finally,
we will train and support the next generation of researchers by organizing
workshops and creating more opportunities for collaboration. Overall, this
collaboration between research networks will contribute to a better
understanding of the effects of drought on ecosystems and human life by
facilitating the exchange of knowledge and data on a global scale.

Increasingly influenced by anthropogenic climate change, human water use, and
expanding land-use change, drought is entering unfamiliar territory. Despite the
influence of drought on ecosystem function, and human well-being, there are
significant uncertainties in our understanding of the impacts of drought for
ecosystems and humanity. Over the past decade, large Environmental Research
Infrastructures (ERIs) have been implemented around the world to drive
understanding of the responses of the biosphere to environmental change. These
emergent ERIs now provide a unique opportunity to advance our understanding of
ecological processes, such as drought, across continents, decades, and
disciplinary boundaries. Against this backdrop, six ERIs from around the world
have come together to establish an international network-to-network
collaboration – the Global Ecosystem Research Infrastructure (GERI). GERI
activities have focused on garnering support and establishing baseline pathways
for communications across continents and cultures. This proposal expands upon
previous activities to realize the power of global network to network
collaborations by: (i) further developing and leveraging strategic international
network-to-network collaborations via engaging new partners in Central America
and continuing existing partnerships, (ii) demonstrating the utility of
harmonized GERI data via a strategic initial focus on ecological drought at a
global scale, (iii) accelerating scientific discovery by bringing together
international stakeholders and researchers to guide the harmonization of these
data and use them to advance knowledge, and (iv) preparing the next generation
of researchers in this network-of-network approach via workshops, training, and
enhanced opportunities for collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.