* 2301161
* Advanced Technological Education in Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bryan Coddington, BLACKHAWK TECHNICAL COLLEGE DISTRICT
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 345,365.00

As manufacturing continues to become more technologically advanced regionally
and nationwide, industry has indicated that many more skilled technicians are
needed to maintain, support, and implement these advancements. With an aging
workforce moving into retirement, companies will need job-ready graduates who
are capable of working independently within six months of employment rather than
the typical 1-2 years. This project will research the effectiveness of
implementing work-based learning in a technical education setting by shortening
the time required for graduates to be job-ready and confident in their
abilities. Over the 3-year project, 57 students will be recruited to complete
credit-bearing courses in one of two cohorts that will result in an associate
level degree within the manufacturing field of mechatronics. Through
collaboration with a 20-member advisory council, and guidance from a Business
Industry & Leadership Team (BILT) key competencies will be defined and
implemented into the work-based learning courses that will utilize a faculty and
student designed automated manufacturing cell to simulate real world work
experience. The first cohort will complete the degree using the current courses
while a second cohort will have select courses replaced with work-based learning
to make up the two research groups. A skills assessment will be developed to
measure the effectiveness of the two instructional methodologies and inform the
need for future work. Because Blackhawk Technical College has a significant
number of non-traditional students in the mechatronics program, this project has
the potential to increase the number of workers who are underrepresented in STEM
related fields. This project will also provide valuable insight into the
effectiveness of work-based learning in preparing students for gainful
employment.

The goal of the project is to shorten the time required for graduates to become
confident in their skills and be capable of working independently through
relevant classwork and work-based learning experiences. 57 students are expected
to enroll over the 3-years of the project. The first cohort (A) will consist of
half of the students and will complete the credit-bearing coursework in its
current form, as a control, while another cohort (B), will have four, single-
credit courses replaced with 288 hours of work-based instruction. Cohort B will
also have a mini capstone project added to select courses to further enhance
hands-on learning opportunities. Qualitative and quantitative data will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the work-based learning modality with results
being shared regionally across the Wisconsin Technical College System and
nationally through NSF ATE conferences. Collaboration between faculty, advisory
council, industry partners, and the Business and Industry Leadership Team will
provide students with relevant and up-to-date information on advanced technology
within the workplace. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.