* 2301766
* ERI: Manufacturing USA: Additive Manufacturing of Iron based Shape Memory Alloy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Ala Qattawi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,989.00

Advances in additive manufacturing have enabled the processing of functionally
graded materials and shape memory alloy systems that were previously difficult
to process using conventional methods. This Engineering Research Initiation
(ERI) grant will support fundamental research in the fabrication of iron-based
shape memory alloy using heat-assisted additive manufacturing, which will lay
the theoretical foundation for material design and manufacturing. The research
outcome will enable new industrial applications that are sensitive to extreme
temperatures, such as batteries, biomedical devices, robotics, and others.
Partnership with LIFT Manufacturing USA center will offer training opportunities
to graduate students, promote undergraduate research and outreach to diverse
groups of younger students. This grant will impact the manufacturing industry by
facilitating the implementation of metal additive manufacturing and promoting
its consistency, while training future leaders of advanced manufacturing.

Compared to well-studied nickel titanium (NiTi) shape memory alloy systems,
iron-based shape memory alloys offer a higher strain recovery percentage and
enable new strain recovery behavior that is less dependent on the environment
temperature. The cost of iron-based shape memory alloy is significantly lower
compared to its NiTi counterpart. However, the processing of iron-based shape
memory alloy using additive manufacturing is not well understood. This research
aims to understand the effect of processing parameters and material composition
on fabrication of iron-based shape memory alloys. The project includes three
research tasks: (1) understanding the impact of additive manufacturing
processing parameters on the mechanical properties of fabricated iron-based
shape memory alloy; (2) identifying the transformation temperatures and strain
recovery behavior, as well as their relationship to the material composition,
(3) developing an in-situ thermal tomography monitoring and modeling framework
for additively manufactured iron-based shape memory alloys to define tailored
material properties and responses. The research will fill the knowledge gap
needed to design iron-based shape memory alloys amenable to additive
manufacturing and advance the understanding of strain recovery behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.