* 2301709
* Investigating the role of microbubbles and focused ultrasound in tissue temperature elevation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Aswin Gnanaskandan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 274,975.00

High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is an emerging therapeutic modality
currently being explored for targeted drug delivery by mild hyperthermia,
targeted ablation of benign tumors, such as uterine fibroids and malignant
tumors in the prostate, liver, kidney, pancreas, or bone. However, delivering
sufficient acoustic energy past certain anatomical constraints (i.e., bones and
dense tissue) has been a challenge that prevented HIFU from being more widely
applicable. For instance, magnetic resonance guided HIFU has been used for
treatment of essential tremor, which requires high acoustic intensities to
overcome the amount of sound that is absorbed or reflected by the skull. This
increase in acoustic intensities also increases the heating outside the focus
and the targeted region, potentially leading to burns in the skin and
subcutaneous fat. Therefore, there is a need for a method to elevate temperature
locally with HIFU at lower acoustic intensities to minimize collateral damage.
Bubble-enhanced heating (BEH), administration of contrast agent microbubbles
during HIFU, can mitigate this challenge as microbubble cavitation enhances the
acoustic energy conversion process, enabling heat generation with less acoustic
energy. The main goal of this project is to enhance the fundamental
understanding of how microbubbles help in achieving increased temperature
elevation in tissues in the presence of focused ultrasound. The project will
also encompass significant educational activities including undergraduate
research projects and outreach activities for high school students.

The technical goal of the proposed research is to use a combined experimental
and numerical study to understand and quantify the interaction of focused
ultrasound with a cloud of encapsulated microbubble contrast agents. A novel
well controlled in vitro experimental setup will be developed to achieve focal
heating in tissue phantoms both in the presence and absence of microbubbles. The
experimental data in the form of temperature and pressure at various spatial and
temporal points will be used to validate a multiscale numerical model that can
predict focal temperature elevation. The validated model will then be used to
develop scaling laws for acoustic shielding, a phenomenon where microbubbles at
higher concentrations can essentially shield the ultrasound from reaching the
target region. The proposed research will help in revolutionizing focused
ultrasound therapy for cancer treatment by accurately characterizing the
acoustic and thermal fields in the presence of microbubbles and by providing
operational bounds of the therapy. This will enable researchers to explore a
wide range of therapeutically relevant parameters and optimize design settings
with confidence when developing focused ultrasound-based therapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.