* 2301493
* Real Gromov-Witten Theory and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Aleksey Zinger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2026
* USD 239,962.00

String theory is a model that represents elementary particles by vibrating
strings with the aim of unifying the four fundamental forces of nature. While
string theory is one of the main paradigms in physics today, it has yet to make
experimentally testable predictions. However, it has generated many mathematical
predictions that have led to fundamental developments in algebraic geometry and
symplectic topology, especially in relation to (pseudo-)holomorphic curves. This
project’s two directions will further test string theory mathematically, aiming
to verify its predictions for the behavior of holomorphic curves in various
settings and to investigate the expected connections between different fields of
mathematics, including enumerative algebraic geometry, knot theory, and
representation theory. This award will also support the PI's graduate students.

This project will build on the PI’s previous work, which established the
mathematical foundations behind the real sector of string theory, to advance the
mathematical understanding of the so-called mirror symmetry predictions arising
from this sector. It will also utilize the PI’s decade-old work, which
established the BCOV mirror symmetry prediction for counts of genus 1 curves in
the renown quintic threefold and continue the recently completed work on the
topology of Deligne-Mumford moduli spaces of stable real curves with conjugate
pairs of marked points.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.