* 2301100
* Strengthening Technical Apprenticeships through Regional Coordination
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Matt Kovac, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nasser Alaraje
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,971.00

Apprenticeships are one of the most effective tools for producing trained
technicians to meet the needs of the local workforce, but some programs are too
closely tied to the needs of a specific company or offerings of an education
provider. This project aims to transform a successful mechatronics
apprenticeship into a regional engine for growth by convening a Business and
Industry Leadership Team to expand the apprenticeship opportunity to encompass
community colleges and corporate partners in a four-county area. It will result
in a standardized, articulable mechatronics curriculum that will allow
apprentices to enter the program in their home county, transfer credits between
institutions, and receive on-the-job training that is closely tied to classroom
instruction. This will serve as a model for dynamically changing technical
apprenticeship programs that serve the needs of an entire region as
manufacturing technologies continue to advance.

Specifically, four local community colleges sill work together to adopt the
knowledge, skills, and abilities recommended by the business and industry
leadership team to create a foundational mechatronics program that serves as the
basis of the technical instruction of the apprenticeship program, including
standardizing a core set of lab equipment. Roving trainers will align the on-
the-job training with classroom instruction using detailed technical lessons
adapted from the German dual system of technical education, and a coordinator
will align the progress of apprentices as they move between participating
community colleges. Participating community colleges will host a series of STEM
summer camps to attract a continuous pipeline of students interested in advanced
manufacturing to meet the increased demand of this regional apprenticeship
program. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.