* 2302519
* Random walks and super-approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alireza Golsefidy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2026
* USD 189,999.00

The PI will study random-walks given by symmetries and explore their
applications to various branches of mathematics and beyond. Consider a space
with lots of symmetries, for example a sphere. Choose a finite set of symmetries
of this space, put a particle at a point, and each time move it according to a
randomly picked symmetry from our chosen set. This is called a random-walk. When
after a few steps, an observer no longer has much information about the position
of the particle, it is said that the random-walk has the spectral gap property.
There are many important questions about different random-walks on the same
space. For instance a major problem is whether under reasonable assumptions
spectral gap is a property of the space rather than a random-walk. Another
question is whether it is possible to have two random-walks where observing one
gives us information about the other. The PI will solve these type of questions
for spaces that emerge from number theoretic problems; this is known as super-
approximation conjecture. The PI will continue his mentoring of graduate
students and postdocs under this award. Having a single random-walk on an
infinite space with the spectral gap property was the source of many
applications. For instance, by discretizing the space, highly connected sparse
graphs, known as expanders, were constructed. Having a random-walk with spectral
gap on spheres were used to obtain an effective distribution of points on
spheres, and recently used in quantum computing. In the past 15 years, it has
been shown that the flexibility of the choice of random-walk which comes with
the super-approximation makes it a powerful tool for a wide range of
applications. Here are a few examples: affine sieve, sieve in group theory,
variation of Galois representations, Zaremba’s conjecture, mixing in
geometrically finite hyperbolic manifolds, and orbit equivalence rigidity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.