* 2302537
* Excellence in Research: A Hierarchical Machine Learning Approach for Securing of NoC-Based MPSoCs Against Thermal Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Cynthia Sturton, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 575,955.00

The design of Multi-Processor System-on-Chips (MPSoCs) often involves the
integration of pre-designed Intellectual Property (IP) components to minimize
costs and accelerate time to market. This approach leaves room for potential
manipulation of the manufacturing process by adversaries who insert malicious
circuitries known as Hardware Trojans (HTs) into the final product. Depending on
the intentions of the adversary, an HT can perform various malicious tasks,
including compromising reliability, causing operational failures, leaking
information, and initiating denial of services. This project aims to address
security concerns related to HT-infected thermal sensors embedded in MPSoCs.
Given that thermal information is notably used in dynamic power and thermal
management, it is crucial to monitor the behavior of thermal sensors within an
MPSoC to detect and isolate compromised ones. This project aims to achieve this
goal by employing a hierarchical machine learning (ML) approach. This project
impacts a broad range of computing systems that utilize any of the commercially
available MPSoCs on the market.

In order to monitor the functionality of thermal sensors in an MPSoC, the
thermal information obtained from the cores on the chip undergoes processing
through a hierarchy of small to complex machine learning (ML) classifiers. At
the lowest level, countermeasures implemented at the Network-on-Chip (NoC)
routers within the target MPSoC try to identify compromised thermal sensors. The
thermal data collected by each router is then transmitted to a chip-wide ML
classifier, which functions as a dedicated ML accelerator, capable of capturing
cases that are not easily detected by the router-level countermeasures.
Subsequently, the thermal data is often transmitted to a cloud server for
further ML processing, serving as a feedback mechanism to update the weights of
the on-chip ML classifier. As the accuracy of the on-chip classifier improves
through learning feedback from the cloud-based classifier, the proposed approach
has the potential to address attacks with diverse probabilistic characteristics
and profiles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.