* 2302182
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Battery-less Tamper Detector for Semiconductor Chip Authenticity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 218,862.00

This research is to explore various approaches for a single-chip detector that
(1) can record semiconductor-chip-package tampering activity without the need of
a battery, (2) can be placed inside semiconductor chip packages through a
nozzle-less droplet ejector, and (3) can be wirelessly interrogated without need
to open up the semiconductor package. The projectâ€™s novelties are (1) the
integration of a pyroelectric energy converter, a GHz resonator, an acceleration
switch and an on-chip antenna, all on a single chip at a low cost and (2) a
submillimeter-sized, battery-less, tamper detector chip that can be placed
inside a semiconductor package through a droplet ejector and that can be
wirelessly interrogated (for any recorded tampering activity) from the outside
of the semiconductor package. The project's broader significance and importance
are the foundational technology for individualized detection and recording of
tampering activities, without needing an electrical power source such as the
battery, and for the recorded event to be wirelessly interrogated, particularly
to ensure the authenticity of semiconductor chips. Also, the proposed study of
droplet-ejector-based chip packaging will likely open up a new packaging
technology for semiconductor chips, particularly for chips whose lateral
dimensions are too small for robotic pick-and-placement. Thus, the research will
impact the semiconductor industry the foremost, but will also likely help many
other industries needing to detect activities involving temperature rise and
mechanical banging without battery. The proposed passive resonator will also be
broadly applied to battery-less, passive security and identification such as
radio frequency identification (RFID).

A single-chip semiconductor-tamper detector will be based on a pyroelectric
energy converter (PEC) for generating a voltage and charge to break an RFID tag
based on High-overtone Bulk Acoustic Resonator (HBAR) from heat associated with
the tamper activity. A MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) acceleration switch
will be designed to make an electrical connection between the PEC and the tag
when mechanical shocks are applied to semiconductor chips on a printed circuit
board (PCB), as a part of a tampering activity to detach semiconductor chips
from PCB, so that the voltage and charge of the PEC due to the heat from de-
soldering process may electrically break the tag. As the tampering activity
involves banging PCBs against hard objects after a de-soldering process, a
normally-off MEMS switch will be designed as an acceleration or vibration sensor
to detect the banging. Counterfeiters may have options to scavenge IC chips with
other methods than the method covered by the proposed tamper detector, but at no
avail or at too high costs. The project will show the feasibility of a
submillimeter-sized, battery-less and wireless, tamper detecting chip that can
be mounted inside a semiconductor package through a nozzle-less droplet ejector.
The proposed study will pave foundational technology for a paradigm-shifting
concept of individualized detection and recording of tampering activities to
ensure authenticity of semiconductor chips. The proposed transducers will likely
impact wireless sensor network, energy harvesting, etc., and thus, the research
will greatly impact many industries including RFID and wireless sensor
industries in addition to semiconductor industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.