* 2302582
* Excellence in Research: Designing Biodegradable Nonaqueous Electrolytes for Grid-Scale Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Peng Bai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 589,551.00

Rechargeable batteries have gained attention for energy storage applications due
to environmental concerns over the use of fossil fuels. As a key component in a
battery, an electrolyte serves as a medium for the transfer of charges
(typically in the form of ions) between a pair of electrodes. One type of
electrolytes is electrolyte solutions consisting of salts dissolved in solvents,
either water (aqueous) or organic molecules (nonaqueous). These electrolytes are
typically in a liquid state during the battery operation. Despite the advantages
of safety, non-toxicity, and low cost, aqueous electrolytes generally have a
narrow electrochemical stability window (i.e., ~1.23 V), beyond which undesired
water electrolysis occurs, triggering a series of problems for the battery
electrolytes and electrodes. For nonaqueous electrolytes with organic solvents,
one of the major issues is their high flammability, which might cause safety
concerns during battery use and failure. This project addresses the research of
novel nonaqueous electrolytes for next-generation Zinc (Zn)-ion batteries. This
fundamental research will have a profound impact on efforts to further advance
the technologies, enabling more cost-effective, safe, and durable batteries. The
broad application and market of these technologies supports the increased use of
energy generated from renewable sources, which contributes to the transition to
a carbon net-zero future. The project also supports undergraduate and graduate
researchers in a multi-disciplinary research experience with outreach to
underrepresented groups in STEM education.

The nonaqueous electrolytes under study are based on Zn salts dissolved in a
deep eutectic solvent (DES), which forms a ternary system. The new system has
several advantages including low cost, nonflammability, desired electrochemical
performance, and environmental friendliness. This represents a new approach that
can overcome the inherent issues associated with the above-mentioned aqueous and
nonaqueous electrolytes. The objectives of this research are 1) to construct
binary and ternary phase diagrams using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) and other techniques and determine melting points of
various compositions in the individual binary systems and the ternary system,
particularly the ternary eutectic point and other compositions in the isotropic
liquid phase regions; 2) to obtain other physical and electrochemical properties
of the selected compositions with lower melting points, including density,
viscosity, ionic conductivity, and electrochemical stability window; 3) to
understand the influence of Zn ion and the possible complexes on the molecular
interactions and solvation structures in these compositions through
spectroscopic characterization (e.g., NMR, Raman, and FTIR) and atomistic and
molecular simulation; and 4) to understand anode/electrolyte interfacial
behaviors (e.g., plating/stripping Coulombic efficiency, dendrite formation) and
cathode/electrolyte interface (e.g., interface stability, electrochemical
reaction mechanism) using operando optical microscopy, SEM, and other advanced
techniques. The goal of this project is to provide fundamental insights into the
relationships among structure, property, and performance for the DES system, and
facilitate designing advanced battery electrolytes for grid-scale energy
storage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.