* 2302896
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing technology-enabled mobility solutions (TN)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Kevin Heaslip, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on advancing
transportation electrification and digitization, promising to revolutionize the
future of mobility at a scale that will transform the movement of people and
goods worldwide. The Tennessee Technology-Enabled Advanced Mobility Engine (TEAM
Engine) seeks to place Tennessee, the region of service, in the vanguard of this
transformation while reducing reliance on carbon-intensive energy sources,
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, and creating a more equitable
transportation system. Tennessee aims to become the top state in the country for
the electric vehicle (EV) supply chain. The state is well on its way to meeting
this goal, with four automotive Original Equipment Manufacturers producing EVs
and $12B in investment in EV projects since 2017. The team aims to create a
thriving advanced mobility ecosystem that strengthens Tennessee's leadership in
the innovation economy, safeguards the environment, and enhances quality of life
for Tennesseans. TEAM Engine is a coalition of educational institutions;
advanced industries; community and non-profit organizations; high-tech business
incubators; accelerators and venture capital organizations; federal, state, and
local government agencies; and economic development entities co-invested in the
long-term advancement of Tennessee's innovation economy and the creation of
mutual and reciprocal benefits for businesses, communities, and residents.

The objective in the development phase is the creation of use-inspired research,
translation into practice, a workforce, and an ecosystem of partners and
stakeholders' strategies that culminate in a roadmap that supports and sustains
our growth, with a commitment to diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility
woven throughout each strategy. The project will generate streams of use-
inspired R&D outcomes to foster advanced mobility industries, leveraging
existing - and exploring the creation of new and open testbeds and facilities
and facilities to support collaborative research, foster industry and community
engagement, de-risk promising technologies; and developing and implementing new
incentives and reward mechanisms for innovators and entrepreneurs to recognize
their contributions to use-inspired R&D and technology commercialization. TEAM
Engine's partners have identified real-world R&D challenges to motivate efforts
and investments beyond this award period, including lighter, safer, and more
efficient EVs, batteries, faster and secure vehicle charging, mobility
cybersecurity innovations, AI informed mobility for all, ground vehicle
automation, and transportation informatics, and micromobility solutions as
research areas of interest for the engine. The roadmap will include
recommendations to the state to inform future investments and alignment of
efforts and resources across the four strategic areas as TEAM Engine moves to
become a full NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.