* 2302144
* RET Site: Engaging and Training Alabama STEM Teachers in Sensing Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Todd Freeborn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2026
* USD 602,645.00

The three-year RET Site: Engaging and Training Alabama STEM Teachers in Sensing
Technologies is hosted by the University of Alabama to advance STEM education in
sensing and measurement technologies across multiple domains of engineering and
computer science for middle school science teachers from west central Alabama.
The site focus is motivated by the fact that knowledge of how to measure and
analyze physical features of materials, devices, tissues, and/or the environment
underlies many engineering research questions. Each summer a group of 10 middle
school teachers from west central Alabama will participate in 8-week research
experiences and explore projects with applications connected to measuring the
human body and the environment. Participants will increase their capacity to
engage in engineering research and increase their understanding about its cross-
cutting nature. Teachers will translate their research experiences and knowledge
about engineering/computer science into course materials to support their
science teaching. These specially developed materials combined with teachers’
increased awareness of engineering are expected to increase students’ enthusiasm
for future studies and careers in STEM-related fields, which is a national need.

The three-year RET Site: Engaging and Training Alabama STEM Teachers in Sensing
Technologies is hosted by the University of Alabama to advance STEM education in
sensing and measurement technologies across multiple domains of engineering and
computer science for middle school science teachers from west central Alabama.
Each summer, a group of 10 middle school teachers from west central Alabama will
participate in 8-week research experiences under the mentorship of faculty from
the College of Engineering at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. Middle
school science teachers will be recruited from school districts surrounding
Tuscaloosa (e.g., Tuscaloosa City, Tuscaloosa County, Hale County, Greene
County, Marengo County) for this program. The main objectives of this RET site
are to 1) increase teachers' knowledge of engineering/computer science
disciplines, engineering research, and engineering career opportunities and 2)
increase teachers’ science teaching efficacy beliefs. To meet these goals
teachers will receive focused mentoring on their research project, participate
in engineering workshops (learning the engineering design process, engineering
careers, programming, and electronics), and receive support from science-
teaching specialists to design course material informed by their experiences
that aligns with the Alabama science standards. During the academic year
following their participation, teachers will join an RET community of practice
to support each other during integration of their course material into their
classrooms and receive support to publish their lessons through
TeachEngineering.org. Faculty mentors will also visit the RET classrooms to
support teacher’s delivery of their course materials and answer student
questions about engineering and STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.