* 2302161
* CBET-EPSRC: Direct methane conversion into valuable oxygenates via tandem catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* James Spivey, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,999.00

Research related to efficient utilization of natural gas for energy generation,
fuels production and chemical manufacturing will remain a critical need as our
nation and the global community transition to renewable energy. To that end,
this project represents an international effort between research teams in the
U.S. and the United Kingdom (UK) to convert methane (the chief component of
natural gas) to commodity chemicals via a novel, energy-efficient, intensified
chemical manufacturing process. The collaborative effort will feature
fundamental research related to catalyst design, synthesis, and characterization
by the U.S. team at Louisiana State University (the focus of this NSF-funded
project), combined with related catalyst and reaction engineering research by
the Cardiff Catalysis Institute (CCI) in collaboration with Imperial College
London (funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council,
EPSRC). Beyond the technological objectives, the U.S. project will support
student-led research through the LSU Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program together with the LSU High School Summer Research (HSSR) program
targeting underrepresented groups. One of the most significant catalysis and
reaction engineering challenges faced today is the conversion of methane to
higher-value chemicals. The project explores a novel combined catalyst design
and engineering approach to catalyze tandem reactions to convert methane to key
chemical intermediates, namely acetic acid and methanol. The approach is based
on the observation that supported AuPd alloy nanoparticles can form hydrogen
peroxide by a direct synthesis route from hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2), and
this can be used to initiate a tandem catalytic reaction. The central vision is
the development of tandem trimetallic catalyst design that places the catalyst
functionality for hydrogen peroxide formation near the catalyst functionality
for carbonylation and partial oxidation to methanol/acetic acid products. The
tandem catalyst approach is further aided by a sophisticated micro-channel
monolithic reactor design coupled to Taylor flow-based regimes of liquid and gas
flow that enable separation of gas species along concentration gradients that
shift equilibrium towards the desired products. The project builds on existing
collaborative research between the U.S. and UK research teams (together with UK
industry partners) who have the complementary expertise needed to bring together
a unique combination of catalyst synthesis, characterization, and reaction
engineering and implementation expertise. The LSU team, in particular, adds
critical expertise in catalyst synthesis, characterization, and evaluation. The
characterization component takes advantage of X-ray spectroscopic analysis
capabilities of LSUâ€™s in-house synchrotron facility (LSU-CAMD) together with
atomic resolution imaging and elemental mapping via a recently acquired state-
of-the-art transmission electron microscope.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.