* 2302407
* SBIR Phase II:  A Parent Coaching App to Help Support Children's Mental, Social and Emotional Health
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Nicole Lipkin, HEYKIDDO, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 949,863.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to empower parenting adults of children ages 5-12 years with
the evidence-based tools they need to promote positive mental, social, and
emotional health outcomes in their children. Approximately 5.7 million U.S.
children between the ages 5-12 are diagnosed with a mental health condition,
with an additional 20-60% suspected of being undiagnosed. Despite the importance
of early intervention, only about 20% of these children receive treatment.
Barriers to care, including access and affordability, become even more glaring
in rural areas and in low income and communities of color. Innovative smartphone
solutions can reach parenting adults from all backgrounds, as 85% of adults in
the U.S. own a smartphone. This project offers an innovative, affordable, and
accessible digital parenting solution, built by psychologists, educators, and
developmental specialists, that seeks to close the child mental healthcare
equity gap, in line with the NSFâ€™s mission. Reduction solutions need to be
prioritized to give children a chance at growing into healthy adults.

The goal of the project is to build a parent coaching app, for parenting adults
of children ages 5-12 years, that can tailor the content it delivers based on
the specific physical, mental, social, and emotional needs of each child and
parent. The key technical innovation at the heart of the app is its adaptive
algorithms, which allow it to tailor the content journey based on a myriad of
inputs. This core technology includes algorithms that deliver developmentally
appropriate content suited for each unique family. In addition, the technology
allows the app to detect when a higher level of care is needed and provides
parents with education on seeking support. Integrating algorithms that track
variable input allow the content to change over time, becoming more relevant and
effective for evolving needs. This phase of research will be longitudinal and
will include a significant sample size of parenting adult users in an effort to
examine the functionality and positive impacts of the app, as well as to prepare
the app for commercial launch in terms of scalability and security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.