* 2302263
* Collaborative Research: Derived Categories in Birational Geometry, Enumerative Geometry, and Non-commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Ballard, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2026
* USD 217,590.00

Solutions to polynomial equations form geometric shapes (for example lines,
planes, curves). Thus, we can solve equations using geometry (by finding where
lines, planes, curves intersect). These ideas have evolved into algebraic
geometry, a field of modern mathematics with applications ranging from physics
to cybersecurity. In this collaborative project we are particularly interested
in the connections to physics. These connections are made through “derived
categories”, a complex system of mathematical data associated to a geometric
shape. While derived categories have experienced explosive development in recent
decades, many questions about them remain unsolved. This project attempts to
solve some of the central and most recent questions about derived categories
using techniques developed by the principal investigators and many others over
the last decade. This award will also support undergraduate and graduate
students.

This project focuses on three specific questions about derived categories.
Together, these questions incorporate numerous areas of mathematics including
birational geometry, enumerative geometry, and non-commutative algebra.
Specifically, our first question studies connections between derived categories
and birational geometry (and the possibly concealed connection between
flips/flops and derived partial compactifications). We ask whether K-equivalent
varieties have equivalent derived categories, a central conjecture about derived
categories due to Bondal-Orlov and Kawamata. Our second question asks how
decompositions of quantum cohomology are related to semi-orthogonal
decompositions of derived categories. This connection is conjecturally made
through mirror symmetry as proposed by Kontsevich and Kuznetsov. Finally, our
third question asks how derived categories shed light on resolutions of
singularities (namely as moduli spaces coming from non-commutative algebra).
Here, we aim to construct non-commutative crepant resolutions using ideas from
homological mirror symmetry. The existence of these resolutions has been
conjectured by Van den Bergh. As a whole, this project aims to interpolate
between these three questions/conjectures using techniques from geometric
invariant theory, non-commutative algebra, derived algebraic geometry, and
mirror symmetry. The central theme is the explicit use and construction of
Fourier-Mukai kernels whose geometry provides a foothold into understanding
these problems. Combining the past work of the principal investigators on the
construction of Fourier-Mukai kernels, wall crossing for derived categories, and
virtual fundamental cycles, we expect to advance our understanding of these
fundamental questions.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.