* 2302536
* Conference: Inclusive Paths in Explicit Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Ghaith Hiary, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This award will help support the participation of US-based students in the
Summer School: Inclusive Paths in Explicit Number Theory, scheduled for July 2--
15, 2023, at the Banff International Research Station satellite site at the
University of British Columbia-Okanagan in Kelowna, Canada. A primary goal of
the summer school is to train students on the most recent techniques in explicit
number theory and to further advance the field. For the first time, leading
experts in the field will come together to provide mentorship to a new
generation of student researchers that is more representative of our diverse
community. The first week of the summer school will consist of lectures and
activities on key topics as well as professional development activities. In the
second week, small groups of participants will work on cutting-edge research
problems in a collaboration with senior and emerging researchers. It is hoped
that the complementary expertise of group members will facilitate tackling
research problems and lead to publishable state-of-the-art results.

The field of explicit number theory is one of the most exacting flavors of
number theory, focusing on simple-to-state yet notoriously difficult problems
such as the Goldbach conjecture (every even number greater than 2 be written as
the sum of two primes) and the Legendre conjecture (there is a prime number
between every two consecutive squares). Producing important results in explicit
number theory requires both scientific creativity and meticulous precision. In
the past decade, there has been a flurry of activity in the field with
significant explicit results for many L-functions, established by researchers in
North America, Europe, and Australia. The summer school website is:
https://sites.google.com/view/crgl-functions/summer-school-inclusive-paths-in-
explicit-number-theory

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.