* 2302564
* Argument Graph Supported Multi-Level Approach for Argumentative Writing Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Lu Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 07/31/2026
* USD 849,799.00

Proficiency in argumentative writing contributes to one's academic and
professional success. However, the Nation's Report Card shows that most
adolescents are not skilled in argumentation and frequently experience
difficulty when comprehending arguments and constructing well-rounded essays.
Traditional teaching approaches for argumentative writing often require students
to practice writing a whole essay before receiving feedback, missing deliberate
practice opportunities on each difficulty factor that the students experience.
On the other hand, while formative and personalized feedback is useful in
improving students' logical writing skills, it requires substantive efforts by
instructors and causes delays in feedback. This project will generate new
insights into artificial intelligence and human-computer interaction
capabilities for enhancing student learning of argumentative writing. The
proposed research will advance the understanding of how people learn
argumentative writing and argumentation. The project will improve the state-of-
the-art in natural language processing by developing techniques for argument
mining and argument quality measurement. The developed argumentative writing
tools can be broadly applicable to many domains, thus providing learning and
practice opportunities to anyone who wants to improve their argumentative
writing skills. This project will also promote STEM education diversity with a
focus on attracting and mentoring women and underrepresented minorities in
computer science. The findings, open-source codes, and argumentative writing
assistance system will be demonstrated and distributed to the public through
various outreach activities at the University of Michigan.

Concretely, this project will investigate efficient and scalable pedagogical
approaches for argumentative writing. Three main research thrusts will be
explored. First, a personalized argumentative writing tutoring system, ARGUABLE,
will be built. ARGUABLE is designed with two learning modes: (1) learning with
examples, and (2) practicing and getting feedback, each containing practice
opportunities and actionable feedback targeting different argumentation skills.
Second, novel natural language processing and machine learning models will be
investigated to enable multi-level argument understanding and interpretable
essay quality measurement. Novel representation learning methods that capture
long-distance relations are investigated to extract argument structures more
accurately. Graphical representation encoding methods will be used to support
feedback provision at multiple levels. A revision suggestion retrieval system
will also be built to support novice students with concrete ideas for writing
improvement. Finally, evaluations will be conducted in collaboration with
instructors who teach argumentative writing at the Ann Arbor and the Dearborn
campuses of the University of Michigan, to assess the effectiveness of ARGUABLE.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.