* 2302447
* Applications of Higher Algebraic Structures in Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ping Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2026
* USD 165,475.00

This project concerns problems in noncommutative geometry; that is, the study of
noncommutative algebras using tools inspired by geometry. Noncommutative
algebras are mathematical objects that have addition and multiplication;
however, the order in which the elements get multiplied might matter. The
purpose of the project, which is centered around higher algebraic structures and
homotopy algebras in noncommutative geometry, is to investigate mathematical
problems motivated by physics in these fields. More specifically, the project is
motivated by a combination of ideas from quantum mechanics, quantum field
theory, string theory, and classical areas of mathematics such as Lie theory,
representation theory, complex geometry, homological algebra, foliation theory,
deformation quantization and index theory, and noncommutative geometry. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed project promotes further interaction
between these fields. The PI continues to disseminate his research by speaking
at conferences and seminars and organizing workshops, which provide excellent
opportunities for the PI to exchange, interact and collaborate with colleagues
from within and outside the US and, in particular, young scientists. This award
will support the training of early career researchers that work on related
fields.

The PI will continue the study of applications of higher algebraic structures
and homotopy algebras in noncommutative geometry and their relation to
representation theory using tools from deformation quantization and Lie
algebroid theory. The PI will establish a Kontsevich-Duflo type theorem for
homotopy Lie algebroids and will establish a formality morphism for homotopy
Kontsevich-Soibelman structures and the noncommutative calculi Ã  la Tamarkin-
Tsygan for dg Lie algebroids. More specifically, the project encompasses several
related problems of independent interest including constructing the universal
enveloping algebra of a homotopy Lie algebroid, studying homotopy Kontsevich-
Soibelman structures and the Tamarkin-Tsygan calculi for the pair of spaces of
polydifferential operators and polyjets as well as the pair of spaces of
polyvector fields and differential forms associated to a dg Lie algebroid, and
developing a formal geometry for dg Lie algebroids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.