* 2302720
* NSF-CSIRO: RAI4IoE: Responsible AI for Enabling the Internet of Energy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Greg Eisenhauer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,495.00

The energy sector is going through substantial changes fueled by two key
drivers: building a zero-carbon energy sector and the digital transformation of
the energy infrastructure. The advances in AI technology and energy as a service
market further fuel the convergence of these two drivers, resulting in the
emergence of a new field of research in the energy sector â€“ the Internet of
Energy (IoE). With IoE, renewable distributed energy resources (DERs), such as
electric cars, storage batteries, wind turbines and photovoltaics, can be
connected and integrated for reliable energy distribution by leveraging advanced
5G-6G networks and AI technology. This allows DER owners as prosumers to
participate in the energy market and derive economic incentives. DERs are
inherently asset-driven and face equitable challenges (i.e., fair, diverse and
inclusive). Without equitable access, privileged individuals, groups and
organizations can participate and benefit at the cost of disadvantaged groups.
The real-time management of DER resources not only brings out the equity problem
to the IoE, it also collects highly sensitive location, time, activity dependent
data, which requires to be handled responsibly (e.g., privacy, security and
safety), for AI-enhanced predictions, for optimization and prioritization
services, and for automated management of flexible resources. This US-Australia
joint project plans to develop Equitable and Responsible AI framework,
techniques and algorithms for the Internet of Energy, coined as RAI4IoE, aiming
to elevate "energy poverty" by providing secure, privacy-preserving and
equitable access to the networks of DERs for every citizen. The outcome of this
research will advance the knowledge of responsible AI as the first principle in
developing and deploying the IoE systems and services, in facilitating DER
integration, promoting deep engagement with prosumers, aggregators and network
operators, and enabling flexibility market of renewable energy supply.

To facilitate equitable participation of all DER owners and users in the
automated flexibility market, AI enabled IOE should be governed by the
responsible AI frameworks and guidelines for distributed monitoring, scheduling,
management, and consumption of DERs, while exercising and guaranteeing
responsible and equitable AI through ensuring AI fairness and safeguarding AI
privacy and AI security in an open and continuously evolving IoE ecosystem. This
project will develop responsible AI frameworks, algorithms and compliance
evaluation methods for the IoE, aiming to elevate "energy poverty" by providing
secure, privacy-preserving and equitable access to the networks of DERs for
every citizen. The project will develop innovative solutions along three
dimensions. First, it develops an equitable AI framework for ensuring IoE for
all, including enabling asset-poor clients to participate in distributed
learning of global DER models, and integrating privacy and fairness-aware DER
data collection with policy-driven data governance. Second, it develops a suite
of responsible AI Algorithms and Models to increase the end-to-end resilience of
IoE against disruptive events, including irregular, sparse or corrupted data,
biases in data and algorithms, privacy violations, and other fraudulent DER
activities. Third, it develops a suite of responsible and equitable AI
compliance methods by combining explainable AI with software testing and
verification methods. The research findings will lead to new generations of AI-
enhanced distributed energy resource management systems. This research will also
provide graduate and under-graduate students with diverse backgrounds the unique
opportunities to learn responsible AI algorithm development, and the importance
of equitable access to DERs from a broad cross-disciplinary perspective.

This is a joint project between U.S. and Australian researchers funded by the
Collaboration Opportunities in Responsible and Equitable AI under the U.S. NSF
and the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
(CSIRO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.