* 2302708
* RUI: Experimental Studies of Active Mixing in Extended Fluid Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Thomas Solomon, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 194,904.00

Non-Technical Abstract

Experiments in this project explore the effects of fluid flows on “active”
agents such as swimming organisms and moving reaction fronts. Fluid flows are
everywhere in nature and in technology, including in living organisms; in
rivers, lakes and oceans; in the atmosphere and in stars; in numerous industrial
processes; and even in “flows” of people in society. These experiments test
predictions that fluid mixing can synchronize the growth of microbial colonies,
similar to the rapid “blooming” of algae in the oceans; that mixing patterns in
the flow can affect the formation of biofilms on surfaces; that the combination
of swimming and the fluid flow can result in “chaotic” trajectories; and that
flows can enhance – and sometimes inhibit -- the spreading of groups of swimming
microbes and of reaction fronts. The results from these experiments could help
explain how algae blooms form and how diseases spread in moving populations; an
understanding of active mixing could also help in the development of “self-
assembled” microstructures. All of the research is done with undergraduate
students, giving them experiences that play an important role in their
development as scientists.

Technical Abstract

The experiments in this project study the effects of laminar flows on active
impurities that consume energy, resulting in motion relative to the fluid. The
active impurities are (a) self-propelled microbes, such as swimming bacteria and
algae; and (b) propagating chemical reaction fronts. The flows include vortex
chain and vortex array flows, hyperbolic flows in a cross-channel, time-
dependent channel flows, and spatially-disordered flows. Previous experiments by
the PI’s group have demonstrated that “burning invariant manifolds” and
“swimming invariant manifolds” block the motion of active impurities in laminar
flows. We will extend these studies to explore transport and pattern formation
of active impurities over distances larger than typical flow scales. The
experiments will investigate: (1) the effects of laminar mixing on the growth of
microbial colonies, both with and without chemo- and phototaxis; (2) the effects
of chaotic fluid mixing on biofilm formation; (3) large-scale propagation of
reaction fronts and the leading edges of microbial ensembles; (4) chaotic motion
of active impurities in flows where passive mixing is non-chaotic; (5) long-
range transport of active impurities in laminar flows; and (6) how selection
over multiple generations enhances certain swimming protocols in response to the
fluid mixing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.