* 2302346
* L-functions via geometric quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Ben-Zvi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 122,753.00

The project explores and deepens an unexpected link between theoretical high
energy physics and number theory. Some of the most important and mysterious
quantities in number theory, in particular in the grand unified vision of the
subject known as the Langlands program, are known as L-functions. In the physics
of quantum field theory the fundamental quantities one measures, the partition
functions, have a similarly indirect and elusive definition. The PI believes
that the study of L-functions can be significantly enhanced by thinking of them
as the output of a quantum mechanical system. This perspective makes evident
surprising new symmetries and unifying structures in the subject. This project
demonstrates the utility of an emerging physics point of view on arithmetic
whose broad dissemination the PI is spearheading, including through a planned
book. In addition the PI is actively involved in training graduate students and
giving expository lectures to broad scientific audiences.

The object of this project is to develop and disseminate new connections between
physics and number theory. The PI and collaborators recently constructed a
bridge from electric-magnetic duality to the arithmetic of L-functions, and this
project provides a central pillar supporting this bridge. In the physics of
quantum field theory, partition functions are the fundamental invariants. In
number theory and arithmetic geometry, L-functions are the fundamental
invariants and at the heart of the overarching vision provided by the Langlands
program. The investigator will develop a new geometric theory of L-functions (in
the setting of number fields) directly modeled on partition functions in gauge
theory. This reveals a hidden quantum mechanical structure to the subject,
situating L-functions as part of the theory of geometric quantization.
Conversely, the investigator will develop a new theory of L-functions for
3-manifolds, suggesting new structure in topology inspired by number theory. The
investigator will work to communicate physics ideas to number theorists and vice
versa, connecting two intellectually distant communities, in particular through
a book aimed at an advanced graduate audience disseminating the shockingly
effective dictionary between gauge theory and automorphic forms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.