* 2302586
* Arakelov Geometry and Algebraic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Nicole Looper, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2026
* USD 200,009.00

The project in this award lies at the interface of algebraic dynamics and
arithmetic geometry, motivated by an analogy between rational points on
projective varieties and orbits of dynamical systems. Understanding the rational
solutions to polynomial equations is a classical and fundamental problem, with
advances such as Fermat's Last Theorem and the proof of the Mordell Conjecture
being among the most celebrated examples of progress in modern mathematics.
These questions find analogues as well as broader frameworks in the area of
dynamical systems. The project funded through this proposal focuses on dynamical
systems on projective varieties defined over number fields and function fields.
A key aim is to extend knowledge on the arithmetic of points of small canonical
height with respect to rational functions to more general polarized dynamical
systems. The funding for this project will support the infrastructure of a
growing group at UIC specializing in questions at the intersection of number
theory, dynamics, and logic. It will also support collaborations between the PI
and other researchers whose work applies non-archimedean analysis and Arakelov
geometry to number-theoretic problems. The PI plans to organize a workshop at
BIRS and to be a project leader for a future Women in Numbers research team.

Three types of problems will be investigated. The first centers on the
arithmetic of points of small canonical height for polarized dynamical systems
in dimension larger than 1. Specific directions include the Torsion Conjecture
for abelian varieties, along with its function field analogue, as well as a
sparseness conjecture for torsion points on abelian varieties that are
S-integral relative to a non-torsion ample divisor. Under this heading also
falls a project studying certain distinguished local canonical heights on
abelian varieties and their relation to the global Neron-Tate height. The second
thread connects Arakelov invariants on higher genus curves to key Diophantine
conjectures about their rational points, capitalizing on recent work linking
these invariants to dynamics and analysis on Jacobian varieties. A central
component of this thread focuses on the self-intersection of the admissible
relative dualizing sheaf introduced by Zhang, and links this quantity to metric
invariants of the underlying curve. The third project concerns pluripotential
theory on Berkovich analytic spaces associated to projective varieties. Here a
particular ultimate goal is the development of suitable quantitative
equidistribution statements for small points in arbitrary dimension, yielding
natural applications to the first aforementioned project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.