* 2302198
* Homological approaches to differential forms, differential operators, and transfer of algebra structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Claudia Miller, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2026
* USD 165,000.00

One of the main questions of algebraic geometry is: How does one find measures
of singularity? A singularity is a place on a curve, surface, or higher
dimensional space where it is not smooth, i.e., it has a sharp point or crosses
itself. In general, one wants to be able to find measures of how extreme a
singularity is and how these vary under maps, but usually the number of
equations or variables makes a graph impossible or misleading. This is solved by
employing the structural backbone given by algebraic geometry and commutative
algebra. Generally, the goal is to attach invariants to singularities that are
measures of the character of the singularity. Singularities will be studied in
several ways: via differential forms and differential operators, which
characterize smoothness; and by constructing new algebraic structures which
yield not only invariants but also tools to discover new invariants. In the long
run, work on singularities can lead to applications to computer vision and
medical imaging and to string theory in physics. The project will continue the
PI’s strong engagement in graduate education with PhD students. The PI will
continue to co-organize conferences and workshops such as the Introductory
Workshop at an MSRI semester program in 2024 and a future MSRI Summer Graduate
School at the Chern Institute.

Commutative and homological algebra are crucial in developing the foundations of
algebraic geometry. This project will address some central topics and their
interplay: differential forms, differential operators, cotangent complexes, and
dg-algebra and A-infinity structures. The focus will be on (1) resolutions of
differential forms and the cotangent complex, (2) differential operators of
fixed orders and their resolutions, (3) DG algebra resolutions of graded
Artinian algebras, and (4) comparisons of bar and Eagon resolutions via
A-infinity structures. For the first, the focus is on understanding symmetries
in and vanishing of invariants obtained from higher differentials, such as
generalized Tjurina numbers, by showing how their resolutions are interrelated
for Gorenstein singularities. For the second, a new homological approach will be
used to work on finding the differential operators of hypersurfaces. The third
involves the use of HPT (homological perturbation theory) to transfer algebra
structures, and the fourth use of A-infinity structures to relate and generalize
two classical resolutions. The unifying theme is to use homological methods to
gain insight into these problems. The central challenge is to understand the
homological behavior of exterior and symmetric power operations, which is known
to be more involved and less understood, despite the fact that exterior algebras
and power operations play a central role throughout many parts of algebra and
geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.