* 2302212
* Machine Learning Techniques for Predicting Blood Flow and  Cancer Cell Trafficking in Microcirculation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Prosenjit Bagchi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 320,014.00

The exchange of oxygen between blood and tissue primarily occurs in
microcirculation, which is made of narrow capillary vessels. Microcirculation is
also associated with many diseases, such as cardiac and cerebral disorders,
diabetes, and cancer. Red blood cells act as oxygen carriers. Their distribution
in the microcirculation is critical to healthy functioning and disease
progression. Sophisticated computer models to predict red cell motion in
capillary vessels have emerged over the past decades. However, such models often
require extensive computing time and resources and are not feasible for organ-
scale prediction over many cardiac cycles. To overcome such limitations, this
proposal will consider the application of Artificial Intelligence or Machine
Learning (ML) techniques for the prediction of blood flow and cell trafficking.
The broader impact will be accomplished through the proposed research, training
of graduate and undergraduate students, and K-12 outreach.

Specific research objectives include the developments of (i) ML models to
predict vessel cross-sectional variation of the blood velocity, and red cell
concentration, (ii) ML models coupling the blood flow, cell volume fraction and
a single-parameter measure of cell deformation, (iii) ML models to predict full
3D deformed cell shape, and (iv) models for high-accuracy long time-series
prediction. Models will be trained using high-fidelity simulation data of cell
flow in bifurcations and vessels of varying geometry and hemodynamic parameters,
creating a model bank. The trained ML models will then be validated against
high-fidelity simulations of red cell flow in physiologically realistic vascular
geometry. Finally, the capability of the ML models will be demonstrated by
considering large-scale cerebral vasculatures for which high-fidelity simulation
is not feasible. The translational aspect of the proposal involves the
development of similar ML models for predicting cancer cell trafficking. The
proposed ML models may provide a significant improvement in patient-specific
(precision) diagnosis. PhD and undergraduate students will be mentored. The
outreach component will involve coding and computing for middle and high school
female students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.