* 2302373
* Multigraded commutative algebra and the geometry of syzygies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Brown, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2026
* USD 220,000.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of spaces that arise as solution sets to systems
of polynomial equations; such spaces play an important role throughout
mathematics and the sciences. A fundamental question in algebraic geometry is:
what does the geometry of such a space tell one about the polynomials that
determine it? The overarching goal of the PI’s research is to use techniques in
computational algebra to study open problems on this theme. This research will
lead to the development of new software for the open-source computational
algebra system Macaulay2. The PI will also continue his outreach to veterans in
mathematics at Auburn University, in collaboration with the university’s
Veterans Resource Center.

The PI will adapt the techniques of the geometry of syzygies from projective
geometry to toric geometry. In particular, the PI will use techniques in
commutative algebra to make progress on conjectures of Berkesch-Erman-Smith and
Orlov on the homological properties of toric varieties. The PI will also
generalize, from the projective to the weighted projective setting, a celebrated
theorem of Green on the linearity of free resolutions of curves embedded in
projective space. In a third project, the PI will develop an efficient algorithm
for computing sheaf cohomology over smooth projective toric varieties by
generalizing an algorithm due to Eisenbud-Fløystad-Schreyer that applies to
sheaves on projective space. The PI will also explain a periodicity phenomenon
for the Fitting ideals of free resolutions over complete intersections,
leveraging work of Eisenbud-Peeva on the structure of such resolutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.