* 2302678
* Collaborative Research: PurSUiT: Systematic viral discovery through structured search of host phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 06/30/2027
* USD 205,869.00

Viral pathogens are usually researched intensively after they emerge and cause
disease in humans or domestic animals. This leads to a deep understanding of the
few viruses that affect humans, but largely ignores the vast, unknown diversity
of viruses in the rest of mammals. This project leverages the high-quality,
cryogenically frozen tissue collections of wild mammals that are stored in
natural history museums to systematically sequence, discover, and characterize
viral diversity from across the Mammal Tree of Life. This project will
contribute directly to the understanding of host-virus evolution, inform the
frequency and distance at which ‘spillover’ or host-switches can occur, and
identify high and low risk viral pathogens. By connecting the viral sequences
back to a physical mammal specimen at a museum, this project provides a
foundation for detailed future investigations of specific pathogens, pathogen
communities, and the associated genetic variation in their mammal hosts. To
further reinforce the connection between microbial research and natural history
museums, this project will collaborate with Project ECHO’s Museums and Emerging
Pathogens in the Americas (MEPA) network to foster international exchange of
ideas and build capacity in biodiverse countries, where pathogen emergence is
more likely.

This project uses a sampling strategy that optimizes evolutionary distances and
geographic coverage to select mammal specimens to survey for viruses. Initially,
a core set of nearly 600 mammalian species in 25 of 27 orders will be targeted
to provide a mammal-wide survey of viral diversity. Based on this initial
effort, lineages that have especially rich viral communities will be selected
for more intensive sampling that will allow for analyses of virus-virus
interactions and host-virus co-evolution (or lack thereof). New and known viral
sequences will be reconstructed bioinformatically and used to test long-standing
assumptions related to viral diversity, host traits, and host diversity,
including which lineages represent “high risk” or “low risk” to humans (e.g.,
bats, rodents, and primates as traditionally “high risk” groups). Pairs of
mammal and virus lineages that show elevated rates of host switching will be
used to identify the ecological and environmental traits that are associated
with such events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.