* 2302685
* A study of hypersurface singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daniel Hernandez, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2026
* USD 220,000.00

This project will study subtle geometric aspects of systems of polynomial
equations, while at the same time training the next generation of scientists,
both in academics and industry. A polynomial is any equation that can be formed
using the fundamental operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication,
and solving a system of polynomial equations means solving multiple polynomial
equations simultaneously. Polynomial systems, though simple to define, are rich
enough to describe, or model, many interesting phenomena. They are ubiquitous in
many different areas of science, including computer science, biology, chemistry,
physics, and engineering, and play a critical role in the applications of these
areas to industry. A polynomial system can involve many different unknowns, or
variables, and in applications, the number of these variables is often quite
large (e.g., having thousands of variables in a system is not rare).
Unfortunately, the technique of graphing, which allows us to visualize and study
polynomial equations, is no longer available to us once we are dealing with four
or more variables. This project is focused on overcoming this obstacle by
developing systematic ways to describe and precisely measure the complexity of
polynomial systems, no matter the number of variables. Furthermore, this will
done in an algebraic, discrete manner; that is, using methods that can be
translated into the language of a computer. In this pursuit, the PI will train,
mentor, and support students. He will train graduate students to conduct
technical mathematical research, to implement their results using open-sourced
computing languages, and to effectively communicate their results to a wide
audience. This will prepare such students for careers in academic research and
instruction, as well as in industry. At the undergraduate level, we will mentor
students, especially those from under-represented groups, to prepare them for
successful careers in industry, and also for graduate school in a STEM, or
adjacent, field.

More precisely, The PI will study the singularities of algebraic varieties, or
systems of polynomial equations, through understanding invariants associated to
them. Invariants are objects (such as a number, or an ideal in a ring, or a
polyhedral shape) derived from a variety in a consistent manner, and that can
meaningfully, precisely, quantify subtle properties of that variety. The
invariants studied are both discrete (e.g., defined using the Frobenius morphism
in prime characteristic), and continuous (e.g., defined in terms of
integrability conditions, or resolution of singularities). The PI will employ
many concrete techniques, including some based on convex geometry, polyhedral
geometry and variants of linear optimization problems, and will produce
effective algorithms to explicitly compute many interesting invariants of
singularities. These algorithms will be implemented in open-source computer
algebra systems such as Macaulay2.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.