* 2302785
* NSF-CSIRO: HCC: Small: From Legislations to Action: Responsible AI for Climate Change
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Chenhao Tan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Climate change is a key threat in contemporary life. To curb and ultimately
reverse climate change governments, organizations, and citizens around the world
are taking actions to reduce the carbon footprint of human activity. Achieving
these goals requires the effective creation and implementation of climate
interventions, ranging from the individual to the national level. Yet developing
effective climate change policies poses a significant challenge. Numerous policy
options are possible, and policies interact with one another in unexpected ways.
The task is further complicated by the fact that there are many sources of
information about climate change, but they are often laden with jargon and may
conflict with one another. The goal of this project is to develop responsible
artificial intelligence (AI) to help stakeholders make sense of climate change
related information, so that non-experts can collectively make sense of and
implement effective policies. This encompasses a wide variety of possible AI-
assisted tasks, ranging from summarizing the latest news reports to explaining
the outcome of new legislation.

In particular, we will focus on improving policymaking and public awareness by
bridging the information gap between a wealth of publicly available information
and a dearth of actionable insights. This will ultimately improve the
effectiveness of climate change policies. The technical aims are structured
along three thrusts: 1) understanding which tasks users are willing to delegate
to AI and why; 2) developing a large-scale dataset of climate change related
information, ranging from legislative texts from Australia and the US to news
articles and social media; and 3) developing prototypes of AI systems to
demonstrate the promise of responsible AI in promoting effective climate change
policies.

This is a joint project between U.S. and Australian researchers funded by the
Collaboration Opportunities in Responsible and Equitable AI under the U.S. NSF
and the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.