* 2302231
* Probabilistic approaches to Brauer groups and rationality problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2026
* USD 126,667.00

Diophantine geometry seeks to understand the set of integer or rational
solutions to systems of polynomial equations in several variables. Every
collection of polynomial equations with integer coefficients has a geometric
avatar, called a variety. The geometry of this variety often governs the set of
rational solutions to the original system of equations. This idea is summarized
by the mantra "Geometry determines Arithmetic". The project focuses on
developing theoretical tools to understand large classes of diphantine
equations. Applications of understanding these equations, and their related
shadows over finite number systems, abound, e.g., in cryptography and coding
theory. The PI has experience working on the latter applications. The project
will also fund mentoring and outreach efforts, with particular attention to
increasing retention of students and researchers from underrepresented
backgrounds in Mathematics, including leading small research project groups
outside his primary institution, and organizing research conferences that
specifically foster a sense of community and belonging. The PI currently advises
five PhD students and two postdoctoral scholars, and expects to maintain a
vigorous research and training group. He will also embark on a book project on
the arithmetic of algebraic surfaces, to fill a gap in the literature, to help
educate future generations of diophantine geometers. This project addresses
foundational questions in the arithmetic of Diophantine equations whose
geometric avatars are surfaces. The PI will use Bayesian inference to devise
probabilistic algorithms that take as input a set of equations defining, e.g., a
low-degree del Pezzo or K3 surface, and determine, with a prescribed degree of
confidence, if these systems of equations have rational solutions. It is
expected that these ideas will have wide application in other problems of
arithmetic geometry around Galois groups. In a related direction, the PI will
systematically study the behavior of rationality over number-theoretic bases, by
leveraging the connection between certain kinds of fourfolds and surfaces
twisted by Brauer classes. The project naturally leads to considering new cases
of the Tate conjecture for divisors on surfaces over finitely generated fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.