* 2302151
* I-Corps: System for rapid detection of virus-loaded aerosol
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2023
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to detect airborne pathogens, such as viruses and
bacteria, in near real-time and on-site. Timely actions informed by early
detection can reduce the spread of infection in a number of settings, such as
schools, hospitals, nursing homes, and office buildings, thereby also reducing
the costs of healthcare, absenteeism, and loss of productivity. The coronavirus
pandemic is an obvious current target for early detection, given the severe
consequences of infections among vulnerable populations and the continuous
disruption to jobs and childrenâ€™s education. However, many other airborne
pathogens are of interest in similar settings, including common viruses such as
the flu, and more rare viruses with severe consequences, such as tuberculosis
and varicella. Timely actions that could be taken to reduce the spread of
infection include isolation of exposed individuals, use of protective equipment,
control of in-room ventilation, and space decontamination. More generally,
occupants of spaces may be made aware through a phone app of the pathogen levels
detected in areas of interest, so they can make informed decisions about what
areas to visit and if masking may be advisable.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an integrated, automated,
and portable device for sensing airborne pathogens on-site and in almost real-
time. The process proposed consists of an initial collection step, in which
virus particles are collected through electrostatic precipitation. Then, there
is a detachment and RNA extraction step, followed by an enrichment phase. This
technology is realized with a novel method that leverages the natural negative
charge of RNA. Finally, the final steps are the chemical detection step and the
classification step. The core innovation is not only the integration of the
overall process described above, but also, the creation of a fieldable process
that obtains highly concentrated target RNA from in-air viral particles.
Pathogen detection from the air is substantially more challenging than detection
from a patient swab due to the much lower in-air concentrations, those these
concentrations can still infect people. The enrichment step is critical to be
able to detect relevant in-air pathogen concentrations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.