* 2302454
* Excellence in Research: Biosynthetic investigation of manzamine class alkaloids
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Madan Kharel, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 460,297.00

Manzamines are members of marine alkaloid natural products. They possess complex
structures and exhibit a number of biological activities, including anticancer
and antibacterial activities. Lack of knowledge of the molecular and biochemical
basis for the production of these alkaloids has been a major barrier to the
bioengineering of new alkaloid derivatives. This project will provide such
knowledge and will serve as the foundation for bioengineering of new manzamine
derivatives with potential applications in medicine, agriculture and
biotechnology. This project will also provide extensive research experiences for
University of Maryland Eastern Shore undergraduate and graduate students, many
of whom are from groups underrepresented in STEM, and thus the work will
contribute to development of a diverse STEM workforce.

Manzamines represent a structurally distinct group of marine alkaloid natural
products with little resemblance to other alkaloids. The structural uniqueness
of manzamines, including manzamine A arises from the assembly of a complex
pentacyclic core attached to a beta-carboline unit. Although over a hundred
manzamines that exhibit a wide range of biological activities have been isolated
primarily from marine sponges, how organisms assemble building blocks and
intermediates to furnish complex structural scaffolds of manzamines has remained
a mystery. The main objective of the proposed project is to identify
biosynthetic building blocks and pathway intermediates and elucidate key
biosynthetic steps involved in the production of manzamine A. The proposed
project utilizes a multi-pronged experimental approach including: (A) isotope
incorporation experiments to identify biosynthetic building blocks of the beta-
carboline and the pentacyclic ring, (B) experiments to identify the enzyme
involved in the attachment of these two structural units, (C) complete genome
sequence analysis of Micromonospora sp. M42 for identifying manzamine
biosynthetic locus, and (D) heterologous production and characterization of
select enzymes involved in the manzamine A biosynthetic pathway. The results
garnered through this project will pave the way for the discovery of other
manzamines through bioinformatic analysis. Manzamine A biosynthetic enzymes with
potentially new catalytic activities will be an invaluable addition to the
existing repertoire of tools for the further advancement of research projects
concerning biosynthetic pathway engineering/synthetic biology, particularly for
the production of new manzamine analogs. The proposed project thus offers a
biological alternative to the synthetic production of new manzamine alkaloids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.