* 2302609
* Excellence in Research: Evaluating Environmental Stressor Effects on Soil Bacterial Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ariane Peralta, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 05/31/2026
* USD 769,173.00

The goal of this Excellence in Research (EiR) project is to conduct
interdisciplinary, collaborative research to investigate how prior environmental
nutrient conditions influence bacterial inter- and intraspecific interactions.
Specifically, the research will examine how changes in nutrients alter bacterial
traits such as the physical features of forming spores and modifying cell walls
and genetic features that are responsible for changes to physical features,
antibiotic resistance, and soil nutrient access in the context of microbe-
microbe and plant-microbe relationships. Results from this work are of broad
national interests in agricultural, natural resources management and
conservation sectors. This work benefits society through research opportunities
at the undergraduate and graduate levels and through shared educational content
for grades 6-8 at rural public schools. This research will be integrated with
the education of undergraduates at Fayetteville State University (FSU), a
Historically Black University focusing on the education of African American
students, with high female, and military or military-affiliated student
populations. This project will support teaching-research integration capacity
through the design, implementation, and assessment of a course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) offered at FSU, which will be linked to
ongoing CUREs and undergraduate/graduate student-led projects at East Carolina
University (ECU). The integration of microbial ecology and biodiversity research
will improve the STEM education quality of historically marginalized populations
and enhance diversity and training of the STEM workforce.

This research will test the hypothesis that long-term nutrient enrichment will
result in more competitive (and less mutualistic) bacterial populations (e.g.,
increased antimicrobial resistance, increased growth rates) compared to the
unfertilized counterparts by focusing on three objectives: 1) examining
culturable wetland soil bacteria by trait-based phenotypic analyses to
understand how ongoing nutrient enrichment influences bacterial traits that are
important for resource acquisition, 2) identifying genotypic differences between
bacterial isolates from nutrient-rich vs. nutrient-limited environments using
comparative genomic approaches, and 3) examining how previous nutrient
conditions influence microbe-microbe and plant-microbe interactions by adding
bacterial inocula (from fertilized or unfertilized soils) to a wetland grass
exposed to a fertilization gradient. The Fayetteville State University and East
Carolina University teams will collaboratively conduct comparative genomics and
functional lab-based assays. Evaluating bacterial traits in an ecological
context will expand our understanding of how resource limitation influences soil
microbial trait diversity with consequences for promoting beneficial plant-
microbe interactions in agriculture and restoration. Collectively, this research
will provide participants the opportunity to generate new knowledge, establish
and refine critical thinking skills, and enhance the overall competitiveness of
students entering graduate and/or professional school as well as the workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.