* 2302424
* Role of Non-Canonical pPLA-Mediated Acyl Hydrolysis in Plant Functional Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Xuemin Wang, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2027
* USD 815,858.00

Cereal plant inflorescence architecture affects flower density, seed numbers,
and grain production. However, the mechanism that regulates inflorescence
architecture remains largely unknown. This project addresses the molecular and
signaling processes that modulate the reproductive structure and seed
production. It investigates how a family of enzymes interacts with two types of
proteins to affect their cellular activities and physiological functions. The
results have the potential to discover a new regulatory nexus that modulates
plant height, inflorescence architecture, and seed yield. The project will have
broader impacts on science, education, and society. The research activities will
provide opportunities for training students and researchers and serve as a
platform to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science.
Research findings from the proposed research have the potential to enhance crop
functional structure and production for food, feed, fuel, and industrial
feedstocks. The use of rice in the project further facilitates the knowledge
translation to crop improvement, such as enhancing panicle density and grain
yield. Thus, the proposed activities will advance the fundamental knowledge with
potential applications for cereal crop improvement.

The goal of this project is to understand how specific patatin-related
phospholipase As (pPLAs) modulate plant height, reproductive architecture, and
seed size. The hypotheses are that pPLAIIIs that contain a non-canonical
esterase motif act through their unique enzymatic activities and interactions to
affect the subcellular association and function of their interacting proteins
mediating plant growth and structures. The specific aims are to determine: 1)
the catalytic difference and substrate uses of pPLAIII and II; 2) the effect of
pPLAs on S-acylation and membrane association of their interacting proteins; 3)
the connection of pPLAIII with G protein signaling to cellulose synthase
functions for anisotropic growth; and 4) the role of altered pPLAIII’s activity,
subcellular interactions, and expression in panicle architecture and seed
production. Multiple approaches, including mutagenesis, structural modeling,
enzymology, lipidomics, genome-editing, cell biology, and organismal morphology,
will be integrated to test the hypotheses and accomplish the goal. Completion of
the research will fill critical knowledge gaps in the regulatory mechanism for
cereal functional structures and test potential applications to enhance rice
reproductive architecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.