* 2302937
* NSF Engines: Type I:  NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing mass timber technologies (OR, WA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Judith Sheine, University of Oregon Eugene
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

This NSF Engines Development Award is focused on creating a thriving ecosystem
in the Pacific Northwest that will drive and coordinate research and education
innovations in mass timber architecture, engineering, and construction, along
with manufacturing and forest management, to address social and environmental
challenges in housing, workforce development, equity, and natural resource
stewardship. Mass timber products utilize small-scale dimensional lumber, wood
veneer, and chips - fastened together to create robust structural materials that
store carbon. Applying mass timber products in buildings can significantly
reduce the carbon footprint of our nation’s-built environment while
simultaneously improving forest health and mitigating catastrophic wildfires by
using wood fiber from restoration projects involving selective harvesting of
small-diameter logs. This Sustainable and Resilient Architecture, Engineering,
and Construction in Mass Timber (RE-ACT) project promotes environmental
resilience and U.S. global competitiveness through the increased use of
sustainable mass timber products and their applications in buildings, including
affordable housing. As a pioneer in mass timber, the Pacific Northwest is a
natural epicenter for a regional ecosystem. Research and outreach by the
University of Oregon, Oregon State University, and Washington State University
have propelled the region to its current leadership position in this emerging
industry sector.

The RE-ACT project will utilize an inclusive participatory needs assessment
process to structure our stakeholder engagement. Partners include state and
local governments, university researchers, economic development organizations,
non-profit organizations, mass timber manufacturers, fabricators, contractors,
and designers. Significant barriers to developing a globally competitive
ecosystem include the training needed to grow the mass timber workforce, the
limited current manufacturing capacity, and bottlenecks in timber supply,
sawmills, and fabrication. Significant private investment is needed to attract,
incubate, and accelerate new and existing businesses to grow the ecosystem.
Industry growth in this sector requires a diverse, equitable workforce and the
creation of new businesses that address social and economic inequities in rural
and urban communities across the region. The Development Award will enable RE-
ACT’s strategic planning process to identify the needs and opportunities related
to use-inspired research in timber, to determine how best to translate
innovations from materials to applications and commercialization, and to create
the necessary workforce development and investment opportunities to launch a
successful future NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.