* 2302511
* The Frobenius action on curves and abelian varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wanlin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2026
* USD 188,883.00

This research project aims to study arithmetic properties of geometric objects
such as curves and abelian varieties defined over different types of fields such
as number fields, finite fields, global function fields and their extensions.
Instead of studying each individual object one at a time, the principal
investigator and her collaborators will take these objects and pack them into
various types of families, and then use the geometry of the spaces
parameterizing these families to deduce properties of the original objects. The
main question that the principal investigator and her collaborators aim to
answer is to estimate the number of special objects in these families and how
often or rarely they occur. These special objects present useful and important
properties making them central topics of research in many areas and directions
in number theory and arithmetic geometry. Some of the target results will
generalize important prior work of other mathematicians. The research program
will provide many projects suitable for undergraduate and graduate students
research which the principal investigator will supervise.

There are two main directions the principal investigator and her collaborators
will pursue with the projects, namely, to study the p-divisible groups for
families of high dimensional abelian varieties and to study the structure of the
ideal class groups of certain families of global function fields. There are
different types of families in the research projects, such as the reductions of
an abelian variety defined over a global field parameterized by the places of
the base field, algebraic families of abelian varieties parameterized by a
Shimura variety and sets of global function fields ordered by their
discriminant. Specifically, one project aims to prove the set of ordinary primes
in the reduction of certain abelian varieties with nontrivial endomorphism
groups has density 1. In the opposite direction, another project aims to
construct infinitely many primes at which these abelian varieties admit basic
reduction, generalizing the work of Elkiesâ€™ on the infinitude of supersingular
primes for elliptic curves. For ideal class group, the principal investigator
and her collaborators will use Galois cohomology and computational tools to
predict and prove properties of the distribution of l-torsion classes for degree
l extensions of the rational function field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.