* 2302116
* New Bridges to Gromov-Witten Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Nuromur Arguz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 160,000.00

In this project, the PI will work on Gromov--Witten theory, an area in
mathematics lying in the intersection of algebraic geometry and symplectic
topology, with implications to string theory in physics. Gromov--Witten theory
is concerned with counting curves of a given type which intersect in special
configurations. Such counts, in good situations, give rise to enumerative
invariants of the space, called Gromov--Witten invariants. These invariants play
a key role in modern enumerative algebraic geometry, as well as in theoretical
physics, in the context of string theory. In this project, the PI will apply
techniques to calculate Gromov-Witten invariants to several other questions
coming from different areas of mathematics, to obtain major advances in mirror
symmetry, in representation theory of quivers, and in the study of
compactifications of moduli spaces of algebraic varieties. This award will also
support graduate students working with the PI in these areas.

The project is built around five main strands. In the first strand the project
intends to develop new degeneration tools for calculating Gromov--Witten
invariants with arbitrary insertions of a large class of spaces. The second
strand is concerned with constructions of explicit examples of mirrors to log
Calabi--Yau varieties and orbifolds using tropical geometric tools. In the third
strand, the project intends to provide concrete descriptions of functorial
compactifications of the moduli space of log Calabi--Yau pairs using mirror
symmetry. The fourth strand of the project will provide a correspondence between
Donaldson--Thomas theory of quivers and Gromov--Witten theory for cluster
varieties. Finally, the project intends to implement tropical algebro-geometric
tools to study the topology of near symplectic manifolds with a toric structure.
The key new ingredient used throughout these strands is the recent advance in
our understanding of Gromov--Witten theory using logarithmic geometry. This is a
modern variant of algebraic geometry, developed in particular to understand
solutions to degeneration problems, which naturally appear in the context of
enumerative and tropical algebraic geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.