* 2302548
* The Geometry of Quasi-modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Francois Greer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,279.00

This award supports research in the field of algebraic geometry, which deals
with nonlinear shapes defined by polynomial equations in many variables. To
better understand their geometry, one considers potential functions and force
fields (differential forms) on these shapes, taking a cue from Einstein’s
approach to physics on a curved spacetime. Force fields are linear objects, and
thus can be studied using methods of linear algebra and group theory. Among the
more sophisticated methods from this point of view are modular forms. This
project will explore the constraints placed on smooth nonlinear shapes from
modular forms, and then which features persist when the shapes acquire
singularities. To describe singular shapes, we must introduce more general tools
called quasi-modular and mock modular forms. The project has several avenues for
participation by undergraduate and graduate student researchers, as well as
fruitful connections with the neighboring fields of symplectic geometry and
number theory.

The project addresses central questions in several areas of complex algebraic
geometry, beginning with Hodge theory and extending through enumerative
geometry, mirror symmetry, and Severi varieties. These areas are tied together
by the appearance of modular forms and their generalizations: Siegel, quasi, and
mock. A broad theme is the importance of K-trivial varieties, most notably
elliptic curves. The investigator will vastly generalize a theorem of Borcherds
about cycle-valued modular forms on locally symmetric spaces, and then explore
an array of geometric implications. There is an intriguing analogy between
completed Shimura varieties and Kontsevich spaces of stable maps. A new Torelli
theorem for elliptic surfaces leads to a system of conjectural correspondences
which interchange degree and genus.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.