* 2302945
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing a domestic value chain for electric vehicles (AL, MS, GA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Allen Parrish, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on developing an
electric vehicle (EV) ecosystem within the states of Alabama, Georgia, and
Mississippi. MAGNET (Mississippi Alabama Georgia Network for Electric Vehicle
Technologies) will focus on growing research, economic development, and
workforce development for EVs in a synergistic way so that growth of each
component influences the growth of the other two components in a virtuous cycle.
The entire world is urgently focused on decarbonization to resolve the climate
crisis, and the speed of transformation is beginning to generate many disparate
efforts to respond in green transportation generally, and in EV technologies
specifically. Automobile companies are all transitioning from internal
combustion engine production to EV production before the consumer market is
ready for the transition. Coalescence is the key to achieving order from this
chaos and achieving sufficient unity of purpose to make the largest and fastest
industrial transition in history. MAGNET is about collaboration and coalescence
within our service area to achieve ordered and effective growth within the
region, and to serve as a model and influencer for the broader coalescence
needed on a national and international basis.

MAGNET will attract stakeholders within the EV industry as coalition partners:
industry, universities, government organizations, economic development
organizations, social services organizations, and workforce development
organizations - to collaborate on building the EV ecosystem for the greater good
of the region. This coalition will provide specific measurable concerns which
MAGNET will translate into use-inspired research and development initiatives.
Through this collaborative approach, industry, academia, and government will
benefit from the research results which will either be integrated back into an
existing industry or incubated into a new industry to support the overall health
of the EV industry in the region. Workforce development will happen similarly -
by bringing workforce development providers and industry together - listening
and translating from needs to action by developing credentials that truly meet
the needs of EV industry. The expansion of the EV production in the region will
create opportunities in traditionally underserved communities to expand both
existing and new industries that are part of the EV ecosystem. The Development
Award will provide support for building the team to prepare for the Engine,
launching a strategic planning process, conducting engagement to increase
stakeholder participation, and providing credibility to attract partners to the
effort.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.