* 2302617
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Computational Exploration of Electrically Conductive Metal-Organic Frameworks as Cathode Materials in Lithium-Sulfur Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Farnaz shakib, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs) consisting of a lithium metal anode and an
earth-abundant sulfur cathode have attracted much attention as a promising
candidate for energy storage. To date, several challenges and technical hurdles
prevent the development of LSBs. In this collaborative project, Professors
Farnaz Shakib (New Jersey Institute of Technology) and Mohammad Momeni
(University of Missouri‚ÄìKansas City) will investigate the design and application
of electrically-conductive metal-organic frameworks (EC-MOFs) as cathode
materials for LSBs. EC-MOFs are a new class of nanoporous materials with
exceptionally high surface area and layered structures that can tolerate
mechanical deformations during battery operation. This project will advance
science by employing novel computational techniques to design and investigate
the functionality of a new class of materials as cathodes. This will lead to the
design of more efficient clean energy resources. During this project, graduate
students will be trained as the skilled workforce for the future of STEM.
Undergraduate and K-12 level students will learn the fundamentals of
computational chemistry through full-day workshops and Summer Schools, which
will help their growth in STEM fields.

Despite intensive research on lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs), finding a porous
cathode material with a high electrical conductivity that can prevent sulfur
shuttling to the anode is still a pressing challenge. The project will address
the unique structural and electronic properties of Pi(ùúã)-stacked layered 2D
electrically conductive metal-organic frameworks (EC-MOFs) as optimal cathode
materials in LSBs. Apart from the apparent advantage of electrical conductivity,
the layered architecture of EC-MOFs can endure extreme deformations without
mechanical collapse. At the same time, their porous nature allows for efficient
encapsulation of the active sulfur material in the cathode providing enhanced
resistance toward its dissolution into the electrolyte solution (the shuttling
effect). The primary goal of this project is to probe the virtually unlimited
chemical space of EC-MOFs to introduce ideal candidates as cathode materials.
Since a case-by-case analysis of thousands of EC-MOFs as potential cathode
materials is impractical, this research follows two main objectives: (i)
creating a comprehensive and expandable database of EC-MOFs with an automated
crystal structure creation tool which will be followed by high-throughput
screening discovery of EC-MOFs with desired structural and electrical
properties; and (ii) investigating sulfur (S8) and its lithium-polysulfide
derivatives‚Äô encapsulation and possible transport at the electrode-electrolyte
interface from advancedmolecular dynamics simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.