* 2302011
* L-Functions and Automorphic Forms: Algebraic and p-adic Aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ellen Eischen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 250,000.00

The PI (Principal Investigator) will conduct research in number theory, a
central branch of mathematics with deep ties to many other areas of mathematics
and beyond. The research focuses on building bridges between a priori disparate
phenomena, to help improve understanding of families of geometric and algebraic
data. Anticipated outcomes will enable substantial progress toward resolution of
several open questions and unresolved conjectures about patterns in numbers,
symmetries arising in associated structures, and behavior of related objects. As
part of the project, the PI will develop tools to improve the community’s
understanding of phenomena that are of central importance. The project’s reach
includes geometry, algebra, and beyond. The PI will also carry out outreach and
educational activities that will expand the impact of her work well beyond the
research community. These activities, including ones incorporating approaches
from the arts, will promote active engagement with core mathematical topics
among both students and the broader public.

The PI’s research will focus on automorphic forms and L-functions as tools to
advance knowledge about behavior of families of arithmetic data. The main
objective of the research is to prove new results about their algebraic and
p-adic behavior, especially in the context of unitary and symplectic groups. Key
components include proving algebraicity results for critical values of
particular Langlands L-functions, constructing new p-adic L-functions
interpolating those critical values, establishing properties of p-adic and
positive characteristic automorphic forms on higher rank groups, and
investigating certain differential operators related to Maass—Shimura
differential operators. As a crucial step, the PI will also develop associated
geometric infrastructure tied to the spaces over which the automorphic forms in
her work are defined. Anticipated consequences include progress toward instances
of Deligne’s conjecture about critical values of L-functions, the
Iwasawa—Greenberg conjectures about p-adic behavior, and higher rank analogues
of Serre’s conjectures about Galois representations. The methods bridge several
different viewpoints and include analytic, geometric, and algebraic techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.