* 2302267
* Braided tensor categories, higher Picard groups, and classification of topological phases of matter
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Dmitri Nikshych, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 05/31/2026
* USD 182,552.00

This project concerns the study of braided tensor categories and their higher-
dimensional analogs. These are abstract algebraic structures consisting of
objects that can be fused using certain natural rules. Such categories are
indispensable in the study of classical and quantum symmetries. They are also
used as mathematical models for a potential hardware design of a quantum
computer. Namely, they correspond to topological phases of matter relevant to
quantum computation and are used to predict the existence of new types of such
phases, their behavior, and their physical realization. This project is
motivated by these connections and deals with algebraic aspects of the theory of
(higher) tensor categories: their structure, classification, and arithmetic
properties. The emphasis is on categories that are most widely used in
applications. Such categories admit an additional symmetry constraint called
braiding that is used to model the interaction of quantum particles. Student
recruitment and training are essential components of the proposed research
activity.

This project will address fundamental questions concerning the structure and
classification of braided tensor categories and 2-categories. Categorical
techniques will be employed to interpret and solve algebraic problems.
Previously developed tools such as categorical Witt and Picard groups will be
generalized and combined into higher-categorical groups, providing a useful
homotopy-theoretic machinery. The concrete research problems include the
following: (1) classification of braided fusion 2-categories and description of
their Witt invariants, (2) computation of groups of minimal extensions
corresponding to symmetry-protected topological phases of matter, (3) study of
Hecke algebras associated with fusion categories and their integral forms, (4)
classification of fiber functors on non-degenerate braided fusion categories
using a categorical analog of Belavin-Drinfeld triples, and (5) classification
of non-semisimple pointed braided tensor categories.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.