* 2302731
* RAPID: Assessment of Damage and Recovery of Power and Road Infrastructures in Western Alaska after Ex-Typhoon Merbok
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Alice Alipour, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 10/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Ex-typhoon Merbok slammed Western Alaska in September 2022, leading to
widespread damage and disruption in numerous coastal communities. The large
geographic coverage, unique co-occurrence of extreme flood and wind events, and
extremeness of damage caused by this ex-typhoon have provided an opportunity to
perform reconnaissance activities and determine the best pathways to enhance the
resilience of communities to similar extreme events in the future. In
particular, investigations in this context help with the documentation of the
effects of a range of storm-driven hazards in rural communities that had rarely
experienced events of this magnitude in the past. The widespread damage to the
electric power network impaired the daily life of the rural communities that
were not prepared for such events. In parallel, the emergency and recovery
efforts were delayed due to access issues originating from damage to several
roads and bridges. Thus, the test-bed afforded by the September 2022 storm in
Western Alaska is expected to allow a detailed investigation of a range of
research questions categorized based on the time of action associated with each.

This project will enable the performance assessment of physical components of
civil infrastructures, the development of data-assisted empirical relationships
that capture the damageability of constructed facilities, and the identification
of post-disaster recovery actions that effectively contribute to the resiliency
of the impacted communities in rural regions. For this purpose, perishable
damage data and recovery activities will be collected from the field for
systematic studies toward enhancing resilience and establishing effective
mitigation strategies for vulnerable communities. Such original information will
continue to advance resilient practices in coastal regions to further reduce
loss of life and property. The planned investigations will also contribute to
transforming the capabilities of owners, planners, and policymakers to
characterize resilience under various extreme event scenarios and determine
optimal adaptation and mitigation strategies. The educational goal of this
project is to train a future generation of diverse engineers who can produce
innovative solutions to maintain civil infrastructures in service in the face of
calamities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.