* 2302196
* Zero-cycles over local and global fields
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Evangelia Gazaki, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2026
* USD 180,652.00

A classical question in number theory is whether a given system of polynomial
equations with rational coefficients has a rational solution. Sets of solutions
to polynomial equations give rise to what we call algebraic varieties, which are
the central object of study in algebraic and arithmetic geometry. In order to
answer such types of questions, one needs to detect and compute various
invariants of the algebraic variety that reflect its algebraic and geometric
properties. This project is concerned with the study of an invariant used for
higher dimensional varieties, called the Chow group of zero-cycles, which can be
used for classification of algebraic varieties, and relates to the question of
existence of rational solutions to polynomial equations. On the broader impact
of this award, the PI will support one graduate student and continue her various
service and outreach activities including conference and seminar organization
and the Bridge to the doctorate program at the University of Virginia.

This project focuses on four conjectures for zero-cycles. The first conjecture
concerns the construction of motivic filtrations for the Chow group of zero-
cycles. The PI has prior work on this subject for abelian varieties using some
K-theoretic techniques, which she now plans to extend to some special classes of
K3 surfaces. The second conjecture, due to Colliot and Thelene, concerns
algebraic varieties over p-adic fields, and in particular establishing this
conjecture for abelian varieties using various techniques including formal group
laws and integral p-adic Hodge theory. The PI also plans to study two
conjectures over algebraic number fields, and the compatibility between them.
The first of these is a conjecture of Kato and Saito, which can be thought of as
a local-to-global principle for zero-cycles, and she will explore whether her
work could constitute the first step towards a new type of Euler system. The
second conjecture is part of the famous Beilinson-Bloch conjectures, which
predict that the Chow group of zero-cycles is a finitely generated abelian
group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.