* 2302284
* Collaborative Research: Slopes of Modular Forms and Moduli Stacks of Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Bergdall, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 162,717.00

Whole numbers are among the most practical and most important mathematical
objects. Humans have studied them for millennia. Number theory aims to
understand patterns possessed by whole numbers. Fundamental questions revolve
around multiplication: how often are numbers in some sequence even (i.e.
divisible by two)? Divisible by three? Or five? Nineteenth century researchers
introduced symmetry actions to reveal hidden patterns in numbers. And, in the
1970's, Robert Langlands made far-reaching conjectures on symmetry. These
conjectures have occupied number theorists ever since. They predict patterns
seen by symmetry actions will arise equally from the calculus of complex numbers
("modular forms"). A pattern appearing in two places is an example of a
mathematical reciprocity. This project will refine Langlands' reciprocity
prediction. The new tool is geometric spaces of symmetry actions, constructed by
Emerton and Gee over the past fifteen years. These spaces are believed to
convert reciprocity questions into geometrical ones. This project establishes
instances of this belief. It will connect divisibility patterns from the world
of modular forms to geometrical theorems on Emerton and Gee's spaces. The
project has substantial broader impacts. Computational data will be included in
the widely-used L-functions and Modular Forms Database. The project also
develops computational tools for teaching. Open education resources (OERs) are
learning materials placed in the public domain. Their primary benefit is
providing learning experiences at low costs. They can be adapted to fit a
diversity of learning environments. The project develops OERs for computer-based
learning of number theory and abstract algebra. The project supports education
and outreach in two more ways. First, Math Circles will be run in public
schools. Second, research projects will be developed to support the Program in
Mathematics for Young Scientists. Finally, the project plans two research
workshops in number theory. Both aim to disseminate new advances in number
theory and reciprocity.

The more detailed aim is a new study of p-adic slopes of modular forms and
Galois representations. The p-adic slope of a modular form is how often its p-th
Hecke eigenvalue is divisible by a fixed prime p. Predictions and theorems on
slopes have been around since the 1980's. Seven years ago, Bergdall and Pollack
proposed a way ("the ghost conjecture") to unify almost all prior ideas. The
ghost conjecture's input is a congruence class of modular forms. The output is
an elementary recipe for slopes in the class. The main caveat is the ghost
conjecture only applies to "regular" classes. But, assuming regularity, Liu,
Truong, Xiao, and Zhao (LTXZ) recently established the conjecture. The current
project removes the regular assumption in the ghost conjecture. The new tool is
Emerton and Gee's (EG) moduli stack of Galois representations. In Galois terms,
regularity is a generic property on the EG stack. The project's technical
innovation is thus deforming slope questions over the stack. A geometrical
reformulation will open the door to generalizing the LTXZ proof. It will also
create space for novel studies of Hilbert modular forms or higher rank
automorphic forms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.