* 2302506
* Excellence in Research: A Spatiotemporal Sustainability Method for Post-Disaster Vegetative Debris Management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Nazli Yesiller, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,256.00

Storms generate large volumes of vegetative debris, which often require
significant resources for timely collection and disposal. This abundant debris
also holds great potential for recycling and reuse, diverting it from landfills
and creating value in end-of-life materials. However, it is critical to collect
and process the debris promptly (before significant decomposition occurs) to
maximize its value. Unfortunately, current debris management practices overlook
the varying material conditions of vegetative debris in different storm-affected
areas, limiting the sustainable use of these valuable resources. To address
these challenges, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this this Excellence in
Research (EiR) project propose to study and understand the changing organic
conditions of storm vegetative debris over time and space and integrate this
knowledge into a data-driven planning framework for post-storm debris
management. By considering the evolving condition of vegetative debris across
storm-affected areas, the proposed planning method will optimize debris
collection resource allocation to enhance recycling and reuse of collected
materials. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the potential improvement of post-disaster debris planning, waste
reduction, and the creation of valuable end-of-life materials. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of two graduate students as well as mentoring of a post-
doctoral scholar at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) and
mentoring of a graduate student at California Polytechnic State University.

Large quantities of vegetative debris require significant resources for timely
management. Vegetative holds substantial potential for recycling and reuse,
reducing landfill waste and creating value in end-of-life materials. However,
the decomposition of organic materials poses challenges to achieving sustainable
utilization. Given the spatial variability due to storage conditions and
geographic distribution, as well as the temporal changes during collection,
temporary storage, and final use or disposal, it is crucial to consider both
spatial and temporal aspects in informed sustainable disaster waste management
planning. To address this challenge, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this
project propose to investigate and unravel the characteristics and evolution of
storm-related vegetative debris in space and time, integrating this
understanding into data-driven debris management planning to enhance recycling,
reuse, and advance sustainable waste management practices. The specific research
objectives are to 1) identify the temporal evolution of vegetative debris and
model the dynamic decomposition potential of uncollected debris; 2) develop an
agent-based modeling (ABM) simulation model of debris collection operations and
compare the spatially extended temporal performance-driven approach with the
temporal-only approach using the simulation model and material assessment model;
and 3) develop a novel spatial-temporal sustainability-based planning
methodology for debris recovery. The successful completion of this project could
lead to a paradigm shift in post-disaster planning, transitioning from the
conventional time-based framework to a novel extended time- and space-based
framework to enable more effective and sustainable debris management. To
implement the education and training goals of the project, the PIs plan to
engage with the Educating Engineering Students Innovatively (EESI) program at
FAMU to enhance learning of students underrepresented in STEM. In addition, the
PIs plan to engage with local agencies and contractors to make research products
more relevant to management practices

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.