* 2302023
* ERI: RUI: Wavefront shaping through flexible multicore fiber bundles for coherent light focusing and imaging in neurophotonics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Joshua Brake, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2025
* USD 173,904.00

The goal of this Engineering Research Initiation(ERI) project is to develop an
improved method of delivering light to the brain for imaging and stimulating
brain activity. Light is a powerful tool for probing the brain and can be used
to monitor the firing of neurons or directly activate neurons using
optogenetics. Optical wavefront shaping techniques can enable deeper light
penetration in the brain. However, these techniques are stymied because it is
challenging to deliver the shaped light to the brain. This project addresses
this challenge by developing a new system which leverages fiber bundles and
optical wavefront shaping to reliably deliver shaped light to the brain, even
when the fiber bundle is moving. The outcomes of the research will provide new
tools for neuroscientists to deliver shaped light to the brain, enabling better
experiments in the research laboratory and paving the way for future clinical
applications. The broader impacts of the project include research opportunities
for undergraduate students at Harvey Mudd, providing tightly integrated
educational opportunities in scientific research methods, optical system design,
and neurophotonics. In addition, the PI will develop new educational resources
to broaden access to optics through wavefront shaping simulations in Python-
based Jupyter notebooks and low-cost lab experiments exploring optical fibers
and light matter interactions in scattering media. Multicore fibers offer an
attractive way to deliver light to regions of interest in the brain but are
challenging to use in practical applications due to core-dependent phase delays
which are impacted by a variety of physical and environmental factors such as
movement and temperature fluctuations. The project will address this challenge
by developing methods to correct the phase distortion of the multicore fiber
without requiring access to the distal end, enabling shaped wavefronts to be
flexibly delivered into deep tissue even when the core-to-core phase delays are
dynamically changing. The research plan is divided into two major tasks: (1)
developing a low-coherence interferometry system to measure the phase distortion
of the multicore fiber and characterizing key performance metrics such as
temporal response and phase sensitivity and (2) using the low-coherence
interferometry system with wavefront shaping to correct for the phase delay in
the multicore fiber and create desired wavefronts beyond the distal tip of the
fiber.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.