* 2302210
* Analytic problems around automorphic forms and L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Young, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2026
* USD 245,636.00

One of the main tools for understanding the distribution of prime numbers is
through properties of the Riemann zeta function. The zeta function is the most
fundamental example of an L-function, which is a mathematical construction that
combines arithmetical information about all the primes at once. More general
L-functions, such as Dirichlet L-functions, are useful for understanding primes
in arithmetic progressions. One of the main ways that L-functions are studied is
by placing them into families, such as the family of all Dirichlet L-functions,
and viewing their properties through this framework. Much of the proposed work
in this proposal concerns the development of properties of new families of
L-functions. One of the main goals is to better-understand the size of these
L-functions, especially in certain ranges that have been inaccessible using
previous methods. The PI will continue to mentor and collaborate with
undergraduate students, particularly through the Texas A&M REU. Such
opportunities are important for preparing students for graduate studies,
particularly for undergraduate students from non-PhD granting institutions as
well as from population groups underrepresented in STEM fields. The PI will also
continue to advise PhD students to work on problems related to families of
L-functions and their moments.

The PI will study new families of automorphic forms and their associated
L-functions, especially via moments of L-functions and large sieve inequalities.
The PI plans to study high moments of L-functions in order to make progress on
the challenging but important L-functions in conductor-dropping families. The
proposer will also study narrower families of L-functions through the use of new
versions of the relative trace formula that isolate small families based on
their local behavior. In a related vein, the proposer will study large sieve
inequalities for families of automorphic forms, with two main goals. One
objective is to establish large sieve bounds in some of the new, narrow
families. A second goal is to develop heuristics for conjecturing the size of a
large sieve bound for more general families. The PI will mentor PhD students on
problems on moments of L-functions for both narrow families and for higher
degree L-functions. The proposer will study newform Dedekind sums with his
undergraduate students. The methods employed will be techniques from analytic
number theory such as functional equations, exponential sums and integrals, and
the spectral theory of automorphic forms, including the Arthur-Selberg trace
formula and the relative trace formula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.