* 2302644
* SourceWrite: Real-time, biometric, intention-informed scaffolding of source-based writing processes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Maria Anna Conijn, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2026
* USD 849,992.00

Writing is a complex task which comprises several component processes: reading
source materials, setting goals, planning content, translating ideas into
language, reading already-written text, copyediting, and so forth. Which
processes a student uses, and in what sequence, affects the quality of their
written composition. By the time students reach college, most will have
developed their own individual mixture of writing processes. These will vary in
effectiveness. When faced with demanding disciplinary writing tasks, especially
those that require synthesizing multiple sources, students' established writing
processes often turn out to be suboptimal. This is a particular concern for
students studying for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
degrees. Required college-level composition classes are designed to help
students improve their writing skills. However, in these classes, students
usually receive feedback only about the texts they have already written, not
about the processes they use when they write. This is because writing
instructors do not have access to the moment-by-moment actions by which
students' texts are produced. In this project, the researchers will develop an
intelligent tutoring system called "SourceWrite" that will automatically track
what the student is doing during the composition process, infer why they are
doing it, and then provide individualized advice and assistance, all in real
time while the student is still in the process of composing their text.

Specifically, the researchers will develop methods for automatic writing-process
analysis that will combine biometric data (keystroke timings and eye movements)
with natural language processing to infer the student's intentions during
composition. These methods will permit automatic, real-time predictions about
writing-process patterns and how these will affect the ultimate quality of the
text. This will be achieved in real time, during text composition, before the
text has been fully produced. To achieve this end, this project will bring
together research in (data-driven) writing analytics with (theory-driven)
psycholinguistics of text production, two directions that have traditionally
been followed separately. The learning and teaching innovation will be in
designing, implementing, and evaluating a novel educational intervention that
will provide intelligent support to students as they engage with their sources
and produce academic text, in the context of a college composition course.
Through a series of design-based research iterations followed by a randomized,
controlled evaluation, this project will establish design principles for this
new pedagogy and determine its effectiveness for developing college students'
writing ability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.