* 2302724
* CCSS: FLASH: Drone Obstacle Avoidance with Event Cameras: Bio-Inspired Architecture, Algorithm, and Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Longfei Shangguan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Drones hold immense potential as the future of deliveries, with the possibility
of transporting food, medications, packages, and various other items directly to
our doorsteps. However, realizing this vision requires overcoming various
challenges, and obstacle avoidance stands as a critical component. A collision
will not only cause financial loss but also threaten human safety. The objective
of this research project is to develop an effective drone obstacle avoidance
system by leveraging an innovative sensor called event camera. To achieve this
goal, the PI systematically studied the mammalian visual system and proposes an
innovative bio-inspired signal processing architecture, algorithm, and platform
to fully unleash the potential of event cameras for drone obstacle avoidance.
The education effort includes developing both individual and group-based
research projects related to this proposal, actively recruiting female and
underrepresented minority students for research, and providing research
opportunities for K-12 students through outreach programs at Pitt. The overall
research proceeds in three coherent thrusts. Thrust I: develop bio-inspired
event filtering algorithms and architecture. Thrust II: develop bio-inspired
event-matching algorithms. Thrust III: develop an open-sourced hardware-software
interface. The developed solutions will lead to remarkable advancements in drone
obstacle avoidance and bio-inspired designs. Moreover, we believe the proposed
bio-inspired designs are generally applicable to other time-sensitive obstacle
detection and localization applications such as autonomous driving. The
developed open-sourced platform will allow mobile users and developers to fast
prototype their own ideas without the need to build from scratch, which lowers
the barrier of entry to drone-related research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.