* 2302436
* Excellence in Research: Understanding Structural, Magnetic, and Electronic Properties of Chromium Telluride
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Samaresh Guchhait, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 431,052.00

Non-technical Abstract

In recent years, there has been an increased interest in green technologies,
which can lower the dependence on non-renewable sources of energy, thus reducing
their environmental impacts. Magneto-caloric materials are an important class of
materials being explored in this endeavor. These materials have potential
applications in solid-state refrigeration, micro-coolers, energy conversion,
magnetic pump, induced magnetic hyperthermia, and controlled drug delivery. In
this project, we study a room temperature magneto-caloric material, chromium
telluride, to understand the relationship between its magnetic, electronic and
structural properties. The research is performed at Howard University in
collaboration with national laboratories, which enables Howard University
researchers to forge close research collaborations with outside communities.
Howard University is the largest research-active historically black university
(HBCU), with a large historically underrepresented student population.
Therefore, this research is bringing cutting-edge research opportunities to
underrepresented minority students and is broadening their participation in
materials science research. These researchers are being trained in advanced
material science research, data analysis, simulations, scientific writing, and
presentation skills. This will enhance their competitiveness with prospective
employers both in academia and industry.

Technical Abstract

Recently, chromium chalcogenides have drawn much interest due to their diverse
magnetic properties. This project studies one room-temperature magnetic
material, chromium telluride, to understand the relation between its structural,
magnetic, and electronic properties. The research includes single crystal
growth, magnetic, heat capacity, magneto-transport, synchrotron x-ray
scattering, and neutron diffraction studies, all supplemented by density
functional theory (DFT)-based simulations. Pair distribution function studies
are performed to determine the evolution of the chromium telluride structure
with temperature. Coherent soft x-ray spectroscopy studies help determine its
ground-state electronic structure. Furthermore, neutron diffraction studies help
determine its magnetic ordering. This project helps answer unaddressed
fundamental questions associated with its magneto-structural phase transitions.
In addition, this material is used to explore the parallel anomalous Hall effect
(PAHE). Therefore, this proposed research aligns well with the Howard Forward
strategy of providing underrepresented minority students with exceptional
educational and research experiences and attracting next-generation STEM
scholars from such groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.