* 2302024
* RUI: Volumes in tropical geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dustin Ross, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2026
* USD 219,999.00

Throughout the last several decades, tropical geometry has emerged as an
influential bridge between the disparate subjects of algebraic and discrete
geometry. In essence, tropical geometry replaces geometric spaces modeled by
nonlinear equations (a parabola or a sphere, for example) with geometric spaces
modeled by linear equations (a line or a plane, for example). Crucially, this
bridge runs in both directions, allowing one to study the rich structure of
nonlinear spaces using linear and combinatorial techniques while also allowing
one to import the deep geometric framework of algebraic geometry into the study
of combinatorics. This project will build a new lane in this bridge that is
centered around the classical concept of volume, with applications in both
combinatorics and algebraic geometry. In addition to the intellectual and
mathematical outcomes of this project, the principal investigator will use the
line of research problems in this project as an avenue to train and support a
diverse community of student researchers at his home institution of San
Francisco State University, preparing them to succeed in PhD programs and
research careers in the sciences.

One of the most important ways in which volumes arise in algebraic geometry is
through the study of divisors on algebraic varieties, which are fundamental
objects for studying the defining equations of a variety. Given a divisor on a
projective variety, there are at least two volume-theoretic interpretations for
the degree of its top power: it is the volume of the associated compact
Riemannian manifold, and it is the volume of the Newton-Okounkov body associated
to the divisor. This project will develop parallels of these notions in tropical
geometry by introducing volume-theoretic tools for studying divisors and
intersection numbers on tropical varieties. Applications of the volume-theoretic
tools introduced in this project include a new geometric understanding of recent
influential results concerning log-concavity of characteristic polynomials of
matroids, allowing one to generalize these log-concavity results to intersection
numbers on a much larger class of tropical varieties than was accessible by
previous approaches, as well as the development of new tropical methods for
studying cones of divisors on tropical compactifications of algebraic varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.