* 2302258
* NSFDEB-NERC: Machine learning tools to discover balancing selection in genomes from spatial and temporal autocorrelations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael DeGiorgio, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 06/30/2026
* USD 648,125.00

Understanding why individuals within species are so genetically diverse is a
fundamental problem in evolutionary biology and genetics. This individual
genetic diversity, and its causes, has important consequences for biodiversity
conservation, agricultural biology, and biomedicine. Balancing selection is a
process that promotes and maintains genetic diversity over time. Despite a few
well-known examples, however, little is known about recent or fleeting balancing
selection, likely because its genetic clues are subtle and difficult to
distinguish from those left by other adaptive and nonadaptive processes.
Detecting balancing selection in genome data is further complicated by technical
issues, such as missing or degraded DNA sequence data, which are not accounted
for by current methods. The primary goal of this project is to tackle these
challenges by designing state-of-the-art tools based on recent advances in
artificial intelligence, which provide strategies for identifying signals of
past evolutionary events in genetic data. These tools will be made freely
available in a public repository, enabling widespread use. In addition, this
project will actively engage local high school students in coding and machine
learning through the iDeepLearn summer workshop, and other students from groups
under-represented in STEM through outreach programs at the FAU campus high
school. Together, these planned activities will facilitate future advancements
in our understanding of balancing selection across diverse taxonomic groups, as
well as foster participation of traditionally underrepresented high school
students in STEM research.

Detecting balancing selection is enhanced by using temporally sampled genetic
data often accessed from ancient DNA, which presents numerous technical hurdles.
This research seeks to develop novel machine- and deep-learning methods that can
identify genomic signatures of recent and transient balancing selection from
spatially and temporally sampled genetic data, while accounting for technical
issues encountered by researchers working with ancient DNA and nonmodel
organimsm. The project will specifically address detecting balancing selection
from data that are incomplete, low-quality, unphased, or pooled under settings
for which there is uncertainty in genetic and demographic parameters. Developed
methods will be applied to human, mosquito, and fruit fly testbeds, as these
study systems have evidence for diverse modes of balancing selection, and
publicly available datasets with characteristics of the technical hurdles the
projects seeks to overcome. These methods will also be implemented as open-
source tools applicable to a wide range of data types common across model and
nonmodel organisms, empowering future studies of adaptation by removing barriers
imposed by limitations of data quality and demographic knowledge, and ultimately
leading to novel insights in the understanding of adaptive history across the
tree of life. Workshops on machine learning in population genomics will be
developed and delivered for high school girls as part of the iDeepLearn summer
program at Florida Atlantic University. In both the US and the UK, multiple
STEM-related career events aimed at secondary school pupils will be developed
and delivered.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.