* 2302845
* Equipment: Acquisition of the IRIS instruments FullWaver device for monitoring active landslides in Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Sina Saneiyan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2025
* USD 204,935.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art electrical geophysical
tool that can provide 3D images of the subsurface without the requirement of
drilling and excavation. The equipment outperforms other available electrical
geophysical tools in that it requires no wiring and has many separate
transmitter and receiver stations, enabling large-scale studies. The tool will
be used at the University of Oklahoma (OU) and will be used by researchers and
students and the Oklahoma Geological Survey (OGS) for a suite of research
studies. The instrument is particularly important as it will expand research in
the area of geohazard mitigation. Furthermore, it will be used for other
research studies including 1) characterizing the subsurface for better
understanding the effect of earthquakes within the first 100 m of Earthâ€™s
surface, 2) monitoring landslides and identifying their causes and effects, 3)
finding fresh groundwater, 4) assessing infrastructure foundation structural
integrity, 5) contaminant transport monitoring in the subsurface, and 6)
critical mineral (such as lithium) exploration. Additionally, the tool will be
used for educating undergraduate and graduate students who are pursuing degrees
at OU during a 6-week field camp training program in the summers. Finally, the
acquisition of this tool will allow for the research and development of new
scientific approaches to tackle the environmental and geohazard issues facing
tribal communities across the state of Oklahoma.

This project will procure an IRIS Instruments FullWaver electrical geophysical
instrument at the School of Geosciences at the University of Oklahoma (OU). The
FullWaver device package consists of (a) multiple separate recording devices
(receivers) capable of measuring full waveform time domain induced polarization
(TDIP), direct current electrical resistivity (DC-ER) and self-potential (SP)
signals; (b) one electrical current transmitter, which is wirelessly
synchronized with the receivers and (c) two signal processing software. Each
FullWaver receiver includes a built-in GPS and unlike any other resistivity
devices include its own power source (i.e., separated from electrical current
transmitter unit), thus a full survey setup does not require any cables
connecting the individual devices (sensors) to a main device, allowing use of
the FullWaver (1) on large surfaces, (2) in harsh terrains, and (3) areas that
constantly require an accurate position of the sensors (e.g., areas prone to
land subsidence), all of which making the FullWaver the perfect instrument for
long-term landslide site characterization. The instrument is particularly
important as it will expand our research in the area of geohazard mitigation at
the School of Geosciences among other near-surface geophysical research areas
(e.g., monitoring contaminant transport at large scales).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.