* 2302567
* Homotopical methods and cohomological supports in local algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Joshua Pollitz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 07/31/2026
* USD 153,450.00

This research project investigates singularities in commutative algebra through
the lens of various homological constructions. Commutative algebra serves as a
local model for algebraic geometry; the latter is a central branch of modern
mathematics, where the focus is on the geometric properties of solutions sets to
systems of polynomial equations (objects ubiquitous throughout mathematics). In
commutative algebra, one examines algebraic structures known as (local) rings,
which provide insights into both smooth and singular points on the solution sets
explored in algebraic geometry. Since its inception in the 1950's, homological
algebra has been instrumental in describing singularities in local commutative
algebra, offering valuable ring-theoretic insights. This project aims to
leverage tools from homological algebra to gain a deeper understanding of
commutative rings, thereby shedding light on singularities in local commutative
algebra and algebraic geometry. Moreover, this strategy advances commutative
algebra by drawing from the wealth of ideas in algebraic topology and
representation theory, areas that have leaned heavily on developing homological
methods for application in their respective fields, and (further) revealing
connections between commutative algebra and these areas. The award will also be
used to fund graduate students interested in the proposed research program.

More specifically, the PI will apply an array of homological tools to glean
insights in commutative algebra; the two central tools being homotopical methods
and cohomological support. Applications of both theories have been far-reaching
in commutative algebra, and the proposed research program will further hone this
machinery with an eye toward breakthroughs in local algebra. In particular, a
primary focus of this project will be on studying the structural properties of
certain triangulated categories arising in commutative algebra. Projects in this
direction include gaining traction on a long-standing conjecture of Quillen,
unifying results in prime characteristic commutative algebra by understanding
generators in the bounded derived category, and relating the dimension of
certain cohomological supports to classical invariants in commutative algebra
with the hopes of making progress on questions of Avramov and Jacobsson. The
structural properties of resolutions is another primary focus of the project. In
this direction, the PI will extend Koszul duality phenomena in local algebra to
include non-quadratic and non-graded algebras. This will be achieved using
A-infinity structures on resolutions to introduce and study a class of rings (or
more generally ring maps) generalizing the class of classical Koszul algebras.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.