* 2302458
* Assessing Atmospheric Impacts of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha'apai Volcanic Eruption and Using It as a Natural Experiment to Evaluate an Earth System Model
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Mark Flanner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2026
* USD 518,808.00

Volcanic eruptions can affect weather and climate through several different
mechanisms. For example, highly explosive eruptions, like that of Mt. Pinatubo
in 1991, often produce sulfur-containing droplets and particles high in Earth’s
atmosphere. There, these aerosols scatter sunlight back to space and can cool
global climate for more than a year. On January 15, 2022, the Hunga Tonga–Hunga
Ha'apai volcano erupted explosively in the South Pacific. Satellite observations
showed that the eruption introduced surprisingly little sulfur to the atmosphere
but injected an enormous amount of water vapor into the stratosphere, about
10-20 miles above Earth’s surface. Water vapor is a greenhouse gas and is
particularly effective at warming climate when it is in the stratosphere, where
only trace amounts of water generally exist. The eruption increased the total
global stratospheric water vapor content by roughly 10%, representing the
largest single-source injection of stratospheric water vapor ever observed from
space, and furthermore this excess water could persist for 5-10 years. The Tonga
eruption therefore represents an unprecedented natural experiment on Earth’s
atmosphere. This investigation will use observations and modeling to assess the
atmospheric impacts of the eruption, including its effects on Earth’s energy
budget via alterations to the amount of sunlight and infrared energy absorbed
and emitted by the planet. The investigators will assess how the eruption
affected stratospheric temperatures, circulation patterns throughout the
atmosphere, and the annual ozone hole formation over Antarctica, which may be
perturbed through chemical and physical mechanisms related to the eruption. More
broadly, this project will evaluate how well an Earth System Model captures the
observed perturbations to Earth’s atmosphere in the years following the eruption
and identify improvements to models that remedy any deficiencies that are found.

In a broader sense, this project will contribute to an improved understanding of
the atmospheric and climate impacts and risks to global society posed by large
volcanic eruptions, particularly those that erupt beneath the ocean surface like
the 2022 Tonga event. Records of past volcanic activity recorded in ice cores
from Greenland and Antarctica indicate that eruptions ten times more powerful
than the 2022 Tonga event occur roughly once every 625 years, with potentially
severe impacts on civilization. The scientists involved in this project will
conduct simulations of such events to explore their potential impacts. They will
also adapt an Earth System Model so that it can be used more readily by the
scientific community to comprehensively study climate impacts from volcanic
eruptions, for example by improving the ability of the model to track and
isolate the influences of volcanic water vapor, sulfur, and ash. Finally, the
investigators will train and mentor a Ph.D. student for this project and expand
the material on volcano-climate interactions presented in the graduate- and
undergraduate-level courses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.