* 2302155
* Conference: 2023 Texas Women in Math Symposium at the University of Texas at Austin.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Mirela Ciperiani, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 24,987.00

This NSF award provides support for Texas Women in Math Symposium (TWIMS) at the
University of Texas at Austin on March 4-5, 2023. The TWIMS is a conference
series that takes place at a different institution in Texas each academic year.
The ongoing goals of the TWIMS conference series are to highlight the research
and professional accomplishments of outstanding, established female
mathematicians, to provide a supportive platform for early career women
mathematicians to showcase their research, to facilitate connections among
Texas-based mathematicians that lead to long-lasting professional relationships,
and to provide an inclusive environment to discuss issues facing those of gender
minorities (ie. women, nonbinary, gender non-conforming, etc.) in mathematics.
The conference is open to participants and presenters in any subfield of the
mathematical sciences and will foster cross-disciplinary collaborations and
mentorship opportunities among a diverse group of mathematicians of minority
genders. In this way, TWIMS 2023 will contribute to the advancement of
mathematical research and will encourage early career researchers to continue to
work in the mathematical sciences.

The inclusion of individuals from dissimilar backgrounds leads to the
advancement of research. Increasing the number of people interested in pursuing
math research and diversifying the backgrounds of researchers increases the
number of perspectives from which any math problem is considered. This is key to
the advancement of the field as a whole. At each career stage we see attrition
of women in mathematics at rates disproportionately higher than those of men. In
order to increase retention of women at every career stage, the institutional
barriers preventing individuals from reaching their full potential need to be
removed. Some of these barriers include the prevalence of negative societal
gender stereotypes, lack of diverse representation and role models, and lack of
encouragement from teachers and mentors. TWIMS aims to address these problems
directly with the explicit goal of contributing to the retention of gender
minorities in math at every career stage. To this end, the symposium will
showcase the research of a diverse array of distinguished invited speakers to
provide examples of successful women in math who can be role-models to younger
mathematicians or women at an earlier stage in their careers. In addition TWIMS
2023 includes two professional development workshops aimed at improving the
participation and presence of our participants in the mathematical community.
The conference website is https://sites.google.com/utexas.edu/twims-2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.