* 2302974
* An Intelligent Assistant to Support Teachers and Students in Simulation-Based Science Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* N Narayanan, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2025
* USD 700,854.00

This project will develop an artificial intelligence-based conversational
framework (iLab) to create dialog-based interactive laboratory experiences for
middle school science students and teachers in the context of simulation-based
science experiments. A key component of the framework is an intelligent
conversational agent (SimPal) that will engage with teachers in a dialog to
solicit their instructional goals associated with simulation experiments and
store them using a computational representation. The agent will then use this
representation to facilitate and mediate an interactive dialog (powered by
state-of-the-art large language models) with students as they run experiments to
enhance their learning experience. The agent will proactively ask students
reflection questions, provide them with real-time customized feedback, track
students' progress, and then analyze their responses and report back to the
teacher. Unlike existing intelligent tutoring systems and pedagogical
conversational agents, the framework will work with any off-the-shelf third-
party simulations in any domain and be used by any teacher or U.S. school
district, a unique feature of this project. Further, teachers will work as
partners in developing and deploying this technology. As such, the project is
expected to make unique contributions to benefit student learning and, thereby,
have a broad reach and appeal in U.S. schools.

The framework developed under this project will serve as a bridge between the
teacher and each student in large classrooms where it is not possible for the
teacher to support each student personally. It will engage the student in a
meaningful dialog, informed both by the responses from the student and by the
teacher’s instructional goals while adapting to both the student and the
teacher, thereby guiding the student toward a deeper understanding of the
underlying scientific concepts and principles. Evaluation studies will be
conducted in multiple Wisconsin classrooms where teachers will integrate the
technology into the regular curriculum. The project will chart a path toward
intelligent support designed to ameliorate four major challenges to learning in
the science classroom: (1) access to high-quality learning materials at any time
and place; (2) adaptability to ensure that students with a variety of
backgrounds, experiences, and abilities receive custom feedback based on the
teacher’s goals; (3) repeatability so students can run several experiments in a
short time and receive real-time feedback; and (4) scalability to reduce the
burden of running inquiry-oriented science investigations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.