* 2302019
* Conference: 2023 Combinatorial Algebra meets Algebraic Combinatorics (CAAC)
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Matthew Satriano, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,500.00

The Combinatorial Algebra meets Algebraic Combinatorics (CAAC) conference will
take place at the University of Waterloo from 20 to 22 of January, 2023. The
CAAC is an annual three-day interdisciplinary conference for mathematicians that
brings together algebraists interested in discrete mathematics and
combinatoricists interested in algebra. The conference focuses on the interplay
between algebra and combinatorics and their applications to other areas of
mathematics and science. The 20th iteration of CAAC will bring together the
mathematical research communities of Canada and the United States, as well as
some mathematicians from other continents. CAAC strives to be an inclusive
conference that promotes collaboration, development of young talent, and
progress in this field.

CAAC 2023 will feature presentations on a wide array of topics in combinatorial
algebra, algebraic combinatorics, and their applications. These topics include
Newton-Okounkov bodies, chromatic symmetric functions, enumeration, cluster
algebras, monomial ideals, dynamical algebraic combinatorics, plethysm, toric
varieties, and geometric vertex decomposition. There will also be a poster
session for early-career participants to share their work. More details are
available on the conference website,
https://sites.google.com/view/caac2023/home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.