* 2302483
* CAREER:  Optically Controlled Protein Proximity Labelling
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Michael Taylor, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 537,452.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Michael Taylor at the University of Wyoming will develop new,
light-promoted chemical reactions that enable study of the biological role of
the mitochondrial translocator protein. Proteins found within a cell form
complex networks with neighboring proteins to help control critical cellular
processes. In these networks, proteins interact and communicate with each other
by packing very closely together in specific orientations. These networks often
change rapidly in response to external stimuli or because of cellular
dysfunction, making them difficult to study in their natural environment. In
this project, Dr. Taylor will study protein networks by developing a new
chemical reaction that labels a protein of interest with an unnatural covalent
bond to a chemical probe. The labeling chemistry that is developed in this
project is controlled by application of a specific color of light. The project
exploits this requirement through precision molecular design of the probes,
which is expected to enable iterative protein labeling sequences that are
achieved by simply altering the color of light used to activate the reaction.
This would allow for the study of not only a specific protein itself, but also
how the target protein networks with neighboring proteins, and how these
networks change in real time. Integrated educational objectives focus on
increasing awareness of and enthusiasm for science-technology-engineering and
mathematics (STEM) in the state of Wyoming through two key activities: (1)
piloting on-line, interactive curricula at the middle school level, which
emphasize how biology and chemistry are inherently linked; and (2) using the
chemical reactions that are developed in this project, that employ aesthetically
pleasing fluorescent molecules, as a basis for interactive demonstrations for
local Girl Scout troops.

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr.
Michael Taylor at the University of Wyoming to develop new, light-promoted
chemical reactions that are applied to the study of the biological role of the
mitochondrial translocator protein, tryptophan-rich sensory protein (TSPO). TSPO
has proven to be a challenging protein to study with canonical experimental
workflows, and thus, its proposed roles in cellular function remain
controversial. Dr. Taylor seeks to address this challenge by developing a
bioconjugation reaction that combines multiple selectivity factors, including
light activation, to chemically label TSPO with high precision. Dr. Taylor aims
to exploit the modular tunability of the chemical systems employed herein to
develop a suite of reagents that are activated over a wide array of wavelengths
and can achieve protein labeling through different mechanisms. This new approach
opens up the possibility of using optically orchestrated, iterative protein
labeling sequences to label both TSPO itself, as well as neighboring proteins.
This, in turn, could enable the construction of a three-dimensional rendering of
the biological environment surrounding TSPO, which would lend unique insight
into the biological role of TSPO. This CAREER Award provides the support to
develop, understand, and apply a suite of chemical reagents and reactions that
allow for the study of TSPO in a cellular environment. The integration of
education and research is achieved through two specific educational activities
designed to enhance enthusiasm and awareness of STEM by developing interactive
STEM curricula for middle school students and implementing interactive
demonstrations for local Girl Scout troops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.