* 2302127
* RET site: A Year-Long NanoEngineering Exploration from the Lab to the Classroom
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Carolyn Nichol, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,985.00

The RET Site: A Year-Long NanoEngineering Exploration from the Lab to the
Classroom is a three-year program hosted by Rice University and designed to
bring cutting-edge nanoengineering research in sustainable energy transition,
clean water, and improved diagnostics and therapeutics into 5th-12th grade
science classrooms. The program works with high-needs school districts in the
greater Houston area, supporting twelve science teachers each year as they
conduct research with Rice University's top-tier nanoengineering research
faculty and facilities. The program includes a 7-week immersive laboratory
internship and support throughout the academic year. The program aims to enhance
the content knowledge and understanding of nanoengineering research processes of
5th-12th grade science teachers as they develop engaging nanoengineering lessons
and activities centered on research practices. By building leadership capacity
in RET participants, the program plans to increase student interest in STEM
careers while encouraging underrepresented minority participation in the STEM
workforce. The program also aims to establish a network of teachers actively
learning about nanoengineering and disseminating their findings through cohort-
building with partner school districts that serve historically underrepresented
STEM students. The RET program aims to bring the excitement of cutting-edge
nanoengineering research into the classroom and inspire the next generation of
STEM leaders. Ultimately, the RET program seeks to create a cadre of motivated,
creative, and diverse educators who will foster future STEM innovators while
contributing to the development of a prepared, diverse STEM workforce. By
connecting industry mentors with 5th-12th grade science teachers and their
students, the program hopes to provide insights into engineering career
opportunities and trajectories.

The RET Site: A Year-Long NanoEngineering Exploration from the Lab to the
Classroom is a three-year program hosted by Rice University and designed to
bring cutting-edge nanoengineering research in sustainable energy transition,
clean water, and improved diagnostics and therapeutics into 5th-12th grade
science classrooms. This RET Site includes a professional development (PD)
program that aims to bring cutting-edge advancements in nanoengineering research
regarding sustainable energy transition, clean water, and improved diagnostics
and therapeutics into 5th-12th grade science classrooms. The program works with
high-needs school districts in the greater Houston area, supporting science
teachers as they conduct research with Rice University's top-tier
nanoengineering research faculty and facilities. The program includes 7-week
immersive laboratory internships, collaborative leadership, and PD support
throughout the academic year. Each year, a cohort of 12 RET participants will
disseminate program outcomes. The objectives are to: enhance 5th-12th grade
teachers' content knowledge and understanding of nanoengineering research
processes; develop nanoengineering lessons and activities for 5th-12th grade
science classrooms centered around research practices; build the leadership
capacities of RET participants; and establish a network of teachers actively
learning about nanoengineering and disseminating RET outcomes through cohort-
building with partner school districts serving historically underrepresented
STEM students. Industry mentors will provide 5th-12th grade science teachers and
their students insights into engineering career opportunities and trajectories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.