* 2302106
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Typhoon Merbok in coastal western Alaska: Extent of flooding and impacts on plant communities and ecosystem function
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Karen Beard, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 11/30/2024
* USD 93,906.00

On September 16th, 2022, the Yukon-Kuskokwim (YK) Delta of western Alaska was
hit by ex-Typhoon Merbok, a storm that many residents of the area described as
the worst in their lifetime. The storm surge was several meters in height, and
inland locations that normally do not flood under the highest tides of the year
were inundated, resulting in extensive loss of homes, fishing boats, and
subsistence cabins. This storm was unusual not only because of its size, but
also its timing as the ground was not yet frozen or snow-covered. Since the
Delta is flat, salty water extended for about a dozen or more miles inland,
flooding Alaskan villages, hunting and fishing camps, and landscapes that are
not acclimated to frequent floods. In this work, scientists will perform aerial
and ground surveys to map the extent of the floods by looking for driftwood and
other vegetation left behind by retreating water. Where driftwood is found,
scientists will determine the amount of sediment deposited and measure pond
salinity to test whether ponds switched from freshwater to salty water during
the flood. The researchers will then set-up areas to observe longer-term effects
of the floods on plants and the release of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere.
As climate change contributes to larger and more frequent storms like Typhoon
Merbok, understanding the consequences of them is becoming increasingly
important to better prepare for the impacts of these storms on the landscape and
the people who live in their path.

This research consists of three components to address the extent and impact of
Typhoon Merbok on the YK Delta region. First, researchers will conduct aerial
and river surveys of drift lines and salinity along four rivers near Chevak,
Alaska. For aerial surveys, transects ca. 30 km long and 2 km apart will be
flown in mid-autumn 2022 with two observers photographing drift lines. All
photographs will be geolocated. For river surveys, researchers will locate and
sample debris, collect soil to quantity sediment deposition, and sample water
bodies for salinity. Second, researchers will use high-resolution remotely-
sensed imagery to locate fields of larger debris over a greater extent of the YK
Delta. The elevation of debris from components one and two will be extracted
from available LIDAR and structure-from-motion elevation models to determine the
elevation of flood waters. Finally, researchers will establish monitoring plots
to test hypotheses about impacts of the flooding, including evaluating changes
to plant community composition, CO2 flux due to salt-kill, and CH4 flux due to
suppression of methanogenesis by sulfates that occur in sea water. The project
will produce valuable maps and data on the impacts of Merbok on the YK Delta
Region, which will be made publicly available and be shared directly with local
communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.