* 2302452
* Excellence in Research: Stimuli-Responsive Exosomes for Quantitative Biosensing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kristen Dellinger, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,488.00

Exosomes are a category of lipid-bound, nanosized vesicles ( small sacs formed
by a membrane and filled with liquid) produced by most cells in the body. Due to
the nature of their packaging and release, these vesicles can contain molecules
that are characteristic of their cells of origin. This means that exosomes can
carry biomarkers for various disease states, including cancer and Alzheimerâ€™s
disease. However, current methods for isolating and purifying exosomes are
costly and often ineffective. Developing new ways to control the release of
exosome contents is essential to engineer better diagnostic tests. This project
will investigate a new set of knowledge and develop tools to control the
behavior of exosomes through the application of heat. Students participating in
this multidisciplinary research will be mentored and trained to prepare them for
a successful career in STEM through summer research experiences, conferences,
and hands-on lab experiences.

The goal of this Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Excellence in
Research (HBCU-EiR) project is to develop and investigate the potential for
engineering thermo-sensitive liposomes for applications in biosensing and
downstream diagnostic applications. This will address a critical challenge in
the field, which is to exert selective control over specific exosome populations
within a mixed sample. More specifically, the ability to direct the release of a
subset of exosomes from a capture substrate and to discharge their intra-
vesicular cargo in a reliable and highly controlled manner could replace
burdensome purification and isolation protocols and broaden the technological
toolbox for integrated biosensors. Inspired by recent success in engineering
stimuli-responsive liposomes, the investigators propose a new paradigm in the
field of exosome research. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that
exosomes can be optimized to exhibit controllable behavior (e.g., release cargo)
when exposed to an external stimulus (e.g., temperature). Ultimately, the
project aims to define the criteria for achieving differential release in two
distinct scenarios (1) from release of a 2D captured substrate and (2) from
release of intra-exosomal contents (or target analytes). This will be
accomplished via the following objectives: (1) Determine whether compositional
differences in cell-derived model exosomes can be used to incite stimuli-
responsive behavior; and (2) Engineer thermo-responsive exosomes by selective
surface modification and validate their potential for biosensing applications.
These outcomes are expected to advance and transform how exosomes and other
extracellular vesicles are manipulated in many settings by introducing a new
mechanism to control their behavior selectively. The relevance of this work
additionally lies in the potential to define and test proof-of-concept criteria
for other stimuli-responsive technologies, including light, enzymes, and
acoustics. This will open pathways for opportunities to advance the
quantification, monitoring, and detection of any targets bound in exosomes and
capabilities with high relevance to the biosensing community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.