* 2302190
* RET Site: Climate Changemakers in Waste Upcycling, Water Justice and Sustainable Energy
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* C. Bobbi Hansen, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,625.00

The new three-year RET Site: Climate Changemakers in Waste Upcycling, Water
Justice and Sustainable Energy (RET_CCM) is hosted by the University of San
Diego. Eight to ten teachers and pre-service teachers will participate each
year. A model of “Changemaking Engineering,” that prepares future practitioners
to innovate engineering solutions within a contextual framework that embeds
humanitarian, sustainable and social justice approaches with technical skills
will be made accessible to these future and current middle school science
teachers, and in turn their students. These teacher-scholars will engage in a
year long process to address a local, community-based climate change challenge
related to either waste, water, or energy. In addition, teacher-scholars will
also receive training and mentorship in reflective practice, to improve
awareness and implementation of their own professional practice; and lesson
study to inform K-12 pedagogical approaches in climate-change related
engineering education. This approach may yield an engineering profession and
practice paradigm that is supportive of learners and graduates to responsibly
apply engineering methods and social awareness to solutions in local and global
contexts.

The new three-year RET Site: Climate Changemakers in Waste Upcycling, Water
Justice and Sustainable Energy (RET_CCM) is hosted by the University of San
Diego. A cohort of eight to ten teachers and pre-service teachers will
participate each year. A model of “Changemaking Engineering,” that prepares
future practitioners to innovate engineering solutions within a contextual
framework that embeds humanitarian, sustainable and social justice approaches
with technical skills will be made accessible to these future and current middle
school science teachers, and in turn their students. STEM teachers will be
mentored and supported to achieve the following program outcomes: 1)An advanced
research-based understanding of local climate change challenges around waste,
water or energy, and related mitigation and /or adaptation solutions through the
lens of eco-social justice and the praxis of socio-technical engineering
research and development; 2) Experience and competency in conducting a three-
tiered socio-technical research model that includes engaging in ongoing applied
research and development on a community-centered climate change issue in either
waste, water or energy; pedagogical action research to systematically
investigate and ultimately improve the teaching/learning of climate-change
topics; and reflective practice to improve awareness and implementation of one’s
own professional approach; 3) Production of corresponding original, hands-on and
NGSS-aligned engineering learning experiences for their students; and 4)
Leadership roles in climate change education within their school, district and
the university community. The RET_CCM program will make the socio-technical
engineering education and praxis paradigm applicable to learning experiences in
K-12 settings. This approach may yield an engineering profession and practice
paradigm that is supportive of learners and graduates to responsibly apply
engineering methods and social awareness to solutions in local and global
contexts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.