* 2302890
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing health equity and diagnostic technologies (GA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Wilbur Lam, Emory University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Goetzel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on building an
innovation ecosystem in Georgia with the plan to expand to surrounding
southeastern states that develops and translates affordable and widely available
devices that can be easily worn or used in daily life to promote health and
wellness for everyone, particularly for those in underserved communities. Life
expectancy and other health outcomes in the southeast are the lowest in the US,
making it the prime region for this potential Engine. Critical to the success of
this activity will be a tight integration and engagement of diverse communities
across rural and urban areas to inform and develop devices that can be used at
the point of care. These community user groups will help define technology needs
through a rigorous needs-assessment program, informing technology roadmaps that
ultimately drive solicitations for use-inspired research, education, and
workforce development. Technology translated and made commercially available
will be directly employed in the same diverse user communities across the
region. The main Engine partners of Emory University, Georgia Institute of
Technology, University of Georgia, Morehouse School of Medicine, the Center for
Global Health Innovation, and the Technical College System of Georgia all have
strong ties to these diverse user communities. They will build on these and
industry connections to develop the potential Engine.

This Development Award will focus on (1) building an ecosystem of partners to
drive use-inspired research and technology translation in the area of point-of-
care diagnostics and wearables with strong community engagement to advance
health equity; (2) expanding existing relationships with vulnerable and
underserved Georgia communities, from a healthcare perspective, and, with input
from all stakeholders, develop an initial use-inspired technology roadmap which
will be expanded to neighboring states in subsequent phases; (3) establishing an
annual technology showcase event that drives technology translation by
highlighting developments in point-of-care medical devices and bringing together
researchers, healthcare professionals, industry leaders, government, community
leaders, and technology funders; and (4) developing a comprehensive education
and workforce development program based on industry and community input. Via its
specific programs, the Development Award will fill current gaps in community
representation, industry involvement, and resources for technology translation.
Thus, it will prepare the team for a full NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.