* 2302322
* Student Work Experiences in Remote and Virtualized Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Paul BART, South Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

South Florida State College (SFSC) is a comprehensive community college and a
Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) located in Highlands County, Florida. This
project intends to create curriculum and academic experiences, recruit students,
and prepare students for contemporary virtualized information technology (IT)
through its Associate of Science (AS) in Network Systems Technology. The new
curriculum has the potential to enable AS students to earn a specialization in
Network Virtualization. The project team plans to integrate faculty, student,
industry, and vendor contributions into a replicable model for educating IT
students to be network technicians working on remote virtualization platforms.
The project will develop and implement a curriculum that extends prior work in
developing a networking virtualization certificate. All of the components of the
AS in Networking program will be directly or indirectly effected by the
virtualization strategy. The proposed project plans to increase enrollment in
the AS in Network Systems Technology and potentially increase the technician
workforce of network virtualization.

The goals of the project are to (1) provide AS Network Systems Technology
students with ongoing, remote, and convenient access to Virtual Machine hosting
platforms; (2) reduce the unsustainable cost of maintaining rapidly decaying or
out-of-date on-campus lab hardware; (3) provide a project and system management
learning experience in virtualization for students; and (4) disseminate the
project implementation strategy to other community colleges in the Florida State
College System through presentations at the annual Association of Florida
Colleges conference. The project team plans to incorporate virtualization and
virtual lab environments in eight existing courses and develop six new courses
in virtualization and virtualization support. The instructional faculty will be
trained in the new virtualization platforms. The project aims to strengthen
industry partnerships and include industry inputs into the curriculum
development. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.