* 2302574
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Environmentally Relevant Photoproducts of Organic UV Filters in Commercial Sunscreens
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Heyes, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,865.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Michael Gonsior, Carys Mitchelmore, Andrew Heyes and their team at
the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES) and Leanne
Powers and her team at the State University of New York College of Environmental
Science and Forestry will study the photo-degradation products of commercial
sunscreens and other outdoor products that contain ultraviolet (UV) filters.
These compounds protect both people and materials from sun damage, but their
environmental fate and risk are largely unknown. This project will evaluate
changes in UV filters when exposed to sunlight, because these photochemical
reactions are major pathways to degrade these chemicals, which in turn
influences their environmental persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity to
aquatic organisms. Their reaction with disinfectants used in water treatment
(potable water and wastewater) will also be evaluated. A graduate student will
be supported at UMCES, and undergraduate students will be recruited through the
Central New York Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and the
research for undergraduate (REU) program at UMCES. A summertime workshop for
teachers is planned in coordination with the Calvert County Board of Education
Science coordinators and teachers; accessible web content will also be produced
through student educational videos.

This project aims to determine the photodegradation kinetics as well as the
photoproducts of the most common organic UV filters. A custom-designed
photodegradation system will be implemented to allow for highly reproducible
experiments, which avoids previous shortcomings. These aromatic UV filters are
also suspected to form disinfection by-products (DBPs) upon treatment with
chlorine. The photoproducts and DBPs produced in seawater and freshwater
settings will be structurally elucidated using modern mass spectrometry
approaches. Results from this project are expected to help scientists to
estimate the environmental lifetimes of organic UV filters, their suspected DBP
formation and photodegradation products, as well as allow for an evaluation of
the role of photochemistry and chlorine disinfection in decreasing or increasing
the environmental risk of these compounds to aquatic organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.