* 2302531
* The Arithmetic Properties of Modular Forms and Hypergeometric Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Fang-Ting Tu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2026
* USD 164,633.00

Number theory is, essentially, the study of the properties of numbers. This
seemingly simple concept leads to remarkably difficult unsolved problems in
mathematics, with implications in areas such as biology, chemistry, computer
science, and physics. This project focuses on investigating the connection
between two fundamental objects in number theory: modular forms and
hypergeometric functions. The theory of classical modular forms has long played
an important role in number theory and was essential in Wiles’ proof of Fermat’s
Last Theorem. More recently, generalized modular forms have become central
objects of study, and can be understood through differential equations satisfied
by classical modular forms. Special functions known as classical hypergeometric
functions are known to satisfy very similar differential equations, suggesting a
connection between hypergeometric functions and modular forms. In turn,
hypergeometric functions provide arithmetic information for various mathematical
objects, including multi-parameter families of Calabi-Yau manifolds leading to
applications in string theory. An overall expectation is that hypergeometric
functions provide a new direction in understanding the phenomena arising in
mirror symmetry, one of the central research themes binding string theory and
algebraic geometry. This project will make use of this connection to
hypergeometric functions to study the arithmetic properties and applications of
general modular forms. The broader impacts of this project include mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students in research, organizing conferences and
workshops, continuing to work on outreach programs with middle and high school
students, and disseminating data and expository notes.

Specifically, this project will study the properties of modular forms in
relation to character sums and differential equations – especially those of
hypergeometric type – using methods from arithmetic geometry, Galois theory, and
Galois representations. The PI will focus on the exploration of modular forms on
Shimura curves – including classical modular curves – which are moduli spaces of
certain varieties. The main goals are: (1) to discover the arithmetic properties
of modular forms on Shimura curves through explicit constructions; (2) to
advance the understanding of hypergeometric systems and the modularity of
hypergeometric Galois representations; and (3) to exploit the relations between
hypergeometric functions and modular forms for arithmetic triangle groups to
understand the fundamental properties of these two objects, such as their values
at complex multiplication points and L-values.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.