* 2302108
* Excellence in Research: Improving the Empirical, Analytical, and Data Archiving Skills of Early-Career Researchers in Criminal Justice and the Allied Social Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tabitha Morton, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 695,742.00

Researchers at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) often face
unique challenges concerning research productivity and grantsmanship. This
project aims to address these challenges by providing training opportunities and
mentoring in the statistical analysis of archived data sources at the University
of Michiganâ€™s Inter-University Consortium of Political and Social Research
(ICPSR). This project proposes to develop a summer institute focusing on
developing skills to analyze and integrate secondary data analysis into research
agendas. The institute will partner with ICPSR on statistical training and
guidance using specific datasets. A vital feature of the institute is that
participants will have access to mentors prepared to support the development of
participants' intellectual products at multiple points during the research
process. Additionally, institute participants also will learn best practices to
integrate secondary data analysis into teaching to further the analytical skills
of students. The development of participants' research experiences and
analytical skills has potential to translate research capacity into successful
outcomes.

Each year of the project will include research training with a particular theme
(e.g., criminal justice, cyber security, public policy, public health). At
various stages during the training life cycle, an external evaluator will gauge
the project's impact and assess enhanced skills in research design and data
analysis; the competence of working with secondary data sets; the knowledge
transfer across subjects; and the development of strategies to incorporate
secondary data in classroom learning and other data-driven learning
environments. After completing the summer institute, participants will receive
additional statistical workshops and mentorship by the project staff to support
moving a concept proposal to a peer-reviewed published product. Gaining access
to and learning to use high-quality secondary datasets, such as those archived
at ICPSR, can help early-career faculty and researchers maximize their potential
for publication and improve their mentorship of students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.