* 2302764
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Charge-density based ML framework for efficient exploration and property predictions in the large phase space of concentrated materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Pejman Tahmasebi, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2026
* USD 95,433.00

Non-technical summary

Future engineering applications require complex materials to withstand extreme
environments. Electronic structure calculations have played an integral role in
developing fundamental understanding of atomic and electronic level properties
of materials. To tackle the challenges of growing materials complexities, in
this project, the investigator at Clemson University will collaborate with
investigators at Colorado School of Mines to integrate data-science based image-
recognition techniques with electronic structure calculations to predict
materials properties. Image recognition is widely used for face recognition,
lane-assisted driving, food-contaminant detection, cancer-cell detection, etc.
In this project, the charge density of materials will be used in the form of
images to learn the electronic structure of materials to enable property
predictions in complex materials. The project will contribute to technical,
educational and workforce development. A fundamental understanding of lattice
distortion in complex alloys will be delivered, namely in high entropy alloys
that consist of multiple principal elements in large concentrations. The project
will develop an open-source machine learning framework with a curated database
of charge densities and alloys’ properties. It will also train undergraduate and
graduate students for future digital economy at the intersection of materials
physics and data science via a new ‘data science in materials science’ course,
and summer workshops.

Technical summary

The chemical randomness in high entropy alloys engenders unique nearest neighbor
environments causing lattice and electronic distortions that result in large
uncertainties in properties both qualitatively and quantitively. The
uncertainties scale with compositional (atomic fraction) and chemical (different
elements) diversities resulting in an extremely stiff challenge for density
functional theory (DFT) to explore the phase space. This technical challenge
runs parallel to the scientific challenge of mechanistic reasons of composition-
property correlations. Since, charge density is the fundamental quantity from
which the physics and property correlations can be extracted, the investigators
will develop a charge-density based machine learning framework that will
elucidate the role of disruptive energy landscape on the emerging properties,
and simultaneously remove the bottleneck to trace the large phase. The machine
learning models will learn the charge density distributions and properties from
simpler alloys and predict them in complex alloys while bypassing expensive DFT
calculations altogether. The investigators will work under the hypothesis that
larger asymmetry in charge density leads to larger uncertainty in properties.
The students will learn to perform electronic structure calculations, data
generation and interpretation, and application of machine learning models to
predict materials properties. The students will also learn image-recognition
techniques applied to materials science problems. Summer workshops will be
organized by the investigators to engage girls in STEM with an interactive,
engaging and hands-on approach. The investigators will also organize a virtual
workshop with a specific focus on feature recognition techniques for materials
predictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.