* 2302591
* Local Langlands in Families
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gilbert Moss, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2026
* USD 268,736.00

The Langlands program is a broad set of conjectures that provide an avenue
toward understanding the mysterious properties of L-functions, which encode
information about solutions to polynomial equations. These conjectures have
motivated broad swaths of research in the field of algebraic number theory and
have shed light on long-standing open problems. In some contexts, the Langlands
conjectures have been proven true, but there remain subtleties that are poorly
understood. In other contexts, they are yet to even be precisely formulated.
This project proposes to study the Langlands program within the context of
geometric deformation. In addition to the number theory research goals, the
project also includes a training component for educators: a three-week summer
number theory program during each year of the project for high school teachers
throughout Maine, especially those serving rural areas. As part of the program,
educators will develop extracurricular activities or elective courses in number
theory for their local high school.

The first research goal of the project is to make progress toward establishing
the so-called local Langlands conjecture in families, which upgrades a presumed
local Langlands correspondence to a map between moduli spaces of integral
objects on either side of the correspondence, assuming a short list of
desiderata. The second goal is to study the logical dependence between the local
Langlands conjecture in families and the conjectures surrounding recent p-adic
geometrizations of the local Langlands conjectures. The method is to generalize
converse theorems and the Plancherel measure in families in order to extend a
line of argument previously used in the special cases of general linear groups
and classical groups.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.