* 2302619
* Moduli spaces of Galois representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bao Le Hung, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 303,000.00

Number Theory is the branch of mathematics which studies the properties and
patterns of whole numbers. Despite this seemingly elementary premise, number
theory has been at the the forefront of some of the most intricate structures
discovered in mathematics, as well as underlying key practical applications
(such as public key cryptography, which powers current secure communications
over the internet). One fundamental idea of modern number theory is that
collections of numbers sharing some common feature (such as being solutions of
some list of equations) possess interesting emergent properties and symmetries.
The most primordial of such emergent symmetry is the absolute Galois group of
the rational numbers, and a large swath of number theory in the last few
centuries concerns probing its (complicated) internal structure. In the 1970s,
Langlands made a web of surprising predictions that this absolute Galois group
is related to the (continuous) symmetry of vibrations on some highly symmetric
geometric shapes (the automorphic representations). Such conjectures are known
to have far reaching consequences: for instance, a proven special case was at
the heart of the resolution of Fermat's Last Theorem. One promising approach to
Langlands Conjectures that crystallized over the last few decades is the method
of p-adic deformation, where one organizes the information on the two sides of
the conjecture according to divisibility by powers of a given prime number p.
The key point whose importance has only come into focus very recently is that
this process reveals macroscopic/geometric features which make it easier to
match the two sides, and the project aims to study exactly those features.
Belonging to an emerging research direction, the project is a fertile ground for
the discovery of and experimentation with new concrete phenomena, and thus
create excellent opportunities for the training of students at both the graduate
and undergraduate level. The PI also plans to disseminate the new geometric
perspectives in the Langlands program to a broader audience through organizing
summer schools and mini-courses.



More specifically, the project studies the geometry of the moduli stack of
representations of the Galois groups of p-adic fields, with focus on loci cut
out by p-adic Hodge-theoretic conditions. These recently constructed spaces are
expected to play a pivotal role in the nascent categorical p-adic Langlands
program, which seeks to promote the (conjectural) relationship between
individual smooth representations of p-adic Lie groups and individual local
p-adic Galois representations to a relationship between the entire categories of
such objects. The project aims to establish a bridge between these two
categories, by relating both to categories of sheaves on some intermediate
objects, moduli spaces of (semi-)linear algebraic objects, which are susceptible
to analysis via methods of geometric representation theory. A sufficiently
strong control on the geometry would lead to major progress on local questions
such as the Breuil-Mezard conjecture as well as global questions such as Serre
weight conjectures, automorphy lifting and the structure of mod p cohomology of
locally symmetric spaces. The flow of information can also be reversed, namely
one can predict new phenomena in geometric representation theory from arguments
and heuristics with Galois representations. Furthermore, these linear algebraic
moduli spaces are sufficiently concrete that one can experiment on them with
computer algebra software, leading to many theoretical and computational
projects accessible to undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.