* 2302816
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Quantum Education by Adaptively Addressing Misconceptions in Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ryan McMahan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,673.00

Quantum information science (QIS), which uses the laws of quantum physics to
process and store information, is expected to broadly impact society through new
developments in commerce, governance, privacy, employment, education, and other
areas. However, a well-trained QIS workforce is necessary to make these
advances. Unfortunately, QIS is a challenging, interdisciplinary field to learn.
The goal of this project is to advance QIS education by using virtual reality
(VR) and machine learning to adaptively address misconceptions about the field.
The project will directly impact the education of approximately 120
undergraduate students learning QIS and has the potential to help transform how
to motivate and prepare students for future quantum workforce positions.

This project will leverage QubitVR, a VR application previously developed for
learning foundational QIS concepts like superposition, measurement, and
entanglement. As a first aim, the project will identify and predict QIS
misconceptions by collecting data from a controlled, general-population study of
QubitVR. This aim will include the development and validation of a new QIS
Concept Introductory Test (QISCIT) for assessing learning outcomes. It will also
involve labeling misconceptions in the collected data and the development and
systematic evaluation of machine learning models based on VR tracking and input
data for predicting when QubitVR learners are likely to have a misconception. As
a second aim, the project will adaptively tutor QIS misconceptions by developing
two intelligent tutoring versions of QubitVR: one that employs proactive
conceptual scaffolds based on the machine learning models and one that employs
reactive scaffolds based on conventional action-condition rules-based reasoning.
This aim will involve one of few studies to directly compare machine learning-
based and rules-based approaches to intelligent tutoring by comparing the two
versions in a between-subject, general-population study. As a third aim, the
project will ecologically validate the efficacy of QubitVR by collecting
control, baseline, and adaptive tutoring data from undergraduate QIS courses in
a longitudinal study. As a final aim, the project will result in the development
of desktop and smartphone versions of QubitVR, which will be made openly
available alongside the VR versions for broader educational impacts and to
advance QIS education beyond the scope of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.