* 2302988
* Structure versus Randomness in Algebraic Geometry and Additive Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Guy Moshkovitz, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 201,419.00

Notions of structure and of randomness are pervasive throughout mathematics, and
the study of the interplay between these two notions has shaped entire areas of
research. The goal of this project is to obtain quantitative improvements to a
myriad of both classical and cutting-edge results that rely on the interplay
between structure and randomness in additive combinatorics, number theory,
commutative algebra, and algebraic geometry. In turn, these improvements should
have applications in multiple areas of computer science such as coding theory,
property testing, and derandomization. This project further aims to expand
access to combinatorics research, both by involving students in research
projects, and by creating educational opportunities for students and the general
public.

The research in this project has two main aspects. The first is focused on
polynomials, aiming to improve the best bounds known for results that build on
the structure-vs-randomness phenomenon, and in particular, on regularization of
polynomials. A main theme here is leveraging recent progress in the study of
tensor ranks, and in the study of quantitative versions of classical theorems
about polynomials (e.g., Stillman's conjecture, finite-field Nullstellensatz).
The second aspect of this research is focused on general functions that,
nonetheless, behave like polynomials to some extent. A central aim here is to
improve or develop new variants of general-purpose tools such as the arithmetic
regularity lemma, with the goal of making progress towards the Polynomial Gowers
Inverse conjecture and other central questions in higher-order Fourier analysis
and additive combinatorics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.