* 2302657
* Data Stories: Co-Designing Curricula and Tools with Teachers to Support Middle School Youth’s Critical Data Literacy through Remixing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Ralph Vacca, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2026
* USD 326,593.00

Youth are avid creators and consumers of data-related claims through their
participation on social media sites, in which they view, produce, and share
content. They remix content, building off one another’s videos, gifs, and memes
to represent and discuss topics they care about. However, participation on these
same platforms can result in echo chambers, misinformation, and proliferation of
perspectives that are detached from real-world experience. Thus, it is essential
to support youth in developing the ability to critique data-related claims
through engaging in investigations that consider context holistically, and with
empathy for the people involved. This project explores the development of
curricula and tools with middle school Math and English teachers that will
leverage youth’s practices with digital media remixing to develop argumentation
skills and the critical data literacies necessary to participate in today’s
workforce and as informed citizens. Students will explore sociopolitical issues
as they create data stories by synthesizing information across data sources and
media. The project will develop curricular resources and tools to support
students’ abilities to investigate, critique, communicate and build knowledge
with and around data. The project will engage 10 cross-domain teachers in 4
schools across the U.S. through summer workshops and year-round design
collaborations; and up to 30 teachers and 1300 students across the United States
through classroom implementations.

The project will develop tools and learning activities, including scaffolding
and interaction design, to support integration of youth’s culturally relevant
media practices, criticality in data investigations, and communication through
the remixing of preexisting online material. The project will engage middle
school math and English teachers in the co-design and implementation of the
technology and curricular units as their learners use data and media to
investigate and respond to their surrounding sociopolitical systems. A design-
based research approach will inform multiple iterations of the technology and
curriculum. Researchers will use mixed methods to analyze documentation,
participant interviews, classroom observations, and implementation artifacts, to
answer three research questions: (1) What remixing affordances can support
students’ critical data-reasoning practices?, (2) How can we support the
implementation of critical data storytelling tools in diverse classroom
contexts?, and (3) How do the remixing affordances of the critical data
storytelling tools support students in developing and applying critical data-
literacy practices? This project will contribute to an understanding of how
technology can connect interdisciplinary learning goals across argumentation and
communication to support critical data-reasoning practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.