* 2302075
* Excellence in Research: PIC Simulations of Relativistic Jets with Toroidal Magnetic Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kenichi Nishikawa, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 487,831.00

This award supports a computational study of astrophysical jets. An
astrophysical jet is a high-speed, highly collimated stream of ionized gas, a
plasma, that emanates from astronomical objects such as supermassive black holes
in the heart of vast galaxies. These jets can travel over great distances in
space and are powered by the intense magnetic fields associated with the
astronomical object they originate from. The high relativistic velocity and
energy of these astrophysical jets make them important features of the
astrophysical landscape, as they can carry large amounts of energy and matter
but also accelerate particles to the highest energies known. Studying
astrophysical relativistic jets by complementing observations with supercomputer
simulations enables understanding of the physical processes that drive these
extremely energetic phenomena. It also allows to better understand the role they
play in shaping the evolution of vast galaxies and other mysterious astronomical
objects. With the help of the supercomputer facilities of the Texas Advanced
Computing Center, this project will use an innovative technique to perform
large-scale, kinetic plasma three-dimensional Particle-in-Cell (PIC) simulations
of relativistic jets, applicable to the black hole jet environments. In
particular, the project will investigate the role of kinetic instabilities to
understand the important acceleration mechanism, shocks and magnetic
reconnection, in simulated cylindrical jets with helical magnetic fields. This
study will advance our knowledge of these highly energetic phenomena, which
cannot currently be investigated using the traditional single-fluid relativistic
magnetohydrodynamic simulations. By performing a study of high energy particle
acceleration mechanisms within electromagnetically observed sources, this
project addresses goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics" program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.