* 2302394
* Moduli Spaces and Galois Theory in Arithmetic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* John Doyle, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2026
* USD 136,482.00

Arithmetic dynamics is a quickly growing area of mathematics that combines ideas
from several disciplines: number theory, which is typically concerned with
properties of the integers, including prime numbers; arithmetic geometry, whose
primary goal is to understand integer and rational solutions to systems of
Diophantine equations; and dynamics, which is the study of how systems change
over time. This project will approach problems in arithmetic dynamics from two
different directions: One is a geometric approach, studying dynamical moduli
spaces -- geometric objects that classify dynamical systems that have various
interesting dynamical behaviors. The other is an algebraic approach,
understanding various algebraic symmetries exhibited by dynamical systems and
the way that these symmetries interact with dynamical moduli spaces. In addition
to working with graduate students on problems in arithmetic dynamics, this
project will involve outreach in the community, to middle and high school
students as well as adults working to further their education.

Arithmetic dynamics is largely motivated by analogies between objects in
arithmetic geometry and the dynamics of rational maps. One explicit connection
is that preperiodic points for rational functions form a natural dynamical
analogue of torsion points on elliptic curves. To better understand the torsion
points on elliptic curves, one is led to consider modular curves, which
parametrize (isomorphism classes of) elliptic curves together with level
structure, a key example of which would be marking a torsion point of order n.
In a similar fashion, one approach to studying algebraic dynamics is to consider
moduli spaces for dynamical systems with a dynamical notion of level structure:
for example, one might study the (equivalence classes) of rational functions of
a given degree d together with a marked periodic point of period n. The PI will
continue his work developing these dynamical moduli spaces and better
understanding geometric, arithmetic, and Galois-theoretic properties. Work on
this project will lead to insights into two directions in arithmetic dynamics:
The Morton-Silverman dynamical uniform boundedness conjecture, which is a
strengthening of Merel's theorem for torsion points on elliptic curves, and
dynamical analogues of Serreâ€™s open image theorem.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.