* 2302887
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing laser technologies in the Rochester region (NY, PA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Thomas Brown, University of Rochester
* Cooperative Agreement
* Geoffrey Brown
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on establishing a
technical community centered on lasers and their importance in modern society.
The uses of lasers go well beyond what is depicted in popular culture; lasers
can be smaller than a grain of salt or as large as a football field. They are
used in internet data centers, manufacturing, medicine, advanced imaging
systems, and basic research. Despite their importance, lasers are increasingly
designed, manufactured, and packaged outside the US. Rochester and the Upstate
NY region has been a center of excellence in optics, imaging, photonics, and
laser technologies for many decades. Rochester's educational institutions,
regional optics industry, and emerging community in photonics and quantum
science combine to make it the right place for a regional innovation engine.
Despite this potential, Rochester remains a region in need of economic
revitalization, with deep needs for education and access to technical jobs. An
innovation engine built on advancing laser technologies in the Rochester region
will provide the seed money and the tools to establish something very special in
the region by combining the highest quality research with the broadest
accessibility to education and training. Regional partners include area
employers such as Corning, L3Harris, Optimax, and Toptica, academic institutions
such as the University of Rochester, the Rochester Institute of Technology, and
Monroe Community College, economic organizations such as Empire State
Development, Greater Rochester Enterprise and Nextcorps, and manufacturing
institutes such as AIM Photonics. Combined with partner organizations nearby and
across the country, the project will build an unparalleled technical and
economic community to benefit every part of our region. To foster both use-
inspired research and development, access to US-developed technology,
entrepreneurship, and workforce development, this project will identify and fill
gaps in laser education, laser technology, and in accessibility for individuals
and for new companies. It will enhance opportunities for a community college-
based technical education in laser technologies, build laser-specific degree
programs into engineering education, establish specialized laser facilities for
startup companies, and define projects aimed at combining the best of photonics,
laser science, and optical engineering to solve some of the grand challenges in
both laser technology and in the regional economy. The development award will
help prepare for a regional innovation engine through community events,
facilities, curriculum, and economic analysis to mount a compelling case for
investment in a laser ecosystem centered in Rochester and Upstate NY.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.