* 2302197
* CAREER: Distributed Inference-Making via Crowdsensing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Swastik Brahma, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 286,028.00

Crowdsensing systems allow human crowd participants carrying smart devices to
contribute sensing measurements from built-in sensors in their devices toward a
distributed inference-making task. Some crowdsensing systems also employ human
crowd participants as humans-as-sensors where humans themselves observe a
phenomenon and contribute subjective inferences obtained. The human-powered
nature of crowdsensing makes the performance of such systems to become
dependent, in addition to aspects of signal processing for extracting
information about a phenomenon from observations made, on factors pertinent to
human nature. This makes optimization of crowdsensing performance to require
jointly addressing signal processing and human aspects, which this project aims
to address by converging interdisciplinary perspectives. The project will
significantly advance human-powered societal-scale distributed sensing
technologies that can sustain smarter, safer, and more resilient communities as
well as will advance human-in-the-loop signal processing capabilities. The
project also aims to significantly enhance student engagement, learning,
recruitment, and retention through an elaborate plan on integrating research and
educational activities as well as will enhance participation of underrepresented
populations, including women and minorities.

The project develops models, analytical approaches, and optimization techniques
that address signal processing aspects jointly with traits pertinent to the
nature of human crowd participants to lay the foundations of crowdsensing-based
distributed inference-making systems. Specifically, the project aims to: 1)
produce novel game theoretic market-based crowdsensing mechanisms that jointly
address signal processing and selfishness aspects to enable optimal information
acquisition from selfish human crowd participants, under factors such as
participatory cost uncertainties, resource constraints, privacy concerns, and
dependency structures, in a competitive market environment while providing
optimal (monetary or nonmonetary) incentives to induce their desired
participation; 2) produce prospect theoretic models and methods for optimally
employing cognitively biased human crowd participants for distributed inference-
making tasks; 3) analytically unravel the impact of attacks from malicious human
crowd participants, who can challenge the integrity of the contributed data, and
develop mitigation techniques; and, 4) produce a crowdsensing testbed that
supports a variety of smart devices and applications for analysis and
performance evaluation of crowdsensing techniques under real-world operating
conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.