* 2302926
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing manufacturing micro-factory innovations in tribal communities (NM, AZ)
* TIP,ITE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Harold Halliday, Navajo Technical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 06/30/2025
* USD 992,439.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on addressing a
key void in technology-based economic development: a failure to involve tribal
communities in technology transfer and advanced manufacturing. The pilot program
will develop distributed manufacturing micro-factories and technology centers in
the Navajo Nation, which will enable these remote rural tribal communities to
participate in emerging supply chain operations in the space industry, which is
growing in the Southwest. These micro-factories will be implemented in a manner
consistent with tribal community values. The region of service is the Navajo
Nation, which includes the states of New Mexico and Arizona. Navajo Technical
University (NTU) and Arizona State University (ASU) will work collaboratively to
develop a plan for an operational ecosystem. NTU has strong technical and
training capabilities complemented by ASU's technical, economic development, and
technology transfer strengths. The project will establish a network of micro-
factories to benefit from space technology supply chain opportunities and
provide a roadmap for Tribal adoption of digital infrastructure and digital
manufacturing technologies that generate revenue and create jobs. The effort
will increase community awareness of employment and entrepreneurial
opportunities. Working with newly elected Navajo Nation leadership, the project
takes a comprehensive approach by leveraging tribal, higher education, and
industry resources to create a sustainable manufacturing ecosystem that furthers
tribal economic prosperity goals.

NTU's Center for Advanced Manufacturing will be the hub of the network of
advanced manufacturing sites. The ASU School of Manufacturing Systems and
Networks will equip sites with state-of-the-art technology. ASU will establish a
legal framework that will facilitate the contracting process with prospective
industry partners. This effort will develop industry and investor connections,
help foster an entrepreneurial mindset among tribal members, and facilitate the
development of entrepreneurial support mechanisms that attract additional
private investment needed to build out the manufacturing network. Through this
Development Award, the project team will establish a roadmap within which space
industry supply chain opportunities, production facility requirements, workforce
technical skill needs, and overall management and coordination mechanisms are
identified in preparation for a full NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.