* 2302299
* Conference: 4th NeuroNex Investigator Meeting: Beyond Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Christopher Moore, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2024
* USD 78,618.00

The National Science Foundation NeuroNex network is a community of research
teams that work on the leading edge of inventing and applying to foundational
question in neuroscience diverse tools, techniques, software, animal models,
behavioral and computational analysis, hardware development, systems biology,
and many other areas of biological and theoretical research. NeuroNex
investigators meet periodically to provide updates on their progress, collect
feedback on experiments and results, and share ideas on timely topics in science
and the practice of team science. These meetings are invaluable opportunities
for NeuroNex investigators to network with other researchers and to form new
collaborations and lines of inquiry that are possible only with
interdisciplinary expertise and shared effort and resources. The theme of this
NeuroNex Investigator Meeting, “Beyond Neurons,” is designed to stimulate
creativity and generate ideas for the future of NeuroNex research. Through a
series of progressive, interactive workshops, NeuroNex researchers are
encouraged to consider how their advancements can be applied to challenges faced
by other NeuroNex groups, to cell types other than neurons, to efforts beyond
biology, and how they can impact on society beyond scientific research. The
ideas generated through this process will identify emergent themes and inspire
future research directions. NeuroNex trainees (undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers) are key participants in these meetings
and have the opportunity to present their work via a Poster Session attended by
present and potential future national and internatinonal colleagues and mentors,
and funding agency officials.

The NeuroNex community has created valuable advancements in a variety of
research areas. NeuroNex Investigator Meetings provide an opportunity for
researchers to update their colleagues on their progress and to inspire them to
ask and pursue answers to questions that require new models, techniques, tool
invention and development, computation, and other paths of inquiry that are only
possible through collaboration with other researchers. The meeting schedule
includes time for participants to network with colleagues, a Poster Session that
allows each group to present an overview of their NeuroNex project and for
trainees to share their research results, two talks from scientists external to
the NeuroNex network whose work is especially relevant to the theme of the
meeting and several workshop sessions focused on the theme of this NeuroNex
Investigator Meeting, “Beyond Neurons.” This theme was chosen to challenge
NeuroNex investigators to consider how they can apply their findings, models,
tools, and other advancements to research questions in “Beyond Your Bench,”
“Beyond Neurons,” “Into the Bioeconomy” and “Beyond Biology.” Through a series
of Workshops, researchers consider each of these avenues of broader impact and,
with subgroups of colleagues, identify the most interesting potential future
directions as well as current challenges to pursuing those avenues. Ideas
generated by each subgroup contribute to the meeting’s exercise of collectively
identifying emergent themes and priorities for future research. Post-meeting
discussions among members of the NeuroNex community will refine the visioning
developed during the meeting. A direct, tangible outcome of the meeting is a
White Paper summarizing the themes and priorities developed during the meeting.
the White Paper will be broadly accessible through the public neuronex.org
website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.