* 2302013
* ERI: Revealing the Reconfiguration Dynamics of Lipid Bilayer and Its Hydration Structures with Nanoscale Resolution during Electroporation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* SHAN ZHOU, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2025
* USD 191,995.00

A fundamental question in life science is to understand and control how cell
membranes respond to external stimuli. This is important in determining the
efficacy of drug delivery. For example, electric fields can create transient
pores on a cell membrane, a process called electroporation, which is used to
deliver cargo into cells, but it remains a challenge to achieve efficient
delivery without causing irreversible damage. This award will use sub-nanometer
resolution imaging to capture how cell membranes dynamically respond upon
applying an external electric field. The understanding of intracellular delivery
gained will not only benefit the biomedical field, but also biomolecule
manufacture, gene editing and other intracellular investigations. This imaging
capability will also benefit the understanding of solid-liquid interface systems
in applications including fuel cells, batteries, and corrosion/erosion
processes. In synergy with the research activities, the knowledge of bio-
interfaces and imaging techniques will be disseminated to the general public, by
developing and using mobile and webpage apps for workflow visualization, doing
demos of bio-interfaces to K-12 students and senior residents, and providing
training to both undergraduate and graduate students.

This award will use an atomic force microscope with sub-nanometer and high
temporal resolution to offer the molecular-level imaging, with a focus on
revealing the dynamic responses of lipid bilayer and its hydration structure
under an external electric field. The understanding of nanoscale interactions
involved in the drug delivery process are still limited due to lack of
appropriate imaging tools. The key hypothesis in this work is that the hydration
structure of lipid bilayer determines the nanoscale interactions of lipid
bilayer with drug molecules and the biophysical behavior of lipid bilayer under
the external stimuli. Three research thrusts will be initiated: i) imaging the
dynamic changes of lipid bilayer under an electric field; ii) capturing the
structural changes of hydration structures involved in lipid bilayer
reconfiguration; and iii) establishing the structure-property relationship for
different types of lipid and solution chemistry. The proposed research
activities aim to resolve and understand the pore formation and sealing
processes during electroporation of lipid bilayers and reveal the role of
hydration structure in this process. The proposed research and education
activities will bridge the long-standing knowledge gap in the molecular-level
imaging of molecular phenomena at bio-interfaces and offer insights into better
engineering of non-viral transfection methods for biomedical purposes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.