* 2302440
* Excellence in Research: Bioengineered extracellular vesicles from stem cells and macrophages act synergistically in angiogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Dong Liu, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2027
* USD 738,400.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-released microparticles that play
essential roles in cell-cell communication by delivering their cargo.
Traditional approaches to studying EVs have focused on investigating EVs derived
from individual cell types, disregarding the likelihood that EVs are secreted by
all cell types and coexist in various extracellular fluids in the body. This
project introduces an innovative exploration of the collaborative effects of EVs
from diverse sources in promoting the formation of blood vessels. Additionally,
the EV cells will be modified through bioengineering techniques to enhance the
production and proangiogenic (blood vessel forming) activities of EVs.
Successful completion of this project will advance our understanding in two key
areas: 1) the cooperative actions of EVs from different cell types in normal
physiological processes and pathological responses, and 2) the exploration of
novel therapeutic strategies utilizing EVs derived from multiple sources in
combination. Furthermore, an integrated education plan is designed to increase
the participation of students from groups traditionally underrepresented in
science. This project will provide students with research training in the
implementation and analysis of each objective and with intramural and extramural
opportunities to present their findings. The outcomes of this project will be
scholarly disseminated via publication and conference presentations and will be
incorporated into existing courses related to the formation of blood vessels.

Angiogenesis is a tightly regulated process essential for embryonic development
and the maintenance of vascular homeostasis in adult organisms. Stem cells and
macrophages are involved in the regulation of angiogenesis via cell
differentiation and factor secretion. Recently, vesicles secreted from the cells
have been implicated in the array of mediators in the angiogenic processes. Two
primary classes of non-apoptotic vesicles, exosomes and microvesicles, released
by cells are categorized as EVs. Unlike living cells, EVs are submicron vesicles
that target recipient cells to deliver their cargo, including RNAs, proteins,
and lipids, in a cell-free fashion. Previous literature has demonstrated that
certain microRNAs (miRs) are involved in angiogenesis, so-called AngiomiRs. The
objectives of this project are to investigate the synergistic effects of EVs
from mouse mesenchymal stem cells and macrophages on angiogenesis in vitro and
in vivo. The stem cells and macrophages will be engineered beforehand to
overexpress miR-31 and miR-30, respectively, based on previous reports. The in
vitro angiogenic effects of a mixture of the EVs released from the two types of
engineered cells will be examined on vascular endothelial cells including
proliferation, migration, and tube formation in comparison with either type of
EVs. To further explore the function of neovasculature, the angiogenic effects
of the mixture of the two engineered EVs will be investigated in a mouse
hindlimb ischemia (HLI) model. Moreover, the synergistic roles of miR-31/FIH1
and miR-30/Cul2 signaling pathways on HIF-1Î± transactivation, an essential step
in proangiogenesis, will be tested. The result of this study will be a
comprehensive understanding of how diverse EVs regulate angiogenesis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.