* 2302015
* ERI: Resilient Operational Planning of Electricity Grid under the Risk of Wildfire
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Saeed Manshadi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Wildfires have become an increasingly dangerous threat to lives, property, and
ecosystems in many parts of the world, particularly in regions prone to extreme
weather. Utility companies are faced with the immense challenge of preventing
wildfires triggered by utility equipment while ensuring the continuity of
electricity supply to their customers. To address this complex issue, this
project aims to develop an agile decision support system that enhances the
resilience of the power grid during periods of extreme wildfire risk. By aiming
to achieve a delicate balance between fire prevention measures and service
continuity, this research has the potential to save lives, protect critical
infrastructure, and maintain an uninterrupted energy supply in high-risk areas.
The project is aligned with the NSF's mission to contribute to the national
welfare and address critical societal issues. Its broader impact will contribute
to public safety, increase awareness and understanding of the complexities
involved in operating the electricity grid under the risk of wildfires, and
stimulate future research in power system operational planning. Furthermore, the
project has the potential to foster interdisciplinary collaboration, leading to
significant advances in our understanding of wildfire risk management.

This project involves developing a scientific framework that quantifies the risk
of wildfire ignition for individual power lines using differentiable
programming, taking into account meteorological data, such as wind speed and
humidity, and structural characteristics. A physical-inspired surrogate model
will be trained to provide a normalized risk score that will be integrated into
an agile operational planning framework for the electricity grid during extreme
weather conditions under the risk of wildfire. The operational planning
framework will consider both short-term and long-term decisions, including the
de-energizing of individual power lines, integration of distributed energy
resources, as well as the expansion or modification of grid components. Given
the urgent nature of decision-making during high-risk situations, advanced
machine learning techniques will be employed to systematically speed up the
problem-solving process by pre-assigning a batch of decision variables. This is
expected to result in a more efficient and practical solution. Preliminary
results indicate significant improvement in solution time with a negligible drop
in solution quality, making this research a promising foundation for future
advances in electricity grid operational planning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.