* 2302470
* CDS&amp;E: MPATHS - Microscopic Pathway Analysis Toolkit for High-throughput Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 04/30/2027
* USD 330,000.00

Non-technical summary

From the freezing of water into ice, to the ordering of proteins into arrays for
analysis and drug design, to the assembly of nanoparticles into crystals that
direct light, changes that occur in the structural arrangements of atoms,
molecules, macromolecules and particles is ubiquitous in nature and in the
synthesis and manufacturing of many materials and products. Understanding how
these structural arrangements occur during a change from one phase of matter to
another is critical to understanding self-organization processes in nature and
to designing and making new materials that build themselves – predictively,
reliably, and inexpensively -- from the bottom-up. By controlling the assembly
process, novel materials that combine unique properties in important,
unprecedented ways become possible, impacting everything from protective
coatings and light-sensitive paints to materials that store and convert energy
to stealth technologies and sports equipment.

This project aims to develop and broadly disseminate powerful scientific
software to aid researchers in tracking, analyzing, studying, and eventually
engineering phase transition “pathways” that a system of material building
blocks follows as it self-assembles and changes from one phase to another. The
envisioned toolkit -- Microscopic Pathway Analysis Toolkit for High-Throughput
Study (MPATHS) -- will be accessible, be easy to use, and exploit the fastest
available computer architectures. It will make possible systematic, high-
throughput studies of different types of phase transition pathways in ways that
will make cross-system comparisons easy and will interoperate seamless with
other open-source packages used by researchers who study phase transitions via
simulations or experiments.

Because MPATHS will reveal microscopic, mechanistic details of how order emerges
from disorder during assembly processes, MPATHS will be of immediate interest to
the nanoparticle and soft matter communities who can use it to study
thermodynamic self-assembly of colloidal crystals and other complex structures,
as well as swarming processes in active matter systems. MPATHS will also be of
immediate and even broader interest to the materials, engineering, and chemistry
communities interested in atomic and molecular self-assembly processes. An
emphasis on accessibility to researchers outside of scientific computing fields
will facilitate the adoption of MPATHS by a broader community.

Technical summary

Phase transitions in which the structure of a multi-particle system changes from
one state to another are ubiquitous in nature and have been widely utilized for
industrial purposes, such as the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals and the
fabrication of materials, including metals, ceramics, plastics, nanocomposites
and more. Therefore, understanding the mechanistic details of exactly how these
structural transitions occur (i.e., the transition pathway) is crucial for a
wide range of potential applications, including predicting and designing novel
materials with desired properties as well as increasing yields or driving down
costs for ones already in use. Hence, considerable research is devoted to the
study of such phase transitions, especially from the point of view of
thermodynamics and kinetics, including the study of such bulk quantities as free
energy barriers to nucleation of ordered phases and nucleation rates. Such
studies are informative but do not reveal the microscopic, particle-level
details of how a particular sample changes from one state to another. For
example, structural transitions such as crystallization, where a liquid
solidifies into an ordered solid phase, are driven by a change in thermodynamic
quantities such as temperature or pressure, which triggers changes in local
structure involving a subset of particles (atoms, molecules, nanoparticles) that
eventually spans the entire system. Microscopic details of how the local
structure changes along the transition pathway controls the quality of the
resulting crystal, as well as whether the resulting crystal is the
thermodynamically preferred one or a metastable polymorph. However, despite the
recent advances in computational power and experimental approaches, automated,
system-agnostic tracking of structure evolution and detection of local and
global changes in particle organization is largely nonexistent in materials and
other fields of science and engineering, hindering the studies needed to
predictively link processing parameters and particle attributes (such as shape
and interaction patchiness in the case of nanoparticles) to final product. With
such microscopic information in hand, researchers could precisely tailor not
only processing parameters but also nanoparticle attributes to stabilize certain
polymorphs over others, improve structural quality of the product, and optimize
yield.

This project will develop a generalized computational toolkit that will enable
the systematic study and cross-system comparisons of structure evolution across
a wide range of self-assembling materials. The system-agnostic nature of the
toolkit will eliminate error- and bias-prone manual intervention, thereby
accelerating the discovery, understanding, and engineering of pathways for
multiple classes of materials. Using particle positions, orientations, and
properties from either experimental or computational raw data as input, the
Microscopic Pathway Analysis Toolkit for High-throughput Studies (MPATHS) will
enable users to identify and label local structural motifs and track their
development across the entire transition pathway. The project team will develop
and package within MPATHS powerful and system-agnostic routines for finding
neighbors, calculating per-particle order parameters and their cross-
correlations, detecting local and global structural events using methods from
information theory, and visualizing systems based on this information. MPATHS
will enable expert workflows by non-experts and be system-agnostic so it can be
used intuitively and with little-to-no computational expertise by researchers
working on structural transitions across many disciplines. MPATHS will
incorporate easy-to-use interfaces that abide by TRUE (transferable,
reproducible, usable by others and extensible) principles, including a python
scripting interface to facilitate the scripting of customized MPATHS analyses, a
graphical user interface to foster accessibility, and a powerful command line
interface. MPATHS will be made widely available and usable as either an offline
or online tool to enable either post-analysis or on-the-fly control of
simulations or experiments.

MPATHS will permit the study of fundamental processes that only now are able to
be studied due to advances in computing power that allow for detailed molecular
simulations of complex structural transitions over long times with fine temporal
detail, and exciting developments in in-situ electron microscopy that allow, for
the first time, the visualization of dynamic nanoparticle rearrangements during
the self-assembly of colloidal crystals of nanoparticles. MPATHS will be used to
discover the microscopic processes driving two different structural transitions
in simulated systems as exemplars: (i) assembly pathways of isostructural
complex crystals from atoms and nanoparticles and emergence of ordered
structures such as three-phase coexistence in active matter systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.