* 2302221
* Excellence in Research: The study of dynamics of an atmospheric boundary layer laden with polydisperse spray under high-wind conditions of a hurricane
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yevgeniy Rastigeyev, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2026
* USD 577,311.00

Predicting hurricane intensity is a very challenging task because it requires an
in-depth understanding of complex multi-scale phenomena governing hurricane
motion. Past research has demonstrated that the ocean spray effects on hurricane
dynamics depend strongly on the size of spray droplets. Therefore, the PI will
focus on developing a comprehensive mathematical framework and its numerical
implementation to accurately model the polydisperse ocean spray effect on the
vertical fluxes of momentum and heat in a hurricane boundary layer. This will
aid in improving the accuracy of hurricane forecasts, which in turn will help
minimize property damage and loss of human life. The research project will also
allow North Carolina A&T State University, a state-supported HBCU, to sustain
and expand recently established new research and educational capacity in applied
mathematics and scientific computing with applications to atmospheric multiphase
turbulent flows.

Specifically, the PI will expand the currently existing mathematical model of a
hurricane boundary layer laden with ocean spray by accurately accounting for
spray polydispersity. The developed model will be used to conduct a
comprehensive parametric study of its effect on the dynamics of the marine
atmospheric boundary layer in high-wind hurricane conditions. To fill the
current gap in understanding spray polydispersity's influence the PI plans to
employ a modern theory of turbulent disperse multiphase flows and the Eulerian
multi-fluid approach. This approach considers groups of droplets of different
sizes, air, and water vapor as separate interacting turbulent continua, each
described by its own set of conservation laws and characterized by its own
velocity, temperature, and turbulent kinetic energy distributions. The
conservation laws for polydisperse spray will be presented in the form of
population balance equations. In particular, the method will consistently
account for droplet breaking/coalescence and evaporation/condensation dynamics.
Combining this method with a higher-order multi-fluid turbulence model will
enable the PI to accurately predict the influence of polydisperse ocean spray on
hurricane dynamics and structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.