* 2302684
* Excellence in Research: An investigation of the effects of Nicandra physalodes on the growth and development of weeds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hattie Spencer, Mississippi Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 220,890.00

Noxious weeds have been found to negatively impact crop production, which
results in reduced yields. Physical management of weeds such as hoeing, and
hand-pulling are usually time-consuming. Managing weeds using herbicides can
lead to the weeds developing resistance to them. In addition to resistance, the
herbicides can contaminate underground water. Thus, there is a need for an
environmentally friendly, cost-effective integrated weed management approach.
Studies on weed control using secondary compounds from plants are significant in
plant productivity, hence, this proposed study will advance knowledge in plant
biology and agriculture. The biological control approach to manage Pennisetum
clandestinum (Kikuyu grass), Echinochloa crus-galli (barnyard grass), and Lolium
multiflorum (Italian ryegrass) can be used. Faculty and students will conduct a
detailed study in understanding how Nicandra physalodes affects the growth of
weeds while crop growth remains unaffected. The proposed study will enhance
research and training opportunities for undergraduate students at a Historically
Black University and offer broader participation in STEM for minority students.
Students will be mentored, with some aspects of the research used as course-
based undergraduate research experience in plant anatomy, plant physiology, and
ecology classes. The results from the proposed study will be presented at
conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals. Local farmers might also
benefit from the outcomes of this research project.

According to the United States Department of Agriculture, P. clandestinum
(Kikuyu grass) is a federally listed noxious weed that is competitive against
legumes. It is a perennial grass whose seeds can lie dormant for a long time. It
can also develop from rhizomes, easily colonize the soil surface, and grow fast.
E. crus-galli (barnyard grass) is an annual, fast-growing weed competing against
rice. L. multiflorum (Italian ryegrass) is an annual or biennial weed that
competes with cereal crops. The authors of this proposed project have observed
that Nicandra physalodes from the Solanaceae, a plant that contains alkaloids,
can be used to manage monocotyledonous grasses. The hypothesis for the proposed
study is that alkaloids found in Nicandra physalodes will inhibit the growth and
development of P. clandestinum (Kikuyu grass), E. crus-galli (barnyard grass),
and L. multiflorum (Italian ryegrass). The investigators, including the faculty
and the students, will examine the morphological, observable, development, and
growth effects of N. physalodes on the three noxious weeds under different
environmental conditions such as changes in temperature and the soil pH. Also,
cell division is expected to be affected when the three weeds display growth
inhibition. The research team will also investigate any chromosome aberrations
expressed when the weeds are growing in the presence of N. physalodes. The
proposed study will also include the investigation of the compounds that will be
extracted from the N. physalodes, which play an important role in the inhibition
of the growth of these three weeds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.