* 2302177
* I-Corps:  Hard platooning device to improve the safety of autonomous vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Swaminathan Gopalswamy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of automated transportation solutions that circumvent the typical
issues of autonomy. In the proposed technology, a lead vehicle is operated by a
human, and automated followers are physically tethered with the smart hard
connect device. The proposed device simultaneously generates and transmits
vehicle to vehicle information over a secure high-bandwidth wired connection.
The transit bus and trucking industries, as well as the United States military,
have the potential to benefit. Given the routine proximity to pedestrians and
bicyclists, transit agencies have a unique requirement for safety and
reliability. These stringent requirements prevent the widespread adoption of the
traditional, untethered, fully autonomous transit vehicles. However, these
requirements may be readily met by the proposed technology. In the trucking and
logistics industries, massive labor shortages can be filled and the productivity
of fleet operators increased, without any compromise on safety and reliability.
Likewise, the United States military Leader-Follower operations, which uses
traditional platooning, may be improved.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an automated vehicle
following technology where the vehicles are physically connected. Autonomous
vehicles have the potential to provide significant improvements in
transportation safety, equity, efficiency, and environmental sustainability;
however, widespread adoption has been plagued by safety and reliability
questions related to unforeseen edge cases, inclement weather, and
cybersecurity. In the proposed technology, a lead vehicle is operated by a
human, and automated followers are physically tethered with the smart hard
connect device. The proposed device simultaneously generates and transmits
vehicle to vehicle information over a secure high-bandwidth wired connection.
Thus, whichever path one vehicle can traverse, the entire platoon can traverse.
Because the followers pull their own weight, the driver feels as if they are
only operating one vehicle. The resultant knowledge advancement will not only
support the proposed technology development, but also has the potential to
answer fundamental questions in control theory, information theory, materials,
and safety.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.