* 2302614
* Collaborative Research: SaTC-EDU: Integrating Cybersecurity in Computing Curricula: A Software PBL-Driven Approach with Focus on Identity and Access Management (IAM)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jeanna Matthews, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2026
* USD 398,370.00

Project-based learning (PBL) and other active learning practices have been shown
to increase student motivation and engagement, raise examination performance,
and reduce failure rates. The overarching goal of this project is to encourage
and facilitate authentic learning experiences in cybersecurity by threading an
Identity and Access Management (IAM)-themed PBL curriculum through existing
computer science-related curricula. Students will work on authentic, real-world
problems similar to what they will encounter on the job. This approach will
broadly expand cybersecurity education to all computing-related students, not
just those enrolled in dedicated cybersecurity programs. The project also aims
to broaden participation in computing disciplines. Ultimately, it will improve
student learning outcomes, including personal competencies, mastery of
cybersecurity content, and higher-order thinking skills.

The project will design and develop a diverse set of ready-to-use IAM-themed
software course projects, along with supporting course modules and active
learning activities, which will enable course instructors to assign and support
take-home PBL projects. At least ten faculty members from multiple institutions
will use the developed course materials in their classroom, impacting over 1,000
students as a result. Three forms of formative evaluation, advisory board
reviews, undergraduate RA beta testing, and in-house classroom trials, will be
used to gather feedback to refine the developed materials. Field tests at
multiple volunteer sites will assess the feasibility of implementing the
developed projects in typical educational settings. Lastly, a pilot study will
assess the promise of the developed projects in improving student learning
outcomes. After these evaluations, the overall framework and materials developed
will be disseminated through websites, publications in conference proceedings
and journals, and proposed workshops.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.