* 2302208
* Langlands correspondences and the arithmetic of automorphic forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Harris, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 102,668.00

Algebra is taught as the art of solving equations, but the fact is that very few
kinds of algebraic equations can be solved by mechanical rules. Nevertheless,
one can often characterize an equation by the shape of its set of solutions,
even if the solutions themselves cannot be written down. The Langlands
correspondences grow out of the observation that the shapes of the equations
that arise in two apparently different areas of mathematics — number theory and
the symmetries of mathematical physics — are linked by a complex web of
relations that allow questions in one area to be solved by reference to the
other area. The branch of mathematics that studies these correspondences is
called the theory of automorphic forms. The simplest examples of automorphic
forms are the familiar sine and cosine function from trigonometry. More general
automorphic forms are described in terms of geometry in higher dimensions. In
this way the study of automorphic forms contributes to the development of all
branches of mathematics. Problems studied in the present project, presented at
seminars and conferences, will serve as the basis for training the next
generation of specialists. They also provide examples for philosophers and
historians of the kind of synthesis of ideas that is characteristic of
contemporary mathematics, and that presents a special challenge for those who
prodict that artificial intelligence will play a prominent role in the
mathematics of the future.



This project is a contribution to the study of motives over number fields in
the setting of the Langlands program, continuing a theme that has been central
to the PI's research throughout his career. The present proposal is divided into
two parts. Part 1 combines motivic methods, — especially the Grothendieck-
Deligne theory of weights — with the Selberg trace formula and representation
theory to the study of local and global Langlands correspondences, both
classical and mod p. In particular, a strategy is outlined for an inductive
construction of the local Langlands correspondence over local fields of positive
characteristic, and an extension is proposed to Arthur parameters of the
author's approach to the generalized Ramanujan conjecture. Part 2 points in the
opposite direction: it applies the insights of the Langlands program and
harmonic analysis on reductive groups to study (p-adic) motivic L-functions,
especially square root p-adic L-functions, with special attention to classifying
the Gan-Gross-Prasad periods that can be interpreted as cohomological cup
products. A more speculative project, joint with Feng and Mazur, aims to provide
a categorical framework for Venkatesh's motivic conjectures in the setting of
Iwasawa theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.