* 2302907
* Mapping Class Semigroups and the Classification of Conformal Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Pilgrim, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 269,390.00

Dynamical systems are mathematical objects that describe the evolution of
systems over time. They model many types of behavior, from animal neurons to
epidemics to weather modeling. In some cases, we have a classification of the
simplest types, and know how they are arranged. For example, we have now a good
understanding in the real quadratic case. This achievement was the result of
work by many researchers from different fields. It remains a central challenge
to give a classification of examples beyond the real quadratic setting. This
project takes up this challenge using tools from several different areas of
mathematics. It focuses on systems that involve complex numbers, and on more
general types called conformal. The conformal dynamical systems studied in this
project include newly discovered, more exotic examples. Though our understanding
of those more general systems is poorer, we have many new tools, from algebra to
analysis, with which to study them. The project applies techniques from the
well-developed theory of mapping class groups to the classification problem.
Mapping class groups are symmetries of two-dimensional objects and are studied
by both mathematicians and physicists. This project generalizes the notion of a
mapping class group in a way that includes these two-dimensional complex
dynamical systems. It also applies new tools from the recently developed theory
of self-similar groups. This research area has an abundance of accessible
problems. Students who engage with these topics will come to appreciate the
essential unity of mathematics and the excitement of research. This will
contribute to the development of a pool of mathematical talent that is broadly
trained. Special software designed for this study allows for rich
experimentation and the development of technical skills.

The combinatorial foundations of complex dynamical systems were laid by A.
Douady, J. Hubbard, and W. Thurston. The lack of a sufficiently natural
algebraic framework delayed progress on fundamental problems until new
techniques were introduced by L. Bartholdi and V. Nekrashevych in 2006. These
selfsimilar group techniques are now standard. The recent developments in this
new field are paralleling those in the theory of mapping class groups. The
natural objects–branched self-covers of the sphere whose forward orbits of
branch points form a finite set—may be fruitfully regarded as representing
branched mapping classes in a countable semigroup. That this semigroup is in
addition a biset over the pure mapping class group makes the combinatorial
structure immensely rich. Just as with mapping class groups, on the semigroup
side, there are similarly very deep connections to Teichmueller theory,
dynamics, geometry, and algorithmic questions. The fuller exploration of these
connections is the focus of this project. Basic dynamical finiteness results,
and the development of an appropriate notion of relative hyperbolicity, are
currently lacking. Intriguingly, the notions of relative hyperbolicity seem to
lead naturally to connections with both coarse geometry and arithmetic dynamics
on Berkovich spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.