* 2302478
* Excellence in Research: 3D Printed Radiation Detectors with Perovskite-Polymer Composites
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Zhibin Yu, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,776.00

Current radiation detectors for nuclear material determination use inorganic
single crystals that are processed at high temperatures and difficult to scale
up to large sizes. A large detector size is essential for obtaining high
accuracy and efficiency for detecting nuclear materials of interest including
highly enriched uranium and plutonium-239 especially in a moving cargo. Large
area and low-cost radiation detectors will also enhance operation efficiency and
improve quality control of many industrial mining and metallurgical processes.
In addition, pixelated radiation detector arrays are required for nuclear
medical diagnostics and for the study of particle physics in outer space.
Current detector arrays with inorganic single crystals have suffered from a
limited spatial resolution due to the difficulties of machining these single
crystals into small size pixels and assembling them into dense detector arrays.
To solve these challenges, the team aims to develop new semiconductor-polymer
composites as a replacement of the conventional single crystals for radiation
detectors and detector arrays. If successful, there will be tremendous
processing and manufacturing advantages of the composites compared with their
inorganic single crystal counterparts, for instance, the composites can be
potentially processed like commodity plastics by solution casting, hot pressing,
melt extrusion and injection molding to achieve radiation detectors with large
sizes and various shapes, or by 3D printing to achieve detector arrays with an
unprecedented high spatial resolution and manufacturing flexibility.

Technical summary: The project will investigate a group of organometal halide
perovskite (perovskite) semiconductors and their polymer matrix composites. The
state-of-the-art perovskite semiconductors exhibit a long charge carrier
lifetime and high carrier mobility, contain high atomic number elements (cesium,
lead, and iodine), and have a high radiation hardness, making them ideal
candidates for radiation detector application. Moreover, they can be readily
dissolved in many organic solvents, facilitating the formulation of perovskite-
polymer composites for this proposed project. The work will lead to fundamental
understanding of the structure, processing, and property relationships of halide
perovskite-polymer composites including, 1) how to engineer the chemical
interfaces between the perovskite and polymer phases to improve perovskite
crystal dispersity and suppress ionic charge migration; and 2) how to engineer
the electronic interfaces in the composite to enhance and balance both electron
and hole collection upon irradiation of high energy photons. If successful, the
work will establish a new era of additive manufacturing by investigating for the
first time the 3D printing of perovskite-polymer composites for high-resolution
pixelated radiation detectors. The knowledge of understanding and engineering
charge transport processes in the composites can provide importance guidance for
future exploration of other semiconductor-polymer composites for new generation
large scale, low-cost optoelectronic manufacturing. This project will also help
create a new educational program at a historically black public university
(Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University) for the training of
underrepresented engineering students to fuel the workforce pipeline in
manufacturing, electronics, semiconductors, and national security industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.