* 2302060
* RET Site: Computer Science Research Opportunity for Smart Environments (ROSE)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Siming Liu, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Computer Science Research Opportunity for Smart Environments (ROSE), a three-
year new RET site at Missouri State University (MSU), will provide a unique
research experience to 30 middle and high school STEM teachers. ROSE is focused
on topics of Internet of Things (IoT), smart environments, artificial
intelligence, security, and data mining research. The College of Natural and
Applied Sciences and the College of Education will partner with local school
districts, including high-needs schools, in Southwest Missouri to enrich their
knowledge of the next generation of IoT and smart environments. ROSE will
provide research training and mentoring for participating teachers during a six
weeklong summer workshop and academic year follow-ups. Teachers will work
alongside faculty mentors to discover research challenges and practical
solutions for multimedia processing, computer security, artificial intelligence,
and machine learning technology through a guided research experience. This
project will impact participating teachers’ professional development and best
teaching practices in computational thinking, problem solving, and scientific
research into STEM curriculum. Teachers will develop new lessons incorporating
concepts from computational thinking, computer programming, network security,
and the Internet. The ROSE project aims to develop long-term relationships with
teachers via academic year classroom visits, monthly virtual re-group sessions,
weekly office hours, and sharing of lesson plans and experiences during the open
to public ROSE Annual Symposiums. ROSE will help teachers develop a passion for
research in smart environments, which will subsequently help them increase their
students' interest in computer science and desire to pursue future academic and
career endeavors in STEM-related fields, which is a national need.

In ROSE, participating teachers will work alongside MSU faculty and graduate
student mentors to discover research challenges and practical solutions for
next-generation smart environments where a variety of smart devices are working
to make inhabitants' lives more comfortable. ROSE faculty and graduate student
mentors will facilitate teachers to develop lesson plans, incorporating concepts
from computer programming, algorithms, and data analysis. Participating teachers
will integrate the knowledge and skills they acquire from ROSE research projects
to create an inclusive classroom experience. ROSE will explore how research-
based exploratory learning, when integrated into 6-12 grade curricula,
influences student perceptions to connect abstract principles to practical
aspects of problem-solving using computers and computing concepts. Long-range
impacts of ROSE are: 1) building teacher and students’ confidence to tackle
scientific problems; 2) enriching teachers’ professional development in STEM
education; 3) creating innovative lesson plans to foster students’ curiosity,
investigative skills and problem-solving abilities, and 4) improving students’
breadth of knowledge in computer science to prepare them for the workforce in a
rapidly changing world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.