* 2302981
* CAREER: Multiscale Mechanics of Bio-based, Reprocessable, Recyclable and Mechanically Robust Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Ning Zhang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2027
* USD 567,771.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research to understand complex mechanical behaviors of bio-crosslinked polymer
composites. Covalently crosslinked elastomers and thermosetting polymers have
been acknowledged as strategically important materials in industry, national
defense and our daily life. Although the strong covalent crosslinks confer these
conventional thermosets desirable properties, they also preclude repairing,
reshaping, reprocessing and recycling, which has caused serious environmental
pollution and resource wastage. By introducing bio-dynamic covalent bonds and
adding reinforcing fillers, a novel green type of polymers that are potentially
recyclable, reprocessable and sustainable has been developed. However, most of
the reported bio-crosslinked polymers are still far from being extensively used
in real-world applications due to the limited understanding of their processing-
structure-property relationships. This research project aims to discover the
fundamental principles that govern the mechanical and chemical properties of
bio-based polymer composites, with the aid of multiscale computational modeling,
data science (statistical analysis), and experimental validation. With
quantified microstructure-property relations and unraveled deformation
mechanisms, advanced bio-based reprocessable and mechanically robust polymer
composites can be developed for wide applications, which will significantly
mitigate the severe plastic pollution issue. The project includes an education
and outreach plan to train diverse groups of next-generation of engineers:
organizing workshops, seminar talks and local recycling center tours to K-12
students, providing high school students with summer internship opportunities,
training undergraduate and graduate students the research skills of coding,
writing and presenting. Particularly, research opportunities will be created for
underrepresented students including physically disabled students.

Through developing a novel multiscale framework that integrates density
functional theory (DFT), all-atom molecular dynamics (AA-MD) and coarse-grained
molecular dynamics (CG-MD), the goal of this project is to establish a
fundamental understanding of the role of exchangeable bio-crosslinks in
assisting the polymer composites strike their excellent balance among
mechanical, functional, and reprocessing properties. The research objectives
include: (i) seamlessly bridging DFT, AA-MD and CG-MD by force field
calibration/optimization/parameterization; (ii) understanding the fracture
mechanisms of two representatives: bio-based styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and
bio-based epoxy vitrimer. The following knowledge gaps will be addressed: (1)
the mechanisms of de-crosslinking/re-crosslinking during curing; (2) the
advantages of bio-crosslinks over conventional linkages (e.g., S-S, C-S bonds);
(3) the interfacial interactions between nanofiller and polymer; (4) the
influence of reprocessing on structure and mechanical performance of reclaimed
polymers; (5) microscale and mesoscale structure-property relations. The
research outcomes will advance the knowledge of mechanics in bio-based polymer
composites, as well the integrated multiscale framework can be extended to other
amorphous materials, such as hierarchical biomaterials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.