* 2302187
* RET Site: Research Experiences in Cybersecurity for Nevada Teachers (RECNT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Emily Hand, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,344.00

This RET Site renewal at the University of Nevada, Reno aims to explore unique
ways to engage middle and high school teachers in summer research experiences
that emphasize cybersecurity in modern systems. Cybersecurity research and its
applications are highly relevant in all areas of society from cyber-physical
infrastructures and defense-related applications to domestic sectors such as
banking and health. This RET Site will continue to have a significant impact on
the teachers who will be trained on such challenges and solutions and
subsequently, the Nevada students, who as direct beneficiaries of this program
will serve as the next-gen cybersecurity workforce. The participant teachers
will spend six weeks participating in research experiences and developing
modules and materials which will subsequently be implemented in their classrooms
during the academic year. The project involves a partnership between the
university, the school districts in the surrounding Nevada counties, and local
industries. The project will further develop a community of teachers who are
passionate about cybersecurity and who can translate this excitement to their
students through engaging, high-quality hands-on learning experiences. This RET
Site is anchored by cybersecurity research that is compelling and engaging for
teachers and 8-12 students, driven by a faculty team that has demonstrated
expertise in both cybersecurity research and education. The project goals are
to: recruit a cohort of middle and high school teachers interested in
introducing cybersecurity and CSE topics into their courses; engage the
recruited teachers in cybersecurity research areas in modern resilient systems;
develop instructional modules that can be incorporated in a variety of STEM
courses and programs; promote and disseminate the results to a large group of
middle and high school teachers; and create a student pathway from Nevada
schools to UNR to the cybersecurity workforce. The site features projects that
are teacher accessible as well as connected to current research and practice.
The projects will build the technical capacity of teachers, so that they are
capable of developing and implementing new, exciting hands-on learning
activities at their schools. Teachers will further develop and enhance their
research, communication, and presentation skills, all of which are essential to
their professional growth and success.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.