* 2302530
* EAGER: A low-cost, long-endurance observational platform for the Arctic atmospheric boundary layer
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Gianluca Meneghello, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,585.00

The Arctic is the fastest-changing environment on the planet. Temperatures in
the region have risen by more than 3°C since the 1970s, three times faster than
the global average. Over the past few decades, the Arctic has taken the role of
a canary in the coal mine for climate change, but our ability to monitor the
atmosphere in this harsh and remote region is still very limited, and often
relies on very expensive manned flights and research cruises. This is in
contrast with the situation in the ocean, where autonomous platforms have
provided a wealth of observations. The resulting paucity of observations is
hindering our understanding of the Arctic evolution, and of its relationship to
lower latitude weather and the global climate. This project focuses on
overcoming current challenges in monitoring the Arctic atmosphere by designing,
developing, and testing a novel observational platform aimed at providing
autonomous, continuous access to the central Arctic throughout all seasons.

This EAGER project supports the design, testing and implementation of an
autonomous Arctic atmospheric observing system using a novel design of balloons
capable of making multiple soundings for each deployment. The platform’s mission
requirements include the ability to: i) fly across the Arctic basin carried by
the prevailing winds while performing four, 1 km soundings per day over three
weeks; ii) operate within a temperature range between -50°C and +20°C; and iii)
survive precipitation and icing. By performing a series of bench tests and two
field campaigns, the project will focus on verifying three hypotheses. First,
that the proposed mechanical-compression balloon design will provide sufficient
maneuverability and robustness to survive the impact of inclement weather.
Second, that recent advancements in sensors, satellite modems, and high-
specific-energy batteries, will provide sufficient savings in weight and energy
consumption to achieve the target three-week flight time. Third, that a control
algorithm can be designed to autonomously fly several platforms across the
Arctic in an energy efficient way. The project will also support education and
public outreach through demonstration events using scaled-down balloon
deployments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.