* 2302796
* Conference: GLOW: Support for the 2023 Penrose Conference on the role of outburst floods in Earth and planetary evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Isaac Larsen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides funding to support early career scientists and those who are
underrepresented in the geosciences to attend and participate in the Geological
Society of America Penrose Conference, “The Role of Outburst Floods in Earth and
Planetary Evolution,” held at Camp Delany Washington State Park in Coulee City,
WA, on June 5-9, 2023. Outburst floods refer to very large flooding events,
caused by breaches of impounded water bodies, that inundate landscapes with flow
rates that may substantially exceed what is possible for the largest
meteorological floods. Outburst floods are also well documented on Mars. This
Penrose Conference enables new collaborations and understanding across a diverse
set of researchers seeking to advance understanding of outburst floods. In
addition to supporting participation by early career scientists and those who
are underrepresented in the geosciences, NSF support enables professional
development for participants through a structured mentoring opportunity that
matches early career scientists with senior scientists.

The objective of this Penrose Conference is to bring together a diverse
community of scholars to discuss and debate the state-of-the-art and chart the
future of outburst flood science. The conference is focused on four linked
themes: 1) Channeled Scabland and the Missoula Floods; 2) universal occurrence
of outburst floods on Earth and other planets; 3) mechanics of outburst flood
processes; and 4) broader Earth system and societal implications of outburst
floods. As such, this Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds (GLOW)
conference award supports the study of other worlds as a way to broaden and
deepen understanding of the Earth and its evolution, as well as the use of
geoscience knowledge to understand the environments of other worlds. The unique
gathering of scientists focused on terrestrial and planetary outburst floods at
this Penrose Conference fosters interactions that promote the cross-
fertilization of concepts and lessons learned from studies of both terrestrial
and planetary outburst floods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.