* 2302393
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Temporal Morphology and Verbal Order in an Endangered Language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Claire Halpert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 05/31/2025
* USD 21,927.00

This doctoral dissertation project involves original research with native
speakers of an endangered language to document and analyze a complex aspect of
the grammar. This work makes the knowledge of first speakers of the language
accessible to the community, language learners, and linguists. The project is an
in-depth linguistic examination of how and when to use specific grammatical
patterns depending on the situation and the speaker’s intent, which serves to
further linguistic understanding of how human language functions and to document
and support an endangered Indigenous language.

Speakers of a language can convey a proposition on its own, such as in the
sentence, "It is snowing," but often such ideas are embedded in other contexts,
such as in "I think it is snowing," or "when it is snowing, I wear a jacket." In
each of these English examples, "it is snowing" looks the same, but in many
other languages including the language of interest in this project, speakers use
different grammatical structures to express the proposition in each context.
These different grammatical structures are called "clause types," and fluent
speakers use them to convey a wide range of nuanced meanings. This project
elucidates how these configurations are used by native speakers. This informs a
theoretical linguistic understanding of clause typing generally while also
supporting the needs of the community by documenting valuable linguistic data
and teaching learners how the language functions. In the absence of everyday
immersion environments where learners would have the rich and varied contexts
necessary to acquire the nuances required for mastery of the language,
linguistic analysis provides generalizations of native speaker grammar patterns
for learners to emulate. This award is made as part of a funding partnership
between the National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the
Humanities for the NSF Dynamic Language Infrastructure – NEH Documenting
Endangered Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.