* 2302341
* Homological Commutative Algebra and Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Claudiu Raicu, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 06/30/2026
* USD 116,660.00

The proposed research aims to investigate subtle interactions between
commutative algebra and classical algebraic geometry on the one hand, and
representation theory and modular arithmetic on the other hand. The main subject
of exploration is homology, which can be thought of as the study of
(dis)similarities. Despite being regarded as an abstract mathematical tool,
homology has found many applications in recent years, particularly to data
analysis and computer science. In algebra, homology refers to a way of measuring
the difference between an implicitly defined set of objects (cycles) and an
explicitly defined subset (of boundaries). In geometry, it is a tool used to
distinguish between different shapes. The homology attached to an object usually
focuses on the most significant traits, and it reflects its symmetries in
intriguing ways. The PI will investigate homological theories associated to flag
varieties, which are geometric objects parametrizing increasing sequences of
subspaces of linear spaces, such as a point contained in a line contained in a
plane. The symmetry comes from moving the linear spaces around while preserving
their containment relations. The homological theories considered depend on a
prime number p=2,3,5,7,11 etc., and the goal is to understand how the resulting
homology depends on p, and how it encodes the symmetries of the flag varieties.
This can then be further applied to study algebro-geometric objects of interest,
such as matrices and higher-dimensional tensors. The proposed research is
suitable for engaging students in research, as well as for computer
experimentation and software development.

A fundamental question at the confluence of commutative algebra, algebraic
geometry and representation theory is to describe the cohomology of line bundles
on flag varieties. A well-known case is that of the projective space, where it
is equivalent to computing local cohomology for a polynomial ring with support
in the ideal of the variables. Other examples include Grassmannians, complete
flag varieties, or the incidence correspondence. For flag varieties over a field
of characteristic zero the cohomology is computed by the Borel-Weil-Bott
theorem, but the positive characteristic problem remains wide open. The PI's
goal is a systematic study of this question, with an emphasis on concrete
examples, and on showcasing peculiar interactions between algebra, geometry, and
symmetry. The PI plans to use the newly acquired knowledge to solve questions of
a homological nature regarding fundamental objects such as matrix determinantal
varieties and analogues for higher tensors, equations and syzygies, or Koszul
modules.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.