* 2302778
* Open Process Models Optimizing Self Regulated Learning in the Classroom
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Magy Seif ElNasr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 02/28/2026
* USD 849,531.00

Many of today’s computing advancements, including artificial intelligence (AI),
machine learning and data science, rely on distributed and parallel computation.
Thus, developing distributed and parallel systems skills is essential for
computer science education and preparation for the workforce. Learning parallel
programming, however, is difficult because students often find it challenging to
think in parallel rather than sequentially (how they are taught in introductory
courses). Game-based learning approaches can provide an engaging environment
that fosters metacognition and self-regulation. This work builds on an NSF-
funded game called Parallel (educational IIS 1523116), which engages students in
solving puzzles that increase in difficulty, helping students to solve puzzles
using abstract principles from parallel programming. Studies of the game,
however, found that it alone cannot stimulate students to manage their learning
through planning, reflection, re-assessment, and re-planning. This project will
develop community-based tools based on learning sciences principles to scaffold
students' self-regulated learning. Student learning processes will be visualized
using interfaces that allow students to learn from each other and instructors to
coach and scaffold the learning process.

The project will focus on the research question of how to engage students in
metacognitive processes of self-regulated learning toward better learning of
parallel programming. The project will address this research question through
design-based research. The project will develop a set of studies to understand
how students currently learn and self-regulate their learning within parallel
programming classes and then use the results of these studies to help develop an
AI system with augmented community interaction mechanisms. This system will be
composed of a process visualization system that extends the Parallel game to
allow students to view and reflect on their process through an open
visualization of their own and other students’ data revealing problem-solving
strategies and decisions. The community interaction mechanisms will allow
students to leave comments for one another and for teachers to scaffold the
learning process through feedback on the student’s learning process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.