* 2302149
* New perspectives in combinatorial algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Steven Sam, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 06/30/2026
* USD 112,772.00

The purpose of this project is to study some classical topics in combinatorics
and algebra from the perspective of new modern techniques. The PI is interested
in algebraic computations such as the equations that characterize a space, and
how they interact with seemingly unrelated computations. The project is broken
into three subprojects with a different theme. These include the study of the
space of polynomials with repeated roots, super homogeneous spaces, and the use
of Lie algebras in representation stability theory. The commonality among them
involves viewing specific algebraic computations from a different angle to get a
different algebraic computation that surprisingly is much more tractable. This
expands on previous work of the PI and his collaborators, and the intention is
to take it into new directions. The project will also provide opportunities for
training graduate students.

The PI will work on three main topics sitting between representation theory and
commutative algebra, with applications flowing between these subjects in both
directions. The first topic concerns computing the equations and syzygies of
multiple root loci in spaces of binary forms. The PI plans to study them all
together as the degree of the binary forms grows using certain monad-type
constructions. Recently, this was successfully used to give a new proof of the
generic Green conjecture on canonically embedded projective curves. The second
topic concerns the calculation of syzygies of determinantal-like varieties via
their connection to the coherent cohomology of super homogeneous spaces and
super analogues of the classical Grothendieck-Springer resolution. This is
motivated by the existence of unexpected actions of Lie superalgebras on these
syzygies and, in fact, offers a conceptual explanation for their existence. On
the other hand, it also offers a new strategy to find super analogues of the
Borel-Weil-Bott theorem, which the PI plans to explore. The third topic concerns
curried algebras; a concept recently introduced by the PI in collaboration with
Andrew Snowden. This provides a deep connection between representation stability
theory and constructions in Lie theory such as the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand
category O. The PI plans to import these techniques from Lie theory to find and
prove new structural results in representation stability and its applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.