* 2302999
* Collaborative Research: NSF-CSIRO: Fair Sequential Collective Decision-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hau Chan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to develop (artificial intelligence) AI-powered approaches to
address challenging societal problems, such as dealing with droughts, infectious
diseases, and environmentally harmful emissions. This project engages specific
questions in these areas, such as: How can one effectively allocate water
resources to increase agricultural drought resilience during drought seasons?
How can one effectively determine when and where to construct hydrogen or
electric vehicle refueling stations to encourage citizens to adopt these
technologies to lower emissions? How can one effectively distribute vaccines and
other medical supplies daily to enhance response to infectious diseases during
pandemics? These problems belong to a class of classical and important problems
in sequential collective decision-making. While sequential decision-making and
collective decision-making have been studied previously, decision-making
problems that are simultaneously sequential and collective are poorly
understood, especially for specific domains such as resource allocation and when
combined with goals such as responsibility and equitability. The overarching
project goal is to establish theoretical and algorithmic foundations for
responsible and equitable AI-powered sequential, collective decision-making. It
also seeks to ensure that sequences of decisions satisfy multiple objectives and
make appropriate trade-offs between short and long-term rewards subject to
fairness criteria. The proposed research will lead to efficient and fair
solutions to our social good and use-inspired applications in drought
resilience, towards net zero, and infectious disease resilience.

The project will achieve its goals by focusing on three interconnected
challenges, leveraging a wide range of techniques from AI, economics, and
operation research. First, the challenge of fair multi-objective collective
decision-making for a single time period subject to multiple objectives and
fairness criteria. Second, explore fair sequential multi-objective collective
decision-making that addresses trade-offs between immediate and long-term
efficiency and fairness. Finally, understand the strategic aspects of fair
multi-objective collective decision-making in collaboration with stakeholders,
who provide information that facilitates the process.

This is a joint project between United States and Australian researchers funded
by the Collaboration Opportunities in Responsible and Equitable AI under the
U.S. NSF and the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.