* 2302437
* HBCU Excellence in Research: Research and Education Center for Investigation of Chemical Transformations in Host-Guest Systems at Extreme Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mohammad Mahmood, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 511,230.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Integrative Activities
(OIA), Professor Mohammad Mahmood of Howard University and Dr. Alexander
Goncharov of Carnegie Institution of Washington will use synchrotron and free
electron laser X-ray diffraction, Raman, and optical spectroscopy to study host-
guest compounds with a focus on C-N-O-H phase diagrams under extreme conditions
of high pressures and temperatures. This work is intended to address the
challenges associated with understanding the response of molecular materials and
host-guest systems to the extreme conditions of high pressure and temperature
and their chemical reactivity and transformations at these conditions. This
research is a physical chemical study of relevance to earth, and planetary
science as information about the structure, composition and stability of
molecular and host-guest compounds can be used to address a variety of questions
related to planetary interiors. Furthermore, this activity will open a
possibility for the talented young scientists from underrepresented groups to be
trained in an academic environment under combined supervision at Howard
University and the Carnegie Institution to prepare them for potential careers in
science.

The proposed research program will be centered on investigations of matter under
extreme conditions of high pressure and extreme temperatures (P-T). The focus
will be on host-guest systems; both water cages hosts containing various guest
molecules and co-crystalline systems will be studied. These systems are
characterized by a wealth of physical and chemical phenomena, particularly under
conditions of extreme temperature and pressure. This takes on additional
relevance as some of these systems are thought to be components of planetary
interiors. Professor Mahmood and Dr. Goncharov and their team including
postdoctoral associates and graduate and undergraduate students will investigate
the structure, composition and vibrational properties of these systems, as well
as their physical and chemical transformations as a function of pressure and
temperature. In so doing, the team aspires to establish potential connections of
these systems with emergent phenomena such as high-temperature
superconductivity. The experiments will involve state-of-the-art diffraction and
spectroscopic techniques including synchrotron and XFEL diffraction, and Raman
and optical spectroscopy performed with diamond anvil cells. As a result of
these studies, it is anticipated that a better understanding of the chemistry
and physics of host-guest complexes under extreme conditions will be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.