* 2302637
* Excellence in Research: Developing a Knowledge Graph Driven Integrative Framework for Explainable Protein Function Prediction via Generative Deep Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Aize Cao, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 533,752.00

Proteins are the building blocks of life performing multitudes of functions that
include but not limited to catalyzing reactions as enzymes, participating in the
bodyâ€™s defense mechanism as antibodies, forming structures and transporting
important chemicals. The interactions among proteins describe the molecular
mechanism of diseases, and convey potentially important insights about the
disease prevention, diagnosis, and treatments. Therefore, functional
characterization of proteins is crucial to helping understand life, diseases,
and developing novel treatments for life threatening illness. Despite recent
advancements, predicting protein function remains an open problem due to low
performance, lack of explainable outcomes, and irreproducible research
dissemination highlighting the need for improved methodologies leveraging the
recent proliferation of biomedical data about proteins.

The objective of this research is to design, implement, and evaluate a protein
function prediction pipeline using a novel generative deep learning approach
powered by heterogeneous knowledge graph to address the challenge of multi-omics
data integration, explainable function prediction, and reproducibility. The
research will be carried out through three interrelated tasks: 1) investigation
of a novel generative deep learning model on knowledge graph; 2) integration of
multi-omics features through large language model; and, 3) development of
reproducible software. Successful completion of this project will lead to a
robust, more accurate, reproducible and explainable protein function prediction
pipeline. The project will create new education and outreach opportunities to
greatly strengthen the training and research activities in computational biology
leveraging modern AI technologies at Meharry Medical College, a leading HBCU.
Meharry dominantly enrolls African American students. More than 90% data science
students at Meharry are African Americans and majority are women. This project
will increase STEM education awareness, impact, and opportunity to the women and
minority students at Meharry to excel in AI/ML, quantitative genomics and data
science research. The reproducible open-source software will greatly facilitate
broader scientific community working to improve protein function prediction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.