* 2302093
* I-Corps: Clinical trial safety
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Elizabeth Johnson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an innovation for community providers providing direct access to
clinical trial safety information when developing a plan of care for a trial
participant outside of the research setting, including which medicines and
treatments to explicitly avoid. Approximately 1 in 50 children and hundreds of
adults enrolled in clinical trials (particularly in oncology) experience a fatal
drug interaction, largely attributed to lack of trial details at time of
clinical encounter. This innovation has the potential to improve the well-being
of individuals by support and inform current policy initiatives aiming to expand
availability of clinical trial opportunities for adult and pediatric patients,
such as by easing travel burdens associated with clinical trial visits and
procedures. As a mobile, bridging technology that can span any distance and be
accessed by any provider, this innovation can bolster expanded clinical trial
access for individuals and communities in rural settings, who may otherwise be
unable to participate (or risk injury by accessing care in an uninformed
setting) and will thus broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in
science.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a new product that addresses
the challenges of clinical trial management by leveraging wearable technology
and embedded software to provide real-time safety information for participants.
This use-inspired solution represents the convergence of disparate fields,
including engineering (human factors, ergonomics), computer science (user
experience, human-centered computing), and nursing models of patient care
(clinical outcomes). Preliminary data demonstrate that clinical nurses have a
high knowledge deficit related to the unique care needs of clinical trial
participants and do not screen for such needs during assessments. This
innovation catalyzes opportunities for open information exchange that will
broaden healthcare providersâ€™ knowledge of drug testing safety and improve
clinical care outcomes. Through the integration of trial safety information
(drug interactions with standard of care treatments, side effect profiles,
research team contact information) and related increase in trial participant
retention, this product will accelerate the scientific understanding needed to
develop novel therapeutics while positively altering the pharmaceutical industry
research paradigm related to equitable, inclusive, and accessible safety
management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.