* 2302608
* Neurocognitive and behavioral constituents of nonverbal speaker-listener attunement during science communication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* John Besley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 631,380.00

How does nonverbal communication affect public speaking in the context of
science communication? Public speaking is a skill that varies between speakers
and which drastically impacts how much audiences learn during a talk. What is
not often appreciated is that nonverbal communication plays a key role in how
well a speaker is received. Nonverbal communication refers to all the ways
people communicate without words, including body language, gestures, eye
contact, and tone of voice. Skilled speakers use nonverbal communication to
capture and hold the audience's attention, create positive impressions, and
build rapport. But audiences also communicate with speakers nonverbally. For
example, a speaker who starts a speech nervously may notice that the audience
avoids eye contact. This can trigger stress in the speaker, which can lead to
derailed thoughts. This project will use virtual reality (VR) to study how this
speaker-audience attunement influences the reception of public talks about
science topics. VR will allow us to create simulations of public speaking
situations, and to measure the responses of both speakers and audiences. This
research will advance our understanding of nonverbal factors as enablers for
learning, and it could lead to new ways for improving public speaking. This is
important because public speaking is one of the top 21st-century job skills and
also because VR technology is becoming increasingly popular for communication.

This project will use VR to experimentally manipulate and test how speaker-
audience attunement influences the reception of public talks in the context of
science communication. The investigators propose a new approach that integrates
bio-behavioral measurement with VR-assisted manipulation to disentangle how
speakers and audiences influence each other via nonverbal social signals.
Specifically, this project will quantify the nonverbal components of the
speaker’s behavior that affect neurophysiological audience responses, subjective
perceptions, and objective outcomes. The project will also study how the
behavior of audiences, which are manipulated via VR technology, affects the
speakers’ neurophysiological processes, coping behavior, and overall measures of
successful communication. In addition to testing the hypotheses about speaker-
audience attunement on physiological subjective, and behavioral outcomes, this
research will yield a database of speeches that are annotated with all measures
and allows studying how speakers respond to audiences and which factors predict
engagement and learning. Together with outreach and education efforts, this
research will open the door to new developments at the intersection of
communication, bio-behavioral, and technological learning systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.