* 2302730
* Building A Teacher-AI Collaborative System for Personalized Instruction and Assessment of Comprehension Skills
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Warschauer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2026
* USD 850,000.00

Students need fundamental literacy skills, especially reading comprehension, to
successfully engage in STEM learning and careers. A number of studies have
explored the use of AI technologies, such as chatbots, to improve students'
reading comprehension by engaging students in interactive dialogue during
reading. This approach is particularly promising for younger students who are in
a critical period for developing reading skills. However, scaling up these AI
resources to make them accessible and relevant to diverse learners and
instructors remains a challenge. This project aims to harness recent
advancements in AI, particularly large language models, to enable teachers to
collaborate with AI in creating interactive reading resources that ask students
questions, listen to and interpret student responses, and provide tailored
feedback to students during reading, focusing on students from kindergarten to
second grade. This will allow teachers to contribute their expertise to develop
AI resources tailored to their students' needs. The project will shed light on
whether the extensive manual labor involved in chatbot development, typically
performed by content creators, designers, and engineers, can be significantly
reduced through AI-teacher collaboration, and whether the resulting chatbots
effectively support teachers' instruction and promote studentsâ€™ reading
comprehension.

This project will be carried out in four stages. This first stage involves the
development of innovative AI models to automatically generate question-answer
pairs based on reading materials teachers select. The models will be tailored to
meet the unique requirements of educational contexts. In the second stage, a
user-friendly teacher-AI collaborative system will be developed through a
contextual inquiry and participatory design process. This system will enable
teachers to verify and modify the question-answer pairs generated by AI and
subsequently incorporate them into a chatbot that engages students in dialogue.
Teachers' modifications to the question-answer pairs will feed back to the
system so that the AI models can gradually learn and adapt to each individual
teacher's preferences. In the third stage, the research team will develop the
chatbot's capability for adaptive interaction so that it can carry out dialogue
and provide scaffolding based on both the accuracy and sentiment of students'
responses. The fourth stage will involve an examination of the usability and
effectiveness of the teacher-AI collaborative system and resulting chatbot in
supporting personalized instruction and assessment. To this end, the research
team will carry out a field test involving an under-power randomized controlled
trial. Five teachers and their approximately 150 students will be recruited to
participate, with half of the students in each class randomly assigned to read
interactive texts with a chatbot generated by their teacher while the other half
reads the original text without the chatbot. Observations and interviews with
teachers and students will shed light on the usability of the teacher-AI co-
created interactive reading materials. Students' post-reading comprehension will
be assessed to provide evidence on the system's educational impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.