* 2302356
* Rational points on modular curves, and the geometry of arithmetic statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David Zureick-Brown, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2026
* USD 68,498.00

The project will explore various topics within number theory and algebraic
geometry. These are ancient areas of inquiry rooted in very basic questions
about solving polynomial equations and motivated by concrete applications. For
example, the Greek astronomer Apollonius of Perga (240-190BC) developed his
theory of conics and ellipses to facilitate the study of Astronomy. Questions
about numbers and shapes still remain central to the frontier of mathematical
research, and this project has a particular emphasis on using modern technical
tools to study classical problems. The project includes problems accessible to
undergraduates and graduate students, and includes efforts including substantial
student focused conference organization (such as the Arizona Winter School).

Mazur's torsion and isogeny theorems are cornerstones of arithmetic geometry,
and arithmetic statistics is an old field full of classical problems. In recent
years both areas have enjoyed an influx of new ideas and progress, especially
via ideas from the geometry of numbers, moduli spaces, algebraic topology,
computational number theory, and more. In particular, this project will study
Mazur's ``Program B'', higher degree torsion on elliptic curves, a
generalization of the Batyrev--Manin and Malle conjectures to stacks (in a
sense, an interpolation of these conjectures), and non-abelian (and infinite
degree) Cohen--Lenstra heuristics (and, in the function field case, theorems).
Each of these sub-projects will introduced new methods and toolkits/frameworks
that are expected to be broadly useful, and suggests numerous open problems and
new directions for research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.