* 2302898
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing carbon-neutral crop technologies to develop sustainable consumer goods (AL, GA, NC, TN)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Jeremy Schmutz, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award focuses on building a
circular bioeconomy for building materials and consumer goods in the
southeastern United States. The project is designed to replace high
environmental impact products with locally developed and grown perennial grasses
that grow on marginal land, improve carbon sequestration, reduce imports, and
have the potential to decarbonize multiple industries. The southeastern US has
significant resources in underutilized farmable land, research in plant
genomics, multiple groups engineering novel sustainable biomaterials, startup
incubators, a mission to revitalize rural economies, and a future workforce
across rural and urban areas, and graduates from universities, minority-serving
colleges and smaller colleges. This integrated regional accelerator for
research, training, outreach, and innovation will catalyze sweeping changes in
manufacturing toward carbon neutrality. To achieve this goal, HudsonAlpha
Institute for Biotechnology, a nonprofit research, education, and economic
development organization, will partner with a broad group of research and land
grant institutions, including Alabama A&M University, Auburn University, North
Carolina State University, Tennessee State University, Tuskegee University,
University of Georgia, and the University of Tennessee, as well as industry
partner Genera, farmers, Ag-tech entrepreneurs, and other collaborators in the
agricultural and manufacturing sectors.

This development award activity will span the entire pipeline for replacing
existing carbon-intensive materials in manufacturing with perennial grass-
derived materials. We will genetically customize these plants with genomics-
enabled breeding to improve the utility of the biomass, develop new and improved
biomaterials from these plants, and enable new industry applications using these
materials. The research from the Engine will support manufacturers in increasing
their sustainability by using these materials. When fully developed, they will
have partnerships across multiple industries to greatly increase the impact on
reducing carbon emissions. Woven into these efforts, there will be training
across the entire development chain, including farmers, students, scientists,
and dedicated workforce development efforts for material and goods
manufacturing. This planning award period will enable the team to develop
specific material targets for applications that will drive the research efforts
of the Engine and expand our interactions with industry partners who will
participate in driving the research aims and use these materials developed in
the Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.