* 2302651
* Fault-Tolerant Energy Management for Highly Dependable Real-Time Embedded Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Linwei Niu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Real-time embedded systems (RTES) are ubiquitous and pervasive in everyday life
worldwide, currently found in numerous applications ranging from smart phones to
intelligent cars and air/spacecraft. The increased number of devices that use
RTES, in conjunction with the demand for ever greater performance, call for
improved energy management solutions to stem energy consumption without
sacrificing performance. On the other hand, fault tolerance has also been a
major concern in pervasive and ubiquitous computing platforms. The proposed
project will develop new energy management algorithms for RTES while satisfying
the fault tolerance requirement. The findings will radically shift how RTES are
designed to be able to meet performance demands on a “green and highly
dependable” computing platform. As such, the results of this work can also have
an enormous global impact not only on the industry’s financial gains, but also
on the environment’s health. Furthermore, this project integrates research and
education by providing undergraduate and graduate researchers with hands-on
unique research experiences where they can apply theoretical learning and can
inspire them to explore a career in computer science. Finally, this work intends
to lay the groundwork for future technological advances which can increase the
competitive edge of this country while also providing societal benefits.

In this project, a novel scheduling framework will be designed to improve the
performance of highly dependable real-time embedded systems (RTES) under fault
tolerance requirements, exploiting modern power-management features available in
heterogeneous multi-core processors. Three Specific Aims will be addressed: (1)
to develop novel energy management schemes that can reduce energy consumption
for real-time embedded systems (RTES) under fault tolerance requirement; (2) to
develop algorithms that can create a scheduling framework targeting maximizing
the feasibility of fault tolerant RTES under hard energy budget constraint; and
(3) to extend this scheduling framework to many-core platforms. The novelty of
the project lies in the fact that it combines the three critical dimensions of
RTES design, i.e., energy efficiency, fault tolerance, and Quality of Service
(QoS) into a single, unified framework to reduce energy consumption as well as
to maximize the feasibility while satisfying the QoS for RTES from the system
level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.