* 2302550
* Moduli and Arithmetic of Higher Dimensional Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kenneth Ascher, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 180,567.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of geometric shapes which arise as solutions to
polynomial equations. Some fundamental examples of these shapes are circles or
hyperboloids, and as such, algebraic geometry is largely intertwined with many
other fields of mathematics. One of the guiding research directions in algebraic
geometry as well as the overall focus of this research project is understanding
the classification of these shapes, a subfield known as the study of moduli
spaces. Algebraic geometry as well as the study of moduli spaces have numerous
applications, for example within cryptography as well as in understanding the
structure underlying our universe via string theory and mathematical physics.
This project includes training opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as outreach efforts involving high school students from the
local community.

While we have an extensive understanding of moduli spaces of algebraic curves,
we understand far less about moduli spaces of higher dimensional algebraic
varieties (i.e. varieties of complex dimension at least two). In short, the main
goal of this project is to further our understanding of higher dimensional
moduli by leveraging many recent results in moduli theory and birational
geometry, such as wall-crossing results that the PI has obtained in joint work
with collaborators. The first project aims to use wall-crossing techniques to
understand the underlying geometric structure and geometric properties of moduli
spaces of higher dimensional algebraic varieties. Additionally, as most known
results regarding moduli spaces of higher dimensional varieties focus on two
cases, namely (log) general type pairs and (log) Fano pairs, the goal of the
second project is to construct and study moduli spaces of (log) Calabi-Yau pairs
using tools from the minimal model program and K-stability. Finally, the third
project uses techniques from birational geometry, moduli spaces, and the minimal
model program to understand various notions of hyperbolicity on varieties of
(log) general type, including the distribution of rational and integral points.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.