* 2302101
* Excellence in Research: Mitochondrial Damage-Associated Molecular Patterns (mtDAMPs) as Immunostimulants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chad Markert, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2026
* USD 920,484.00

This Excellence in Research (EiR) project aspires to enhance STEM research by
tackling the central research question, “Why did our immune systems evolve to
treat both microbial danger and cellular damage with inflammation?”.
Inflammation follows penetrative trauma, in non-sterile settings, when
potentially harmful bacteria are present. Similarly, when an organism’s
cells/tissues are injured/damaged, perhaps due to non-penetrative trauma,
sterile inflammation follows. Despite the very different circumstances, the
inflammatory phenomena following these examples of trauma are surprisingly
similar. This project will focus on mitochondria, specifically, mitochondrial
peptides and nucleic acids, as mediators of sterile inflammation. The mechanisms
of sterile inflammation following muscle contraction-induced injury (CII) that
will be studied in this project will fulfill a knowledge gap in exercise
physiology. The research may offer further insight into the consequences of
mitochondria evolving to be endosymbionts as well as immune/ inflammatory
implications of CII. Another objective is to fully leverage the project to
enhance research capacity. Students and a postdoctoral fellow will be trained
and mentored during this project, increasing retention of the next generation of
talent in the STEM pipeline. Meanwhile, pursuit of this research will enhance
institutional research capacity at a Historically Black College & University
(HBCU).

Immune systems treat both microbial danger and cellular damage with
inflammation. Inflammation follows penetrative trauma in non-sterile settings,
when potentially harmful bacteria are present, and inflammation may follow when
an organism’s cells/tissues are injured/damaged due to non-penetrative trauma in
sterile conditions. Presently, scientists understand that damage-associated
molecular patterns emanating from mitochondria (mtDAMPs) are elevated in trauma
patients, and that mtDAMPs play a causal role in sterile inflammation. However,
the mechanism underlying this increase and its relevance to exercise physiology
is unknown. Specific molecular signatures, such as N-formyl peptides (mtFPs),
have been implicated, but other possibilities exist, including the pattern of
unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) DNA repeats in, and circular
nature of, mitochondrial DNA. The investigators hypothesize that muscle
contraction-induced injury during exercise causes the release of mtDAMPs, which
activate innate immunity, leading to sterile inflammation in athletes. In
particular, the investigators will measure the levels of mitochondrial proteins
and nucleic acids in exercise-induced sterile inflammation. The investigators
will also develop cell culture infrastructure to query in vitro interactions of
skeletal muscle cells and innate immune cells, such as monocytes and
neutrophils. Structural and thermodynamic properties of the human mtDAMP,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase subunit 6 (ND6) will be
investigated. The investigators will use a variety of methods, such as ELISA to
investigate mitochondrial proteins, PCR to investigate mitochondrial nucleic
acids, and x-ray crystallography to elucidate the structure of ND6. This
research will shed light on similarities between clinical noninfective trauma
and the trauma elicited simply by strenuous exercise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.