* 2302117
* Dualities in Enumerative Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Pierrick Bousseau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 251,418.00

In this project, the PI will work broadly on interlinked areas centered around
modern enumerative algebraic geometry, motivated by conjectural dualities in
physics. Enumerative algebraic geometry concerns counting geometric objects
satisfying a given list of constraints in a space defined by polynomial
equations. In good situations, these counts do not change under generically
varying the set of constraints and therefore define enumerative invariants.
Among the most extensively studied enumerative invariants are Gromov-Witten
invariants and Donaldson-Thomas invariants, which have important applications in
mathematics and physics. While Gromov-Witten invariants correspond to counts of
curves in a space, Donaldson-Thomas invariants are integers counting geometric
objects called vector bundles or more generally sheaves. In mathematics, both
the count of curves and sheaves in a space carry crucial information about
geometric properties of the space, as such properties are used to characterize
and classify different spaces. On the other hand in physics, Gromov-Witten and
Donaldson-Thomas invariants appear in the context of string theory, where they
correspond to counts of particles in gauge theory as well as black hole
microstates in quantum gravity. This award will also support graduate students
working with the PI.

There are four main strands of research directions the project is branched into.
In the first part, the project intends to investigate conjectural dualities,
establishing new bridges between enumerative algebraic geometry and quantum
physics. These dualities are expected to relate Gromov-Witten and Donaldson-
Thomas invariants of toric Calabi-Yau threefolds to the quantization of the
mirror curves. A second subject of study is related to canonical bases in
representation theory. In particular, one of the goals of the project is to use
enumerative algebraic geometry of surfaces to construct canonical bases for
double affine Hecke algebras and their generalizations. In a third direction,
the project intends to establish connections between refined Donaldson-Thomas
invariants and invariants arising in real algebraic geometry. The focus of the
final part of the project will be on holomorphic symplectic geometry. In this
context, the goal is to provide a categorification of Floer theory for
holomorphic symplectic manifold, motivated by structures in Donaldson-Thomas
theory. The unifying ingredient here is the recent advance in the understanding
of wall-crossing, mirror symmetry, logarithmic geometry, and tropical geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.