* 2302814
* Collaborative Research: Adaptable Game-based, Interactive Learning Environments for STEM Education (AGILE STEM)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Conrad Tucker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Learners of all ages are expected to be prepared to interact with emerging and
technology-driven work environments. In addition, the growing reliance on online
learning and its unprecedented and unexpected acceleration due to the COVID-19
pandemic are expected to change the education landscape forever. Thus, there is
a need to grow the development of digital platforms for teaching and learning.
Emerging technologies such as machine learning and high fidelity simulated
environments have the potential to create customized and adaptable learning
environments to support STEM learning outcomes. This project serves the national
interest by advancing the knowledge about designing and creating adaptable game-
based, interactive learning environments for STEM. The inclusion of
underrepresented minority and female learners in the design stages of these
learning environments, their portability, as well as the capability of these
environments to be customized and adaptive have the potential to enhance
education equality, engagement, and learning outcomes, and broaden their
usability to several STEM domains. Moreover, the narratives and simulation
models are inspired by real-world systems. Therefore, the learning environments
are expected to enhance the learner’s understanding of complex system concepts
that are challenging to understand using traditional teaching approaches and
will help build the much-needed skills for the U.S. future STEM workforce. The
proposed emerging technologies do not necessarily need access to specialized
equipment, which eliminates barriers to scalability and border implementation
and use.

The primary goals of this project are to automatically customize and adapt
three-dimensional (3D) simulated game-based learning environments to improve
engagement, and provide a deeper understanding of their design, development, and
deployment, impact on learning and self-regulated learning (SRL) skills, and
knowledge transferability from the learning environments to real-life
applications. The project addresses the lack of scientific evidence and/or work
in the following thrust areas: 1) the potential of reducing the barriers to
content generation of 3D simulated game-based learning environments using
emerging and advanced machine-learning methods; 2) creating customized content
and adaptive 3D simulated game-based learning environments that improve and
maintain learners motivation and engagement, enhance learning via instructional
assistive content scaffolding, and increase knowledge transferability from game
to real-life applications; 3) assessing the effectiveness of the learning
environments for all learner groups in online and residential settings; and 4)
exploring how learner decision-making and behavior data in the simulated game-
based learning environments, and eye-tracking, facial expressions, bio-signals,
and usage data, enhance knowledge about the relationships between decision-
making/usage and SRL skills development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.