* 2302430
* Measuring singularities in commutative algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Linquan Ma, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 07/31/2028
* USD 177,135.00

This project involves questions in the theory of commutative algebra. This is a
field that deals with the local properties of algebraic varieties, i.e., the
solution set of a system of polynomial equations in several variables. For
example, the solution set of a single polynomial equation in two variables can
be realized as a curve in the plane (e.g., a parabola y=x^2). The singular or
non-smooth points of an algebraic variety have rich algebraic and geometric
structures, and detailing their properties is crucial in many investigations.
For example, the parabola is nonsingular (meaning that locally it looks like a
line), while the curve defined by y^2=x^3 is nonsingular except at the origin,
where it locally looks like a cusp. The projects that will be explored are
focused on the singular points of algebraic varieties (i.e., singularities),
with a focus on measuring singularities using various algebraic techniques. The
PI will involve his graduate students and post-docs in this research project.

The PI will construct a mixed characteristic singularity theory in collaboration
with other experts in this area. One focus is to develop a mixed characteristic
version of test ideals. Projects include studying their behaviors under
localization and completion, and their connections to multiplier ideals from
birational geometry. Another focus is on perfectoid signature and perfectoid
Hilbert-Kunz multiplicity, which are defined using the perfectoidization functor
of Bhatt-Scholze and are inspired by F-signature and Hilbert-Kunz multiplicity
from positive characteristic. Projects include understanding the behavior of
these numerical invariants under localization and in families. The PI will also
continue the study on Hilbert-Samuel multiplicities, with a focus on the
longstanding Lech's conjecture. The proposed projects include attacking the
three dimensional mixed characteristic case, and exploring the existence of lim
Ulrich sequences beyond the graded case. The PI will also investigate the
existence of lim Cohen-Macaulay sequences and their variations to attack the
longstanding Serre's conjecture on intersection multiplicities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.