* 2302786
* NSF-CSIRO: Towards Interpretable and Responsible Graph Modeling for Dynamic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Laurent Cherubin, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Real-world natural and engineered systems (e.g., food web, power grids, river
networks, and ocean current networks) are inherently complicated and are driven
by many factors with dependency relationships. Graphs have been commonly used to
represent the structure and content of these systems for event prediction and
risk estimation. To date, many graph learning methods, such as graph neural
networks, have been proposed, but primarily for static graphs. In dynamic
systems, the structure and content are simultaneously evolving in response to
emerging trends and events, making it difficult to understand and interpret how
each part of the graph functions in forming reliable models for predictions.
This project strives to build a graph learning and interpretation framework for
dynamic systems by combining sensor pattern discovery, node interaction and
network functionality analysis, and physics- and knowledge-informed learning.
The project will propose new algorithms for modeling and understanding large-
scale dynamic systems using graphs, as well as develop a prototype for domain
experts to analyze their data, explain what is currently happening in the
system, understand the resulting consequences, and provide possible mitigation
strategies. The joint effort between the US and Australian teams will help
understand/uncover the dynamics of water monitoring systems for different
terrain types, inland and coastal water exchange, toxic algal blooms, and
resilience of rural and regional communities.

The project includes three main thrusts: (1) sensor signal to feature extraction
and understanding; (2) dynamic network node modeling and interpretation; and (3)
dynamic network functionality and trustworthiness. The research will study
signal snippet pattern (SSP) extraction and interaction analysis to understand
how features interact with each other during the emergence of significant
events. At the node level, new temporal encoding and spatial-temporal graph
neural networks will be used to learn models for node event prediction and
anomaly detection for early warning. The study of node interaction will answer
why, when, and how two nodes may be interacting with each other. Beyond node
level interpretation, the project will target graph functional units, estimate
each snapshot graphâ€™s contribution, and locate subgraphs with the highest
significance concerning output systems. A perturbation-based post-hoc explainer
will provide counterfactual explanations to enhance the explainability and
trustworthiness of dynamic graph neural network systems. The research will also
investigate combining physics laws and domain knowledge into dynamic graph
neural networks to develop a data-efficient, robust, and responsible graph
modeling framework.

This is a joint project between U.S. and Australian researchers funded by the
Collaboration Opportunities in Responsible and Equitable AI under the U.S. NSF
and the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.