* 2302242
* Cybersecurity Enhancement and Expansion Program for Information Technology Programs at the College of Central Florida
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Amy Osborne, College of Central Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 302,105.00

The growing need for cybersecurity professionals is well documented. The Florida
state legislature created “The Florida Center for Cybersecurity,” also known as
“Cyber Florida,” in 2014 with the “vision of making Florida the most cyber-
secure state in the nation.” To support this initiative and to increase the
number of cybersecurity professionals in the region, the College of Central
Florida (CF) will develop a new College Credit Certificate (CCC) focused on
cybersecurity with a pathway into the workforce via industry partnerships and
co-ops/internships. The project will implement outreach activities that target
high school and community college students, adult students, and the larger
community. The goal of the project is to address the increasing demand for a
qualified cybersecurity workforce in the region by expanding CF’s capacity to
attract, retain and successfully certify an increased number of students. The
lessons learned from this project will contribute valuable empirical data on
associate-level cybersecurity education and workforce training and will be
disseminated to the education community.

The proposed project will accomplish the following objectives: (1) Develop a new
CCC with a focus on cybersecurity; (2) Increase the number and diversity of
students enrolled in cybersecurity and IT programs and certificates; and (3)
Increase the number of students who complete Cybersecurity /IT programs, and
pass industry certifications. Local employers and the National Cybersecurity
Training & Education Center (NCyTE) will guide the development of the new
cybersecurity CCC. The project will examine whether offering a financial aid-
eligible 30-credit hour CCC focused specifically on cybersecurity makes a
difference in the number and gender of students it attracts. The new course
curricula and materials as well as insights generated by the project
implementation will be shared with other institutions across the country via CF
website, Cyber Florida, and the NCyTE Center. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.