* 2302576
* Conference: 4th Bacterial Cell Biology Meeting
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Jie Xiao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The 4th Bacterial Cell Biology Meeting (sponsored by Fusion Conferences Limited)
will be held in Cancun, Mexico on February 12-15, 2023. This meeting is
primarily attended by scientists from basic science background. It will bring
together senior and junior researchers from broad ranging disciplines to discuss
and advance our understanding of all aspects of the machinery and function of
bacterial cells, with sessions on cellular structures, genome organization cell
division, cell wall construction, cell development, and morphogenesis, as well
as sessions on new imaging techniques for studying bacteria. The application of
novel microscope and biophysical techniques, together with advances in computer
simulations, has greatly increased our understanding of the biology of these
cells, and a conference to share these results will disseminate this knowledge
rapidly to increase basic knowledge of prokaryotic life. The training and
engagement of junior scientists (graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
beginning assistant professors) is a priority of the conference, along with
extensive poster sessions to allow interactions between senior and junior
scientists. NSF support will be used to defray registration fee and/or travel
costs to allow attendance of participants from these stages of their careers,
especially for members of groups historically under-represented in this field.

The science presented at the 4th Bacterial Cell Biology Meeting will cover all
areas of the biochemistry and cell biology of the wide variety of bacterial
phyla, including talks on condensed matter in bacteria, dynamics of
intracellular organization, the organization of the prokaryotic genome within
the cell, and the wide range of specialized structures found in many different
bacterial species, including free-living and pathogenic microbes. Leading
researchers will present and discuss recent findings on the structure of these
proteins, the mechanisms by which bacteria maintain and grow critical structures
and the genome.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.