* 2302043
* SBIR Phase I:  Ester and Polyester Modifications of Seaweed-Derived Colloids to Improve Melt Processing and Compatibility with Renewable Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Joakim Engstrom, SWAY INNOVATION CO.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2024
* USD 272,397.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a new type of melt-
processable pellet made utilizing phycocolloids derived from different seaweed
materials. Today, the commercial plastic packaging industry is reliant on the
polymerization of petroleum derivatives, which are then compounded or melt-
processed before being converted into finished goods. Mounting consumer backlash
against plastic waste, domestic and international regulations, and an increased
focus on curtailing dependence on petroleum are driving the demand for
compostable packaging solutions that can service the biodegradable packaging
market which is set to grow to $812 billion by 2030. By using seaweed as an
alternative feedstock, the team's goal is to eliminate the need for more
environmentally intensive inputs including petroleum as well as other
terrestrial crops. Furthermore, this material technology is being designed for
compatibility with existing plastic manufacturing infrastructure â€“ thereby
streamlining a path to scale and cost competitiveness. The anticipated outcome
of this project is the development of the first commercially viable polymeric
material predominantly derived from seaweed, that is melt-processed and
compostable. This breakthrough will unlock a renewable plastic replacement that
meets essential requirements for cost, scalability, and environmental impact.

The intellectual merit of this project focuses on the development of a viable
pathway for creating melt-processable pellets from seaweed. The goal is to
enable the conversion of these pellets using conventional machinery to produce
flexible film packaging. The main technical challenge to overcome in achieving
successful commercialization is that seaweed materials do not melt at suitable
processing temperatures, as do traditional polymers. Consequently, the resulting
material does not possess the necessary mechanical properties required for
flexible packaging. To address this challenge, the team will explore the
tempering of seaweed chemistry and associated materials with selected commercial
compostable polymers. This approach aims to achieve comparable strain at break,
tensile strength, and stiffness to conventional thin film packaging while
ensuring home compostability. While previous research and applications have
explored the use of seaweed for less economically viable film technologies, the
unique contribution of this effort lies in combining varying seaweed chemistries
and implementing them as a melt-processable seaweed material.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.