* 2302173
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Computational Complexity and Algebraic Combinatorics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Igor Pak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 322,539.00

This project aims to study a variety of problems centered around certain numbers
and polynomials that describe fundamental symmetries in algebra and geometry.
Despite their fundamental nature and century-long history, these objects have
been largely mysterious and remain at the heart of recent developments in
algebraic combinatorics. The main goal is to understand their computational
nature and behavior, which would have far-reaching implications across many
fields. In one direction, the researchers aim to explain, using the framework of
Computational Complexity theory, why these objects are so difficult to
understand. In another direction, they aim to use these objects and quantities
to establish the computational complexity of certain fundamental polynomials.

Specifically, the project lies in the intersection of Computational Complexity
and Algebraic Combinatorics. The goal is to advance the understanding of the
asymptotics and the complexity of computing several structure constants such as
Kronecker, plethysm, and Schubert coefficients that comprise some of the main
open problems in algebraic combinatorics. Their computational complexity would
explain why these structure constants have remained so elusive despite decades
of research and would hint at what solutions to expect. Understanding their
behavior and asymptotics can lead to new lower bounds on fundamental problems
and polynomials in Geometric Complexity Theory, such as the complexity of matrix
multiplication and computing the permanent. Viewed broadly, the project works
towards the separation of the computational complexity classes VP and VNP, which
represent the algebraic analogues of the well-known complexity classes P and NP,
respectively.

Specifically, the project lies in the intersection of Computational Complexity
and Algebraic Combinatorics. The goal is to advance understanding of the
asymptotics and the complexity of computing several structure constants such as
Kronecker, plethysm, and Schubert coefficients, which comprise some of the main
open problems in the area of algebraic combinatorics. Their computational
complexity would explain why these structure constants have remained so elusive
despite decades of research and would hint towards what solutions to expect.
Understanding their behavior and asymptotics can lead to new lower bounds on
fundamental problems and polynomials in Geometric Complexity Theory such as the
complexity of matrix multiplication, computing the permanent, etc. Viewed
broadly, the project works towards separation of the computational complexity
classes VP and VNP, which represent the algebraic analogues of the well-known
complexity classes P and NP, respectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.