* 2302399
* Multiple Zeta Values in Function Fields using Motivic Framework
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nathan Green, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2026
* USD 139,074.00

Multiple zeta values are real numbers which are defined by certain infinite sums
of fractions. Their exact values and the relationships between them have puzzled
mathematicians since the time of Euler. In particular, mathematicians seek to
understand when it is possible to add a finite number of multiple zeta values
together to get another multiple zeta value. While mathematicians have
infinitely many examples of such relationships, proving that these constitute
all such relationships remains a distant goal. This project will study near-
relatives of multiple zeta values in an alternative setting where there is a
reasonable hope of proving such results about the set of all relationships
between them. The end goal of the project is to develop a new method of
producing families of relationships between multiple zeta values and to classify
how many relationships such methods produce. This project will also involve
outreach to nearby HBCUs to encourage underrepresented groups to participate in
graduate level mathematics and STEM programs.

More specifically, the main goal of this project is to lay the groundwork for
proving the algebraic independence of certain sets of multiple zeta values
defined over global function fields. The first step is to develop a method for
generating relations between function field multiple zeta values which are
defined over the function field. The PI will do this using his recently
developed formulas involving a pairing between t-motives and the dual t-motives.
Next, the PI will use these motivic constructions to show that spaces of
deformed multiple zeta values are generated as a tau-algebra by certain special
functions which have precise arithmetic meaning. The end goal of this part of
the project is to produce a conjecture describing how many multiple zeta value
relations are described using this tau-algebra structure. This project will also
contain a significant offshoot which realizes these deformed multiple zeta
values as generating elements in inseparable extensions of Taelman's unit
module. The end result of this part of the project will be a theorem which
states exactly which elements we must adjoin to Taelman's unit module in order
to ensure that it contains specific deformed multiple zeta values.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.