* 2302420
* Excellence in Research: Investigation of novel spin textures in non-centrosymmetric magnetic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Storr, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 950,566.00

Non-Technical abstract In most solids, for every atom within the unit cell at
position (x,y,z) there is an indistinguishable atom at (-x,-y,-z). These
materials are called centrosymmetric materials. However, magnetic materials
where the centrosymmetry is broken, termed noncentrosymmetric materials, have
attracted considerable attention in recent years owing to their potential for
future nanometer-scale quantum-information technology applications. The aim of
this project is to study the fundamental spin and lattice properties of
noncentrosymmetric magnets using neutron scattering technique. Neutron
scattering is a powerful probe that can determine the spin arrangements of the
noncentrosymmetric materials, which will allow their potential use for future
applications. The planned research will also train the next generation of
graduate and undergraduate students at Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU) for
neutron scattering measurements and data analysis. In addition, students will
learn how to grow single crystals and basic laboratory skills in low-temperature
physics. The joint efforts by combining the strength of PVAMU, Norfolk State
University, and Rice University will develop an internationally competitive
program involving both the growth of novel complex materials and neutron
scattering.

Technical abstract This project focuses on the synthesis and characterization of
non-centrosymmetric magnetic materials such as ScTMGe (TM = Fe, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu),
Mn-doped ScFeGe, and chiral magnetic oxides. Both end members ScFeGe and ScMnGe
crystallize in hexagonal crystal structure having P-62m space group. ScFeGe is
an itinerant helimagnetic system below ~36 K with wavevector k = (0 0 0.193) and
a magnetic moment ≈ 0.53 μB confined to the ab plane. A metamagnetic transition
is observed with a threshold field of ≈ 6.6 T when H is parallel to the ab
plane. The main element of this research plan is the preparation of the above
listed materials in polycrystalline form and high-quality single crystals,
followed by characterization of their physical properties, including
determination of structure, phase purity and the measurement of their
electronic, and magnetic properties. The experimental results obtained from this
research will unveil the interrelationships between structural and magnetic
properties of materials. The samples are synthesized at Prairie View, Rice, and
Norfolk State University, followed by characterization of their physical
properties, including determination of structure, and the measurement of their
electronic, and magnetic properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.