* 2302298
* Diophantine Approximation to Closed Subschemes and Integral Points on Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Aaron Levin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

The project studies topics central to arithmetic and number theory, with a
primary focus on the subject of Diophantine approximation. At its core,
Diophantine approximation consists of the study of rational numbers which
closely approximate a given real number. This topic has an ancient history,
going back to at least the first rational approximations for pi, and in modern
times has led to several deep applications in number theory and throughout
mathematics. The PI will study generalizations and improvements of several
inequalities in the subject, with a particular focus on Schmidt’s Subspace
Theorem and its relation to the geometry of closed subschemes. The PI will
pursue applications to a central conjecture in the subject, Vojta’s conjecture,
as well as connections to recent inequalities involving greatest common
divisors. In a related direction, the PI will explore the classical and
fundamental problem of effectively determining the set of integer solutions to a
system of polynomial equations, with an emphasis on higher-dimensional problems
where the techniques are less developed and understood. The projects have
additional close connections and consequences for diverse areas of mathematics
beyond number theory, including geometry and complex analysis. The project will
support a wide range of mentoring activities and research opportunities,
involving the training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers. In particular, the PI plans to continue creating and
supervising high school and undergraduate research projects, drawn from the PI’s
research program.

A recent line of research in Diophantine approximation studies inequalities
involving heights associated to closed subschemes, as opposed to the classical
setting of heights associated to divisors. The PI plans to develop this theory
of Diophantine approximation to closed subschemes, and to explore applications
of the theory to integral points on varieties. In one direction, the PI will
study refinements and improvements of the Schmidt Subspace Theorem for closed
subschemes, including extensions to the setting of m-subgeneral position and
generalizations of the Nochka-Ru-Wong theorem. In another direction, the PI will
study and develop recent inequalities involving greatest common divisors and
their connections with Vojta’s conjecture, and develop function field analogues
and applications. A last set of projects are centered on discovering
applications of the new Diophantine approximation inequalities to integral
points on varieties, including developing effective methods for studying
integral points, particularly on higher-dimensional varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.