* 2302879
* CDS&amp;E: Coupled Electro-Thermal Transport in Two-Dimensional Materials and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Zlatan Aksamija, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2026
* USD 312,589.00

This project is funded through the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering program by contributions from Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program of the Division of Materials Research and the Thermal Transport
Processes program of the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational research for the development and applications
of a simulation tool to model the transport of charge and heat carriers in two-
dimensional (2D) materials. 2D materials are a broad cohort of novel materials
in the form of atomically thin sheets having a thickness of only one or a few
atoms. Owing to their ultimate thinness, such materials hold tremendous promise
as a platform for future energy-efficient nanoelectronic and energy devices,
which may enable extremely dense integrated circuits, and wearable and
multifunctional electronics. Electronic and thermal properties of materials are
not only mutually coupled but strongly interdependent: electrical resistance
increases drastically with temperature, which, in turn, increases heat
dissipation, creating hot spots that waste energy and limit performance. This is
particularly pronounced in 2D materials, whose atomic thinness and relatively
weak coupling to the environment may present a bottleneck to heat removal. In
this project, the PI will develop and release a code that treats the dynamics of
charge and heat carriers concurrently in various 2D materials of scientific and
technological relevance. The code to be developed will be disseminated freely to
the community, along with maintaining a dedicated website for forums and
documentation.

This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities, which
include training and mentoring the next generation of computational materials
scientists and introducing computational science to students across levels, by
redesigning core materials courses, recruiting underrepresented students in
science, math, and engineering disciplines, and creating free online educational
modules to teach undergraduate students high-performance and parallel computing.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational research for the development and applications
of a simulation tool to solve the coupled Boltzmann transport equations for
electrons and phonons in two-dimensional (2D) materials. Simulating thermal
dissipation inside 2D nanostructures requires a two-way coupled treatment of
electrons and heat, the latter being transported by phonons. Computing electron-
phonon coupling from first principles and solving the electron and phonon
Boltzmann transport equations using ab initio inputs has now reached full
maturity. However, there is a critical need for a platform that will enable
studying non-isothermal transport, where electron and phonon populations are
simulated concurrently so that phonons generated by electron-phonon coupling are
tracked and their distribution/temperature fed back into electron transport and
vice versa. To address this need, the PI will develop and release a code, called
CelphonBTE2D, for two-way coupled electron-phonon Boltzmann transport simulation
of 2D materials and heterostructures. The code will build on first-principles
data to enable predictive simulation for realistic applications.

The code to be developed will be disseminated via the nanoHUB, which will host
source code and track usage, along with a dedicated website for forums and
documentation. This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities, which include training and mentoring the next generation of
computational materials scientists and introducing computational science to
students across levels, by redesigning core materials courses, recruiting
underrepresented students in STEM disciplines, and creating free online
educational modules to teach undergraduate students high-performance and
parallel computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.