* 2302977
* Collaborative Research: Social Media Co-Pilot: Enhancing Teens’ Digital Literacy and Cyber Safety Education with AI-based Conversational Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Natalya Bazarova, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 470,975.00

The prevalence of cyber risks in online environments calls for digital literacy
and cyber safety education to prevent and mitigate harms that can lead to
serious and long-lasting consequences for teens. Artificial intelligence
(AI)-based conversational agents have great potential to improve digital
literacy and cyber safety education because they can provide personalized,
dynamic, and immediate learning guidance and feedback. The goal of this research
is to educate teens on safe, responsible, and ethical conduct on the internet
through Social Media Co-Pilot, an innovative AI-based conversational
intervention embedded in an interactive and realistic online learning
environment. By dynamically analyzing learners’ input, the Co-Pilot will
identify “teachable moments” and offer personalized, conversational feedback to
reinforce prosocial behaviors and discourage risky actions online. With the
capacity to assume different conversational roles appropriate to the situation
(e.g., a more knowledgeable peer, a peer needing immediate help, an adult mentor
etc.), Social Media Co-Pilot will guide a learner into a deeper reflection and
responsible actions when confronting common social media risks and pitfalls,
such as online aggression, privacy violation, phishing, and scams. This project
will benefit all youth, but will provide additional, customized support to
vulnerable and underserved communities, thus reducing digital divides. Youth’s
improved digital literacy and cyber safety skills can provide a foundation for
STEM literacy and enhance their readiness to pursue STEM careers.

The PIs will employ cutting-edge natural language processing (NLP) techniques to
develop the conversational agent that drives Social Media Co-Pilot. They will
iteratively refine Social Media Co-Pilot with teens and educators, whose
formative feedback will inform incremental improvement of the tool and provide
personalized in-situ conversations and critical reflection on various
cybersecurity challenges. Co-Pilot will be developed using large language models
with extensive input from racially and ethnically diverse teens and educators to
ensure its relevance to different learners, as well as its effectiveness and
scalability. Once built, PIs will evaluate the effects of Social Media Co-Pilot
on youth’s cyber safety knowledge and behavioral outcomes through a randomized
field experiment. By leveraging educational theories to inform improvements in
the design and evaluation of Social Media Co-Pilot, this project will contribute
new knowledge about the effectiveness of AI-based conversational agents as
experiential learning tools. It will also advance the understanding of human-
centered AI design and novel ways to customize large scale NLP models in the
education domain, while ensuring reliability, transparency, and fairness in
design and application.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.