* 2302094
* CSR: Small: Cascading Failures Modeling and Mitigation in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Liudong Xing, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 420,766.00

Cascading failures take place when a single incident triggers successive
malfunction of system components in a chain reaction. Without timely and
effective mitigation mechanisms, cascading failures often cause catastrophic
impacts on the entire system and even the environment and society. There is a
big gap between the existing cascading failure theories and realities in the
Internet of Things (IoT) systems. This project aims to make breakthroughs in the
IoT cascading failure and reliability research to bridge the gap, mitigating
serious consequences caused by the failures. In addition, the project has
educational components with the goals to help increase participation of
underrepresented minorities, particularly women in computing and engineering,
and to integrate research and education through new curriculum development and
research training of both graduate and undergraduate students.

The overarching objective of this project is to enhance the reliability and
robustness of IoT-based systems by developing efficient cascading failure
modeling and analysis methods as well as effective mitigation strategies to
strengthen IoT systemsâ€™ resilience to cascading failures. Specifically, the
project will (1) develop new comprehensive mathematical models to characterize
the complex physical mechanism of cascading failures in IoT; (2) create
efficient and scalable reliability evaluation methodologies to provide an
accurate and fast prediction of the IoT system reliability considering impacts
of cascading failures and various dependencies; (3) develop innovative in-
process and multi-phase mitigation mechanisms to effectively respond to
cascading failures and prevent or at least alleviate their consequence; and (4)
evaluate and validate the proposed research using case studies of real-world
IoT-based systems as well as publications evaluated by independent peers and
experts. The proposed cascading failure models and mitigation strategies, and
reliability analysis methods are fundamental contributions to the body of
knowledge on the reliable and robust design and operation of modern and evolving
IoT-based systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.