* 2302475
* Dual complexes and weight filtrations: Applications to cohomology of moduli spaces and invariants of singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Sam Payne, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2028
* USD 109,167.00

Algebraic geometry studies solution sets of systems of polynomial equations. For
instance, lines are solution sets of linear polynomial equations, while circles
and hyperbolas are solution sets to quadratic polynomial equations, and their
study goes back to the ancient Greeks. The solution sets of systems of many
polynomial equations in many variables often have beautiful and complicated
geometry. The PI will apply new and modern techniques to answer questions of
classical interest in the field of algebraic geometry, and to address long
standing open problems about the geometry of spaces defined by polynomial
equations. He will also continue his energetic engagement with training future
generations of mathematicians, including through mentorship of graduate students
and postdocs. The PI will pursue three main research directions: cohomology of
moduli spaces of stable curves, cohomology of moduli spaces of smooth curves,
and the local monodromy conjectures for hypersur- face singularities. He will
confirm predictions of the Langlands program and the Hodge conjecture for moduli
spaces of stable curves, using new results on the Chow cohomology and cycle
class maps for moduli spaces of smooth curves. He will apply new results on the
cohomology of moduli spaces of stable curves to study the weight-graded
cohomology of moduli spaces of open curves, proving new non-vanishing results
for cohomology of mapping class groups and producing new generating functions
for weight-graded Euler characteristics. And he will pursue a proof of the
motivic, p-adic, and topological local monodromy conjectures for hypersurface
singularities, along with related conjectures such as the monodromy and
holomorphy conjectures for p-adic local zeta functions twisted by a character.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.