* 2302908
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing quantum technologies (CT)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* S. Pamir Alpay, University of Connecticut
* Cooperative Agreement
* Geoffrey Brown
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on making
Connecticut (CT) America's accelerator for quantum technologies. It will create
a national competitive advantage in an emerging technology domain with
applications in healthcare, aerospace, pharmaceuticals, and finance. The effort
will extend opportunities to demographics left behind by cycles of economic
downturn, thereby driving economic and workforce development in service of
equitable opportunity. It will move beyond workforce training to connect
opportunities in innovation and entrepreneurship to people from communities in
need of economic renewal. Development Award partners include the University of
Connecticut, Yale, and their technology incubation programs; the cities of
Stamford, Hartford, New Haven, and Waterbury; the CT Department of Economic and
Community Development, CT Next, Advance CT, and Connecticut Innovations; CT
Workforce Council and the Connecticut State College and University System; the
Connecticut Business and Industry Association, and many small and large
companies. Given its number of important economic sectors, its strength in
relevant research, the rural-to-urban character of its communities, its cultural
diversity, and the differentials in opportunity available to its residents, CT
is positioned to become America's quantum accelerator by transforming a diverse
region into an economic development powerhouse.

Advanced manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, healthcare, and finance industries
anticipate that quantum technologies will contribute to next generation
approaches to sensing, cryptography, AI, infrastructure optimization, drug and
therapy development, software, and cybersecurity, to name just a few. The team
will develop strategies for use-inspired R&D in two broad, interrelated topics:
1) quantum materials, hardware, computers, and devices; and 2) quantum software
and algorithms, involving world-class research infrastructure and faculty in
applied sciences, engineering, and business/ entrepreneurship. The region's
industries will contribute to the effort as adopters and end users and will
leverage their R&D capabilities to support the Development Award. The team will
plan for a multifaceted approach to train a knowledgeable, skilled, and diverse
workforce accommodating all skills levels, from technical high school and
associate, to baccalaureate, graduate certificate, master, and Ph.D.-level
preparation. Academic and workforce partners spanning research universities,
colleges and community colleges, technical high schools, and technical training
centers will ensure that the team develops the full spectrum of talent needed to
support quantum industries. This Development Award will enable the team to build
regional partnerships, develop workforce strategy, and analyze the potential of
quantum technologies to address future needs of strategically important
industrial sectors, laying the groundwork for a full NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.