* 2302028
* AccelNet-Design: Accelerating Research Collaboration on Artificial and Natural Intelligences (ARCANI)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Jacob Foster, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 249,974.00

The fields that study mind and cognition are flourishing. Cognitive science has
blossomed. Our understanding of animal minds has radically expanded. AI research
has blazed past longstanding milestones like playing Go or writing credible
essays. These fields study the same phenomenon—intelligence—in diverse forms,
both natural and artificial. But they remain siloed, and each lacks a coherent
foundation. This is most glaring in AI, where our capacity to engineer powerful
AI systems has vastly outpaced our capacity to understand them. By building
dialogue between the major disciplines studying natural and artificial
intelligences, our project will produce a roadmap for Accelerating Research
Collaboration on Artificial and Natural Intelligences (ARCANI). To create this
roadmap, ARCANI will link several international research networks, drawing on
insights and conversations that cross disciplines, career stages, and countries.
The integration of these research networks will also help diversify
participation in the study of natural and artificial intelligences. It will
train a cohort of early career researchers in new ways of doing science and
international collaboration. Through the existing Diverse Intelligences Summer
Institute, the ARCANI team has an excellent record of fostering collaboration
and leadership amongst researchers from underrepresented groups and developing
nations. ARCANI allows us to scale up our efforts, improving training,
collaboration opportunities, and skill development for young scholars across
many disciplines. The ARCANI roadmap will lead to the development of theoretical
foundations spanning from animal behavior to AI. It will establish a vibrant
trading zone for sharing novel methods, data, and computational frameworks. And
it will translate foundational concepts and empirical insights into practical
technologies. These interdisciplinary efforts are poised to transform the ways
humans think about the environment, interact with computer systems, and build AI
to support science, art, and human endeavors more broadly. Such outcomes will
enhance US scientific leadership in many critical lines of research.

Our Network of Networks brings together researchers from the biological,
cognitive, social, and computer sciences to develop new approaches to
Accelerating Research Collaboration on Artificial and Natural Intelligences
(ARCANI). ARCANI aims to break down disciplinary silos and develop a
comprehensive framework for exploring human, animal, and machine intelligences.
We will link networks in ethology, complexity science, comparative cognition,
neuroscience, robotics, and AI, with nodes in every habitable continent. We have
identified three promising areas for accelerated advance through network-to-
network collaboration: (1) theoretical foundations of intelligence (DEFINE); (2)
leveraging the data revolution to redesign the study of cognition (DESIGN); and
(3) naturalistic approaches to AI and robotics (DEPLOY). Each area will be
explored by a cross-network working group, holding several virtual meetings and
one in-person meeting. Early career researchers (ECRs, including grad students
and postdocs) will play a prominent role; the Diverse Intelligences Summer
Institute (DISI) will help recruit diverse and exceptionally gifted ECRs.
Working groups will address three questions: WHAT are the gaps in existing
knowledge? WHO in their networks is best positioned to come together to address
them? HOW can AccelNet support sustainable international collaboration to close
those gaps? These questions will drive surveys of existing research, definition
of key concepts, and frank assessment of barriers. Working groups will summarize
their findings in white papers, which we will publish as agenda-setting
documents. Working group members will join the leadership team in crafting a
2024 Implementation proposal, providing a roadmap toward transformational cross-
network collaboration on the foundations and applications of research on
artificial and natural intelligences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.