* 2302624
* Quantized Lagrangian submanifolds of moduli spaces and representation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gus Schrader, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 279,999.00

Despite its relatively recent development, the theory of cluster algebras has
proven to be a powerful and versatile tool across a broad range of areas of
modern mathematics and physics, and has been instrumental in building bridges
between these disciplines. This project focuses on exploring new structures in
representation theory, quantum topology and enumerative geometry from the
cluster-algebraic perspective. In many problems in these areas, identifying an
underlying cluster structure reveals hidden combinatorial structures and
symmetries, thereby leading to explicit, constructive proofs of deep results.
This research program will closely involve early career researchers, with plans
to disseminate both the necessary background ideas and cutting edge results from
the project through the organization of mini-schools aimed at graduate students
and postdocs in adjacent areas of research.

More specifically, this project focuses on the quantum geometry of moduli spaces
of local systems on surfaces, and the problem of quantizing Lagrangian
submanifolds of these symplectic moduli spaces. Constructing such a quantization
amounts to producing a canonical vector in the Hilbert space associated to the
surface, and in accordance with the philosophy of topological quantum field
theory, these quantized Lagrangians are closely related to the geometry of
three-manifolds. The PI will systematically study this quantization problem,
developing along the way new structures on the underlying moduli spaces of local
systems based on their connection with representation theory. New directions to
be explored include the construction of integrable systems providing higher
Teichmueller-theoretic analogs of the classical Fenchel-Nielsen Hamiltonians on
Teichmueller spaces, as well understanding the behavior of the cluster structure
for moduli spaces of local systems with non-generic monodromy data at punctures,
which is intimately connected with the theory of double affine Hecke algebras
and their higher genus analogs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.