* 2302080
* LEAPS-MPS: Computational Methods for Many-Physics Problems Involving Multi-Material Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Xianyi Zeng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 185,424.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In recent years, physical and mechanical systems that
contain more than two entities have become common in applications. Some examples
include fuel mixing in a deforming engine chamber, wind and ocean waves
impacting on offshore wind power generation systems, and heart blood flow
simulations. Although there are many numerical methods that can be used
individually, most do not work well with each other for solving challenges in
these more complex situations. To this end, this project aims at developing a
computational framework and software suite for the high-fidelity simulation of
multi-material flows. Upon completion, this project will provide a powerful tool
for studying the coupling between multi-material fluids and any number of
structures. The project also involves collaboration in two related subjects – a
computational method to capture under-resolved structural boundaries in fluid-
structure interaction problems and a machine-learning based reduced order
modeling of embedded flow computations to realize real-time flow predictions in
complex environments. In carrying out the project, the PI will train two
graduate students. In addition, the PI will improve two graduate courses for a
new PhD program in Data Science at The University of Texas at El Paso to better
prepare a majority Hispanic student body to solve data and computing related
challenges. Furthermore, the project involves the organization of a new annual
one-day workshop to promote a STEM-related career among young students from
underrepresented groups and low-income families in the Borderplex region.

The major component of the project is an efficient and reliable embedded
boundary method on moving computational grids, called the ALE-EBM method.
Traditionally, the interface between fluids and structures are tracked by mesh
points and it necessarily causes the grid to move, a strategy commonly known as
the Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian or ALE methods, whereas the interface between
two fluids are usually captured implicitly by various embedded boundary methods
(EBM), due to its large deformation or topological changes. The two strategies,
however, cannot be combined per se to enable computation of multi-
fluid/structure interaction problems or multi-material shock hydrodynamics, as
existing EBMs rely heavily on the assumption of a fixed grid. The new ALE-EBM
method attempts to fill this gap by providing a proved methodology to perform
embedded boundary computations on a computational grid that is allowed to move
freely. In particular, the project includes: (1) analyzing multi-material
Riemann problems to enforce various transmission conditions between materials
while maintaining the physical relevance of the numerical solutions, (2)
utilizing multiple level sets to capture the motion of multiple fluid sub-
domains while preserving the signed distance meaning of each level set and
conserving the mass of each fluid, (3) using a Nitsche-type method to capture
adjacent structural boundary with a much smaller physical scale, and (4) a
machine learning approach to achieve efficient reduced-order modeling
computations of these problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.