* 2302070
* RET Site: Biologically Inspired Computing Models, Systems, and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Gina Svarovsky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,239.00

This award renews a Research Experience for Teachers site at the University of
Notre Dame. The site will form partnerships between Notre Dame computer science
students and faculty, Notre Dame students in pre-service education programs, and
teachers from elementary and middle schools in the greater South Bend area.
During the summer, teacher participants will work on research projects focusing
on the advances, capabilities, and challenges associated with machine learning
(ML) / artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms that are currently driving
efforts across the technology, manufacturing, and government sectors. To
translate their research experience into the classroom, teacher participants
will develop new curricular materials that focus on the mathematical techniques
at the heart of many applications students already use on a daily basis (e.g.,
ML algorithms that draw boxes around individual faces when using an smartphone
camera) and the ethical implications of such technologies. These materials will
address newly released computer science standards from the Indiana Department of
Education and be shared at the local, state, and national levels. Through this
RET site experience, teachers will gain tools to introduce and prepare future
generations of students to understand and develop ML/AI software and systems.

The Computing RET site will recruit teacher cohorts from elementary and middle
schools in the greater South Bend area, as well as several local colleges that
partner with area school districts to form in-service/pre-service student
teacher partnerships. A specific aim is to pair pre-service teachers with the
in-service teacher with whom they will complete their student teaching
assignment. Selected participants will work with ND faculty and students for
seven weeks during the summer on an appropriately tailored, ML/AI-centric
research project. Teachers will also be supported by professional development
activities that include but are not limited to (1) strategies for translating
research into the classroom, (2) presentations that introduce participants to
the technical state-of-the-art with respect to ML/AI hardware and software, (3)
the ethical challenges posed by ML/AI systems, etc. Developed materials will be
shared through multiple channels including a Computer Science Teachers
Association (CSTA) regional chapter, and online repositories such as the CSTA or
TeachEngineering.org. RET personnel will also engage with educational
foundations in local school districts that aim to broadcast developed materials
district-wide. Summer activities will be complemented by extensive, post-program
follow-up activities that share an overarching theme of helping RET participants
provide their students with context about the scientific background and
motivation for a module objective. Notre Dame personnel and in-service teachers
will also work with pre-service teachers to discuss strategies and best-
practices for integrating STEM into “day-to-day” lessons, how to engage diverse
groups of students with said content, etc. Post-program engagements will ensure
the translation of lab experiences into classroom practice, and to foster and
strengthen long-term partnership between engineering faculty and the local
school districts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.