* 2302469
* Excellence in Research: Research Capacity and Partnerships Building in Next-Generation Communication Ecosystems with Vertical Intelligence
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhu Han, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The evolution of next-generation wireless communications known as the sixth
generation (6G) will enable not only super-fast and ultra-reliable
communications services, but also new use cases and intelligence to benefit
society and redefine how we live and work. In this project, a team of
researchers and educators from two HBCUs, Prairie View A&M University and Texas
Southern University, collaborating with the team of the University of Houston,
propose a comprehensive plan to enhance research capacity in the next-generation
communications ecosystem with vertical intelligence and to build strong
partnership. The proposed project will leverage the research capabilities and
existing collaborations among the three participating institutions, and greatly
enhance the research capacity and educational excellence at all institutions.
Partnerships with industry and government will engage HBCUs in future critical
6G and beyond infrastructure and maintain diversity in the workforce. The
proposed research will explore theoretical advancement as well as experimental
design. If successful, the proposed research will help accelerate the
development and commercialization of promising technologies for 6G and ensure
continued U.S. leadership in the telecommunications industry. The education
goals include enabling broad participation of underrepresented minorities in
cutting-edge research, building a pipeline to attract and retain them to pursue
careers in STEM, and training future workforce in critical areas especially 6G
for the nation.

The proposed research will target integration of 6G terrestrial cellular
networks with aerial access networks (AANs) with many satellites, high altitude
platforms (HAPs), and unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) through integrated sensing,
communications, and computing to gain vertical intelligence in the next-
generation communications ecosystem. Three research thrusts are proposed: 1)
Novel dynamic, stochastic and distributed optimization methods will be
investigated for robust resource planning and allocation and mobility
management; 2) A hierarchical sensing architecture will be designed to provide
mutual benefits between communications and sensing; 3) Efficient privacy-
preserving edge computing and computation offloading strategies will be studied
to jointly optimize communications and computing. The proposed framework and
strategies will not only optimize resource usage but also integrate sensing,
communications, and computing seamlessly, while protecting user privacy and data
security. The proposed methods will be validated through extensive simulations
and experiments using USRPs and the NSF POWDER, COSMOS and AERPAW testbeds. This
project will significantly enhance research, education, and outreach in all
participating institutions and enable broad participation of underrepresented
minorities in advanced research, and provide the much needed diversity of the
next-generation workforce in 6G and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.