* 2302309
* Connections Between L-functions and String Theory via Differential Equations in Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kimberly Logan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2026
* USD 161,350.00

Automorphic forms demonstrate a substantial link between number theory and
physics. First, they appear in number theory as building blocks in the theory of
L-functions. L-functions shed light on many important number theoretic topics
such as the distribution of prime numbers. In physics, automorphic forms model
symmetry conditions of supersymmetric string theory and are used to find
coefficients of the scattering amplitude for gravitons (hypothetical particles
of gravity). Finding higher order coefficients of the graviton scattering
amplitude may provide a quantum correction to the discrepancy between relativity
and experimental data. This project seeks to answer a number of questions
centered around the theory of L-functions and scattering amplitudes for certain
string interactions using the study of automorphic forms. For broader impacts,
the PI will lead undergraduate research projects, continue her involvement with
the Sonya Kovalevsky Day and the Navajo Math Circle, and will write an open
access text on math for elementary teachers with a focus on activities and
curriculum that centers Native American traditions and ideas​.

The study of differential equations involving automorphic forms is a common
thread connecting most of the questions addressed in this project. Specifically,
the PI plans to answer a number of questions relating to the zeros and special
values of GL(2) L-functions. Most of these questions relate the zeros of
L-functions to the spectrum of certain operators. The project also addresses a
number of questions arising from the study of scattering amplitudes for
gravitons. The PI will conduct a more detailed analysis of the Fourier modes of
the SL(2) solutions and classify a family of solutions through a closed form
expansion. In the course of the study of these Fourier solutions, the PI will
address an open conjecture relating to a shifted convolution sum of divisor
functions. Certain shifted convolution sums also have applications to
subconvexity bounds for L-functions. The PI will also compute a spectral
solution in SL(3) and uses these techniques to prove quantum unique ergodicity
for non-degenerate Eisenstein series. To address these problems, the PI will use
techniques in functional analysis, analytic number theory, the theory of special
functions, and PDEs.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.