* 2302623
* Geometry of moduli stacks of Galois representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Le, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 185,000.00

A central problem in number theory concerns solving polynomial equations in the
whole numbers and closely related number systems. Solving these so-called
Diophantine equations is typically very difficult, and this difficulty is a
source of security for encryption algorithms that, for instance, guarantee
private communication on the internet. Moreover, the richness of these
Diophantine problems has profound connections to other branches of mathematics.
One can fruitfully study the set of solutions to these equations through its
geometry and dynamics, repackaging them as a Galois representation. In the
1970s, Robert Langlands made far-reaching predictions that connect Galois
representations to mathematical physics and harmonic analysis. A p-adic version
of Langlands' conjectures, which incorporates divisibility by powers of a prime,
has led to exciting progress on Langlands' original conjectures and,
consequently, a range of classical number-theoretic questions like Fermat's Last
Theorem. Further analogues of Langlands' conjectures in other contexts have
spurred activity in representation theory, algebraic geometry, and modern
physics. More recently, a number of mathematicians have proposed a unifying
categorical framework for these different versions of Langlands' conjectures.
This project aims to study the p-adic version of Langlands' conjectures through
the categorical framework by modelling the space of Galois representations. The
geometry of the space of Galois representations is a new and fertile research
direction that provides opportunities to train younger researchers and to
connect communities in number theory and geometric representation theory. The PI
also plans to recruit and train researchers through outreach, by disseminating
accessible background material on number theory aimed at beginning graduate
students, and by organizing local and regional seminars and conferences.

The goal of this project is to investigate the hypothetical mod p and p-adic
Langlands correspondences that relate Galois representations and modular and
integral representations of p-adic reductive groups. This correspondence is
conjecturally mediated by sheaves on stacks of Galois representations. The
Principal Investigator will construct local models for stacks of Galois
representations to analyze these conjectural sheaves and answer questions around
modularity lifting, the Breuil-Mezard conjecture, the weight part of Serre's
conjecture, and the mod p cohomology of locally symmetric spaces using the
Taylor-Wiles method. These investigations will allow for applications to and
from modular and geometric representation theory. This project gives
undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to probe local models via
combinatorial methods and computer algebra packages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.