* 2302819
* Collaborative Research: Worksite-specific Safety Training Environments with Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Namgyun Kim, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2026
* USD 546,164.00

In high-risk workplaces such as construction sites, inattention to workplace
hazards is a common factor in serious injuries and fatalities. Evidence strongly
suggests that conventional, lecture-based safety training methods in classroom
settings rarely capture workers’ interest and do not decrease accidents.
Further, adults often learn best in the context of their own work environments
and real-life situations. As a result, making safety training more closely
associated with trainees’ work environments may be more effective than current
methods. To this end, this project will construct a personalized augmented
reality (AR) training system that uses pictures taken by trainees on their own
worksites to recognize site-specific hazards and create replicas of their
worksites that show simulated accidents caused by those hazards. This work will
require advances in AR environment design, computer vision algorithms, and
workplace training pedagogy, and will lead to better occupational safety
training practices in high-risk industries and new educational materials for
high schools, universities, and industry around occupational safety. It will
also serve as a case study of operationalizing andragogy (adult-targeted
teaching) in a learning technology setting.

The project will be organized into two phases. First, the project will create
learner-centered AR safety training environments wherein trainees organize
safety training content by themselves and experience potential accidents in the
AR environment. This first phase will include (1) developing AI algorithms that
detect workplace hazards from the trainees’ worksites; (2) creating an accident
scenario pool, which can be adapted to various types, shapes, and scales of
real-world hazards; and (3) simulating potential accidents by accurately and
seamlessly overlaying AR avatars on detected real-world hazards. In
collaboration with industry partners, during the second phase the team will
examine the effect of the developed training on workers’ attention to real-world
hazards by (1) assessing individual trainees’ hazard recognition abilities, (2)
monitoring workers’ physical behaviors near workplace hazards, and (3) comparing
the performance of individuals trained using the proposed methods to those
trained using conventional methods as well as non-personalized and virtual
reality environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.