* 2302832
* Collaborative Research: Linking Marine and Terrestrial Sedimentary Evidence for   Plio-pleistocene Variability of Weddell Embayment and Antarctic Peninsula Glaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Brendan Reilly, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 132,303.00

The potential for future sea level rise from melting and collapse of Antarctic
ice sheets and glaciers is concerning. We can improve our understanding of how
water is exchanged between Antarctic ice sheets and the ocean by studying how
ice sheets behaved in past climates, especially conditions that were similar to
or warmer than those at present. For this project, the research team will
document Antarctica’s response across an interval when Earth transitioned from
the warm Pliocene into the Pleistocene ice ages by combining marine and land
evidence for glacier variations from sites near the Antarctic Peninsula,
complimented by detailed work on timescales and fossil evidence for
environmental change. An important goal is to test whether Antarctica’s glaciers
changed at the same time as glaciers in the Northern Hemisphere as Earth's most
recent Ice Age intensified, or alternatively responded to regional climate
forcing in the Southern Hemisphere. Eleven investigators from seven US
institutions, as well as Argentine collaborators, will study new sediment cores
from the International Ocean Discovery Program, as well as legacy cores from
that program and on-land outcrops on James Ross Island. The group embraces a
vertically integrated research program that allows high school, undergraduate,
graduate, post-docs and faculty to work together on the same projects. This
structure leverages the benefits of near-peer mentoring and the development of a
robust collaborative research network while allowing all participants to take
ownership of different parts of the project. All members of the team are firmly
committed to attracting researchers from under-represented groups and will do
this through existing channels as well as via co-creating programming that
centers the perspectives of diverse students in conversations about sea-level
rise and climate change.

The proposed research seeks to understand phasing between Northern and Southern
Hemisphere glacier and climate changes, as a means to understand drivers and
teleconnections. The dynamics of past Antarctic glaciation can be studied using
the unique isotope geochemical and mineralogic fingerprints from glacial sectors
tied to a well-constrained time model for the stratigraphic successions. The
proposed work would further refine the stratigraphic context through coupled
biostratigraphic and magnetostratigraphic work. The magnitude of iceberg calving
and paths of icebergs will be revealed using the flux, geochemical and
mineralogic signatures, and 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb geochronology of ice-rafted
detritus. These provenance tracers will establish which sectors of Antarctica’s
ice sheets are more vulnerable to collapse, and the timing and pacing of these
events will be revealed by their stratigraphic context. Additionally, the team
will work with Argentine collaborators to connect the marine and terrestrial
records by studying glacier records intercalated with volcanic flows on James
Ross Island. These new constraints will be integrated with a state of the art
ice-sheet model to link changes in ice dynamics with their underlying causes.
Together, these tight stratigraphic constraints, geochemical signatures, and
ice-sheet model simulations will provide a means to compare to the global
records of climate change, understand their primary drivers, and elucidate the
role of the Antarctic ice sheet in a major, global climatic shift from the
Pliocene into the Pleistocene.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.