* 2302388
* Distribution of the Hodge and the Tate locus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Salim Tayou, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 06/30/2026
* USD 165,000.00

Geometry and arithmetic were first studied by the Greeks, while algebra first
emerged centuries later in the hands of Persian scholars as the art of solving
equations. The interplay between these three disciplines has been at the center
of mathematical research over the past century. Mathematicians have uncovered
deep connections between them, leading to many spectacular results in
mathematics (e.g., Fermat’s Last Theorem) and other fields, including
applications in cryptography, quantum field theory, and string theory in
physics. The main object of study at the intersection of these disciplines is a
set of algebraic equations. While geometry helps understand the shape of the set
of solutions with complex entries (also called algebraic varieties), the goal of
arithmetic is to understand the set of solutions with integer entries. There are
natural linear structures attached to algebraic varieties called Hodge
structures, which in some cases capture faithfully the set of algebraic
equations we started with. The study of Hodge structures, their symmetries, and
their variations is the main object of investigation of this proposal. It is a
topic at the crossroads of several areas of research such as complex algebraic
geometry, number theory, and representation theory, with many long-standing
conjectures. The PI will involve graduate students in this project and will
organize a conference on recent advances in Hodge theory.

This project aims to answer several questions regarding the distribution of the
exceptional Hodge locus in the theory of variations of Hodge structures and
their arithmetic counterpart, the Tate locus. These questions will be addressed
using tools from Arakelov intersection theory, ergodic theory, Hodge theory, Ax-
Schanuel theorem for Shimura varieties, and Diophantine geometry. The first goal
is to study the atypical Hodge locus in some families of algebraic varieties.
The second goal is to study the Tate locus and give a concrete application to
exceptional algebraicity under specializations of Brauer classes on K3 surfaces.
The third goal is to study the modularity behavior of the closure of special
cycles in moduli spaces of K3 surfaces, or more generally in orthogonal Shimura
varieties. These generating series exhibit a quasi-modularity behavior as well
as a mixed mock modularity behavior, depending on the type of degeneration of
the family of K3 surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.