* 2302568
* Transcendental fiber functors, shift of argument algebras and Riemann-Hilbert correspondence for q-difference equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Valerio Toledano Laredo, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2026
* USD 94,533.00

Quantum groups are deformations of the most basic symmetries of Nature. They
were discovered during the 1980s in the study of one- and two-dimensional
statistical mechanical models describing thin layers of ice. Amazingly, quantum
groups have recently been shown to arise as the symmetries of 4-dimensional
gauge theories, which describe the interaction of elementary particles such as
quarks. Differential equations are another basic paradigm in science, and
describe the evolution of physical, chemical, biological and economic systems.
One of their striking aspects is that they can exhibit Stokes phenomena: their
solutions are not entirely captured by the recursive, and often programmable
methods used to solve them. The missing information, or Stokes data, can be
considered as a hidden symmetry of the differential equation, as they relate
different solutions possessing the same formal expansions. This project stems
from the recent discovery that quantum groups naturally arise from the Stokes
data of differential equations associated to classical symmetries. The main
goals are to further explore this bridge between classical and quantum
symmetries. Of particular interest is the extension to difference equations,
which are natural discretisations of differential equations, and whose Stokes
data are not well-understood beyond the one-variable case. Another important
direction will the study of the integrable systems, or constants of motion,
corresponding to these differential and difference equations. The project will
provide research training opportunities for graduate students.

In more detail, the project stems from transcendental construction of quantum
groups from the Stokes data of the dynamical Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations
for the corresponding Lie algebra due to the PI. The first component will
extending the construction to numerical values of the deformation parameter, in
particular to roots of unity, and to the difference setting. The second
component will establish a Riemann-Hilbert correspondence for q-difference
equations in several variables by defining an appropriate notion of regular
singularities and capturing these by elliptic monodromy data, similar to the
one-variable case treated by Birkhoff. The third component is concerned with the
integrable systems arising from the Casimir connection, and their
parametrisation in terms of sheets of the corresponding Lie algebra. The results
of the project will have application in the study of Stokes phenomena, quantum
integrable systems and geometric representation theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.