* 2302274
* Excellence in Research: Harnessing Big Data and Domain Knowledge to Advance Deep Learning for Interpretable Cell Quantitation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hoang Long Nguyen, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,995.00

Accurate, reliable, and interpretable pancreatic cell recognition and evaluation
allow better anticipation of changes in body response to disease or treatment.
Thus, it is highly valuable to pathologists and scientists in clinical practice
and laboratory work, who care for patients, especially for those with
commodities like obesity or diabetes. This project designs and develops novel
deep learning, transfer learning, and interpretable methods integrated with
domain-expert knowledge for reliable, interpretable, and accurate pancreatic
cell quantitation by harnessing and exploiting the abundance of big data.
Existing methods do either manual recognition or require understanding of a huge
number of parameters setting for automation. Additionally, these techniques do
not impose interpretability and disregard domain-expert knowledge. The project
tackles these issues by incorporating domain expert knowledge, transferring
knowledge and experience from other image processing and segmentation problems
adapting for cell quantitation. The project outcomes would benefit researchers
in biomedical imaging, transfer learning, human-machine interaction in addition
to providing practical studying materials in areas such as deep learning, image
processing, and interpretable methods for students. Moreover, the project has
the potential to increases research capacity and collaborations to generate new
research opportunities for students from underrepresented communities to pursue
advanced degrees in STEM.

The project develops data-driven algorithms addressing interpretable cell
quantitation problem. Facilitated by novel deep learning algorithms, the project
harnesses the potential of big data to derive reliable, interpretable, and
accurate evaluation. In addition, the project explores a generalized framework
for extending existing findings and incorporating domain-expert knowledge to
complement the modeling and learning process. Specifically, this research uses
microscopy images, machine learning, transfer learning, and domain knowledge in
three thrusts: (1) A deep learning based cell quantitation algorithm. The
algorithm is featured with interpretability, guided by domain-expert knowledge
for trust, reliable, and accurate performance. (2) Enhancing data-driven
techniques in the area of transfer learning to fill important knowledge gaps at
the intersection of the deep learning and biomedical imaging. (3) Advancing
domain knowledge incorporation and human intervention methods for developing and
operating deep learning based system for biomedical research and healthcare. All
the research outcomes are made publicly available to facilitate extending and
accelerating varied application development from diverse communities of
researchers and students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.