* 2302580
* Engineering a Kidney Organoid Model to Investigate Fibronectin-TGF-beta Signaling in Renal Fibrosis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christopher Lemmon, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2026
* USD 536,031.00

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is estimated to affect approximately 11-13% of the
global population. CKD is driven by scarring of kidney tissue, a process known
as “renal fibrosis”. This process is dramatically affected by both the protein
TGF-beta, which is secreted by inflammatory cells, and the protein fibronectin,
which is a structural protein assembled into fibrils by cells to build new
tissue. The process of fibrosis is confounded by two issues. First, TGF-beta
induces cells to assemble fibronectin into fibrils, while fibronectin fibrils
bind TGF-beta and induce cells to respond to it; this feedback makes it
difficult to separate cause-and-effect in fibrosis. Second, multiple cell types
in the kidney can secrete TGF-beta, secrete fibronectin, and assemble
fibronectin into fibrils, making it difficult to distinguish the contributions
of different cell types to the progression of fibrosis. This project will
address this complexity by developing hollow spheres of kidney cells that mimic
kidney tissue. Removal/ inhibition of specific cell types and/or elements of
TGF-beta and fibronectin signaling will allow for a deeper understanding of how
these proteins contribute to renal fibrosis. The impact of this work will be
expanded by developing a four-session symposium targeted to high school students
and community college students from under-represented communities that focuses
on the fundamentals of kidney function and cell biology.

CKD is driven by renal fibrosis, which is a process of excess assembly of
extracellular matrix. The interplay between the immune cytokine TGF-beta and the
extracellular matrix protein fibronectin in renal fibrosis is incompletely
understood. In response to inflammatory signals, the cytokine TGF-beta is
released from immune cells. TGF-beta drives increased secretion of the
extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and subsequent assembly of fibronectin
into a scaffold of fibrils. Immune cell-derived TGF-beta also drives an
increased secretion of endogenous TGF-beta, which subsequently binds to the
scaffold of fibronectin fibrils. Collectively, these drive alterations in renal
tubule morphology, renal tubule function, and extracellular matrix remodeling
that occur during renal fibrosis. In this work, a reductionist approach will be
used to identify the contribution of fibronectin fibril assembly, endogenous
TGF-beta secretion, and TGF-beta/fibronectin tethering to renal fibrosis and
kidney damage. To better understand their respective roles, renal tubule
spheroids will be engineered that will serve as a platform for investigating
TGF-beta/fibronectin interactions in renal fibrosis. This renal tissue mimetic
will consist of renal epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and pericytes, as well as
relevant tubulo-interstitial extracellular matrix components. The work will
first determine if these renal mimetics recapitulate kidney tubule polarity and
tubular function and will demonstrate that known inducers of renal fibrosis
drive similar changes in the renal spheroids. The following system elements will
then be perturbed: i) the assembly of fibronectin into extracellular matrix
fibrils, ii) the expression and secretion of endogenous TGF-beta, and iii) the
localization and tethering of TGF-beta to fibronectin fibrils to better
understand the interactions between these key constituents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.