* 2302477
* Collaborative Research: Deep ocean temperature and continental ice volume from benthic foraminiferal test composition, 77Ma to Present
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Miriam Katz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wanamaker
* 07/31/2025
* USD 48,579.00

Sea floor sediments record the natural variability of the Earth’s climate
system. Studying sediment records can improve our ability to predict how the
climate system will respond to human activities. This project will produce
records of deep-sea temperatures, continental ice volume, and atmospheric carbon
dioxide. The records will document changes in the climate system over the last
77 million years. Those data will improve our understanding of processes such as
polar amplification and the ability of the Earth’s system to adjust to different
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. This study will also improve our
knowledge of long-term changes in deep ocean temperatures and ice-sheet volume
variability and their connection to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide. The
project will be carried out by two female scientists, one of whom is an early
career researcher. Several undergraduate and graduate students will participate
to the proposed research activities. The outreach program will involve
Earth/Environmental Science teachers from middle and high schools.

Benthic foraminifera are excellent recorders of past environmental conditions.
In particular, the benthic foraminiferal (bf) magnesium/calcium ratio (Mg/Ca) is
used as a temperature proxy, making it possible to separate temperature from ice
volume effects on the widely used bf oxygen isotope proxy (d18O). However, the
bf Mg/Ca signal is complicated by a dependency on carbonate saturation state
(“omega”) in addition to temperature. Benthic foraminiferal lithium, boron and
strontium to calcium ratios (Li-B-Sr/Ca) show promise in separating the
temperature and omega contributions to bf Mg/Ca. The proposed research will: 1)
construct robust temperature and ice volume histories during the late Cretaceous
and Cenozoic (~77-0 Ma) using bf d18O in conjunction with bf Mg-Li-B-Sr/Ca; and
2) calibrate offsets in bf Mg-Li-B-Sr/Ca for multiple species across paleodepth
transects to encompass a range of omega. Different species’ physiological
response to variations in temperature, omega, and seawater element/Ca ratios
will be addressed using a multivariate model. One-Myr sample spacing will be
used for the calibrations, whereas a new higher-resolution (~200 Kyr) record
will provide a robust dataset of bf Mg/Ca variations since 77 Ma. This dataset
will be used, together with bf d18O data, to test the hypothesis that deep ocean
temperature and continental ice volume covary from the Late Cretaceous to the
Cenozoic. The connections among changes in deep ocean temperature (and
chemistry), continental ice volume, and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration
will be investigated using a numerical box model of the ocean carbon cycle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.