* 2302095
* A Non-Archimedean Approach to Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tony Yue Yu, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,207.00

Mirror symmetry is one of the most mysterious dualities in mathematics. It
originated from theoretical physics, and generated great impact on various areas
of mathematics, in particular differential geometry and algebraic geometry. The
objects of study are geometric shapes called Calabi-Yau manifolds that appear
naturally in different contexts of mathematics and physics. Mirror symmetry
predicts that given any Calabi-Yau manifold, there exists a mirror manifold,
such that an ever-growing list of geometric relations hold between the two,
involving deep and elaborate invariants that are otherwise unrelated. Despite
the continual progress in the subject, both the full extent of existence of
mirror manifolds and the underlying mathematical mechanism of mirror symmetry
remain unsolved today. This project brings a new approach to the study of mirror
symmetry, based on latest developments from non-archimedean geometry. The goal
is to conceive and pursue a full-fledged theory of non-archimedean mirror
symmetry, which will lead to new results unattainable from existing methods, as
well as applications beyond the current scope. This award will also support
graduate and undergraduate students.

The mirror existence problem will be studied via the enumeration of analytic
curves with boundaries in non-archimedean SYZ torus fibrations of Calabi-Yau
manifolds. New constructions of such fibrations will be explored using non-
archimedean Monge-Amp√®re equations in addition to the minimal model program. An
analog of the Gromov compactness theorem for non-archimedean curves with
boundaries needs to be established, based on generalized tail conditions, which
depend on novel analytic surgeries of the target spaces. The construction of
virtual fundamental classes for the curve counts will rely on our previous works
on derived non-archimedean geometry. PI will prove various properties of the
mirror algebra obtained from the curve counts, including associativity, radius
of convergence and singularity estimates. The local mirror algebras are expected
to glue together to form the global mirror variety using wall-crossing formulas.
A long-term goal is to show that the mirror construction is an involution, the
best exhibition of mirror duality. PI also aims for applications outside mirror
symmetry, in particular towards cluster algebras in representation theory and
the moduli of KSBA stable pairs in birational geometry. PI expects fruitful
future interactions with the Gross-Siebert program based on logarithmic
geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.