* 2302205
* RAPID: Impact of Repeated Disasters on Water Insecurity and Mental Health Outcomes in Puerto Rican Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Kaoru Ikuma, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 10/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

Repeated natural hazards impede the quality of life through declines in water
quality and reliability of potable water access. Five years after Hurricane
Maria, Hurricane Fiona caused catastrophic flooding across Puerto Rico causing
island-wide power and water outages starting September 18, 2022. Strong storms
have led to significant water insecurity in communities across Puerto Rico. The
negative impacts on socioeconomically vulnerable communities remain largely
unknown, especially when these communities face repeated exposure to disasters
due to climate change. In particular, as a first step towards building adaptive
resilience, we need to better understand the impacts of repeated disasters and
associated water infrastructure on people’s mental health and psychological
resilience. Through this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID), ephemeral
data that will help build the knowledge base on the social outcomes of two
hurricanes and service interruptions will be collected. The project will
highlight the need for more effort in addressing mental health issues through
integrated health and potable water programs.

Building on pre-Hurricane Fiona data on measured and perceived water quality,
mental health statuses, and psychological resilience from three vulnerable
communities in Puerto Rico, the PIs will obtain ephemeral data on the effects of
repeated disasters on water insecurity-related perceptions and mental health
outcomes following Hurricane Fiona. Specifically, the objectives are to: (1)
capture, contrast, and compare microbiological and chemical water quality before
and after Hurricane Fiona; (2) longitudinally study how changes in water quality
and experiences with water insecurity after Fiona affected mental health; and
(3) longitudinally study how disaster situations change people’s behaviors
towards drinking water practices and trust in different water sources. These
objectives will be carried out through a mixed-methods approach: (i) tap water
sampling at the household level, (ii) a survey to the same pre-Fiona group of
150 households, and (iii) interviews with thirty households using enthnographic
methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.