* 2302698
* Collaborative Research: SHINE--Using Photospheric Imprints of Coronal Currents to Understand Coronal Magnetic Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Stuart Gilchrist, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 107,634.00

Solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) drive the strongest disturbances
in the solar system. These events are powered by the sudden release of magnetic
energy stored in electric currents flowing in the coronal magnetic field. Basic
questions about these currents remain: How do coronal currents evolve to become
unstable in the lead up to such events? And how do these currents evolve to
release magnetic energy during flares and CMEs? This project addresses these
questions through modeling and analysis of coronal extreme ultra violet (EUV)
images. The broader impacts include mentoring of undergraduate students and
collaboration between US and Australian institutes. Outreach will be conducted
for the Great American October 2023 and April 2024 solar eclipses.

This project will employ Gauss’s separation method — which has a long heritage
in terrestrial and planetary magnetism — to photospheric vector magnetograms (2D
maps of the 3-component magnetic field) of solar active regions (ARs). The core
idea of Gauss’s method is that the photospheric field can be unambiguously
partitioned into three distinct parts, each with its own source: currents below
the photosphere, currents above it, and currents passing through it. We refer to
the part of the photospheric field due to coronal currents as the ”photospheric
imprint” of these currents. Photospheric imprints, by themselves, cannot fully
reveal the nature of coronal currents. Nonlinear, force-free field (NLFFF)
extrapolations have previously been used to study coronal currents, but fields
on these models’ bottom boundaries typically exhibit substantial inconsistencies
with magnetogram fields. While both methods have limitations, combining them can
substantially improve our under- standing of coronal currents. Accordingly, the
project will exploit both approaches in case studies of flare- and CME-prone
ARs, to investigate the structure and development of coronal currents. The team
will analyze evolution in photospheric imprints and NLFFF models before and
after flares/CMEs, and in quiet epochs to establish baseline rates of change.
Coronal EUV images will also be studied for context.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.