* 2302596
* Social Virtual Reality enabled Learning to Empower Special Education Students in Gaining Competence to Join the Future Technology Workforce
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2026
* USD 849,986.00

This project aims to enhance STEM education and workforce development for
transition-aged adults with a variety of cognitive conditions including autism,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and dyslexia. It is aimed at
fostering STEM identity and promoting STEM pathways for individuals with
neurodevelopmental and learning disabilities, who have often been overlooked in
STEM education and outreach. This project leverages advancements in virtual
reality (VR), intelligent pedagogical agents, and asynchronous learning
technologies to create an accessible, inclusive approach to STEM education. Upon
completion, the project will provide a highly accessible cybersecurity
curriculum using the latest VR technologies, available as a free, open
educational resource under a Creative Commons license. By reducing barriers to
participation in STEM fields, the project will open pathways to STEM careers for
this traditionally underserved population.

The project framework is based on three pillars: a STEM curriculum centered on
computational thinking (CT) using cybersecurity scenarios to encourage
collaborative learning, immersive learning in a game-like VR platform with
attack impact analysis and defense solutions, and accessibility and usability
through learner-centered, inclusive approaches. The curriculum follows a three-
phase pedagogy: learning foundational concepts, applying concepts to problem
scenarios, and creating novel solutions to open-ended problems. Learners will
engage in a series of units to explore a range of cybersecurity scenarios
involving attacker-defender games, encompassing software engineering, data
analysis, and teamwork within a social competencies framework. CT practices will
be organized under four dimensions: data, modeling & simulation, computational
problem solving, and systems thinking. Research will also be conducted to
develop intelligent pedagogical agent techniques to enable self-paced and high-
scale deployment of training. The project will openly disseminate outcomes,
including new theory, software elements for social VR environments, and special
education content data sets. Programs that serve neurodivergent learners will be
partnered with to assist in recruiting neurodiverse co-designers and to ensure
the sustainability of the project efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.