* 2302577
* NSF-DFG: Nonequilibrium Thermal Processing of Nanoparticles via Laser Melting and Fragmentation in Liquid
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2026
* USD 432,487.00

The widespread and rapidly expanding use of nanoparticles in the manufacturing
of advanced nanomaterials for applications in catalysis and biomedicine calls
for the development of nanoparticle manufacturing techniques capable of meeting
the sharp rise in global demand. Laser processing of colloidal solutions of
nanoparticles is a unique green chemistry technique, working at room temperature
and ambient pressure without the need for any chemical additives or reactants,
saving resources and minimizing waste. To fully unleash the potential of this
scalable nanomanufacturing technique, this award supports fundamental research
to reveal, through tightly integrated computer modeling and experiments, the
fundamental mechanisms of the laser-induced modification of nanoparticles in a
liquid environment. These insights into mechanisms of nanoparticle formation
foster the advancement of manufacturing techniques for environment-friendly and
energy-efficient generation of nanoparticles with sizes and structural
characteristics that meet the high demand of future developments in catalysis
and biomedicine. The multidisciplinary nature of the research and the
international collaboration with the University of Duisburg Essen, Germany
facilitate the professional preparation of a new generation of researchers ready
for work at the forefront of the rapidly expanding fields of laser-based
advanced manufacturing and scientific computing. The impact of the project is
augmented by bringing an established International Conference on Advanced
Nanoparticle Generation and Excitation by Lasers in Liquids to the US for the
first time and broadening participation of US students in the Venice
International School on Lasers in Materials Science.

Laser fragmentation in liquids and laser melting in liquids are two
nonequilibrium thermal processing techniques to fabricate chemically clean
nanoparticles for catalysis and biomedicine. However, the underlying
nanoparticle formation mechanisms are poorly understood. This project tackles
the challenge of probing the rapid highly nonequilibrium processes triggered by
short pulse laser irradiation by combining multiscale and multiphysics modeling,
time-resolved optical probing, and ex situ characterization of nanoparticle
phase composition and defect density. An advanced computational model for
investigation of the nanoparticle fragmentation and melting dynamics is
developed and verified in experiments using a continuous-flow flat jet laser
processing setup that ensures precise control over the pulse number and laser
fluence exposure of dispersed nanoparticles. Transient optical properties are
calculated for nanoparticles undergoing laser-induced melting and disintegration
to facilitate the connections to the results of time-resolved experimental
optical probing (pump-probe) and to reveal optimum conditions for the energy-
efficient nanoparticle processing in a novel double-pulse irradiation strategy.
These optimum conditions are key for better nanoparticle size, shape, and
structure control, as well as for further upscaling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.