* 2302650
* EAGER: Advanced Digital Twin Capability for Turbulent Wind Fields in the NHERI Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel at the University of Florida
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Catherine Gorle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will establish,
validate, and disseminate an advanced digital twin capability for the National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) boundary layer wind tunnel (BLWT) at the University of
Florida (UF). Wind tunnel testing remains the most common approach for assessing
wind loads on structures and informing wind resistant design to reduce the cost
of damage. However, wind tunnel experiments have limitations, such as the
measurement resolution and the challenge of obtaining simultaneous records of
wind velocity and pressure fields. Numerical simulations, such as Large Eddy
Simulation (LES), offer an opportunity to fill in these gaps, but such
simulation capabilities are currently not optimally leveraged by the research
community. An important barrier is that current numerical modeling capabilities
are mostly tailored to stationary, standard neutral wind profiles; in contrast,
wind tunnels such as the BLWT at UF are increasingly implementing advanced
capabilities to reproduce more complex turbulent wind fields that cause
structural damage. This research project will establish numerical simulation
capabilities for these complex wind fields. To maximize the potential impact of
the project, validation test cases and a corresponding digital twin tool set and
tutorial for the simulation capabilities will be defined through structured
interviews with the current UF BLWT user base. The resulting digital twin
capability will make it possible to jointly leverage numerical and experimental
models to improve understanding of the turbulent wind loads that drive damage to
buildings and civil infrastructure and to advance wind resilient design.
Simulation data and documented source codes will be archived and made publicly
available in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This EAGER
will contribute to the NSF role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program.

The specific goal of the research is to establish and disseminate a numerical
modeling strategy for reproducing complex turbulent wind fields generated in the
UF BLWT. For standard neutral log-law wind fields, inflow boundary conditions
commonly employ artificial turbulence generation methods. Since the velocity
statistics of artificial turbulence evolve within the computational domain, some
form of calibration is required to ensure that the target wind field is
correctly reproduced. This calibration challenge is exacerbated when the
objective is to model more complex turbulent wind fields, such as the boundary
layer with a pronounced roughness sublayer that can be produced in the UF BLWT,
which is important for low-rise buildings, where the building is immersed in the
roughness sublayer (the roughness height of the boundary layer is on the order
of the building height). The first objective of this project is to explore
computationally efficient and accurate methods for numerically reproducing these
roughness sublayers. Different combinations of artificial turbulence inflow
generators, upstream roughness resolving simulations, source term forcing
methods, and machine learning approaches will be investigated and validated
against experimental data. The second objective of this project is to support
broad dissemination of the resulting turbulence generation method by co-
designing a digital twin tool set and a tutorial with the BLWT user base. The
digital wind tunnel can also help identify optimal measurement locations for
physical testing and potentially support data infilling where there are limits
on the spatial resolution of physical measurements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.