* 2302171
* RET Site: Computational Modeling and Simulation for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shafigh Mehraeen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This three-year RET project, RET Site: Computational Modeling and Simulation for
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education, is hosted by the
University of Illinois Chicago (UIC). There is an urgent need for computational
modeling and simulation (CMS) training of the future U.S. workforce. Future
changes in the job skills, which require computing knowledge, will challenge
current educational models. During a six-week summer program, ten teachers
recruited from public and private high schools in the city of Chicago will be
immersed in the cutting-edge research projects revolving around CMS for Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education. The interdisciplinary
projects will offer opportunities to develop innovative and technologically
grounded lesson plans and classroom activities in the STEM using CMS tools. This
RET focuses on areas including but not limited to (1) Nanotechnology, (2) Data-
driven modeling and machine-learning, (3) Drug design and delivery, and (4)
Biomechanics. The teachers will also work with the UIC team to devise inquiry-
based lesson plans and learning modules to be integrated into the classroom in
the following academic year. Lesson plans and learning modules will be
disseminated through the UIC RET and Chicago Public Schools websites, and the
NSF repository. To ensure seamless integration of teachers' experience into
classroom practices, follow-up activities include classroom visits by the UIC
team and providing feedback.



This three-year RET project, RET Site: Computational Modeling and Simulation for
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education, is hosted by the
University of Illinois Chicago (UIC). There is an urgent need for computational
modeling and simulation (CMS) training of the future U.S. workforce. Future
changes in the job skills, which require computing knowledge, will challenge
current educational models. While all experimental observations need scientific
explanation, in pre-college education, little attention has been paid to the
advantages of computational modeling and simulation (CMS) for explaining such
observations and pinpointing possible flaws in experimental measurements. This
RET focuses on (1) Nanotechnology, (2) Data-driven modeling and machine-
learning, (3) Drug design and delivery, and (4) Biomechanics. The CMS team in
the Departments of Chemical, Civil and Materials, and Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, and Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)
provides high school STEM teachers with the opportunity to learn about CMS.
Partnering with minority-serving public and private high schools in Chicago, ten
recruited teachers will be selected based on application materials and immersed
in the cutting-edge research activities to enhance their perspectives on CMS as
a tool, and to develop studentsâ€™ knowledge about the STEM using this tool. The
teachers will participate in a six-week summer program, and become part of a
research community, including faculty mentors, an education advisor, and
graduate and undergraduate students. Through professional development
activities, the teachers will work with faculty mentors, an education advisor,
and industry professionals to devise inquiry-based and Next Generation of
Science Standards-aligned lesson plans and curricular modules to be integrated
into the classroom in the following academic year. Lesson plans and learning
modules will be disseminated through the UIC and Chicago Public Schools
websites, annual conferences, and the NSF repository.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.