* 2302375
* Representation Theory Meets Computational Algebra and Complexity Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hang Huang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 06/30/2026
* USD 107,961.00

The goal of this project is to use mathematical tools to tackle computational
and applied mathematical problems. The main themes are (1) Systems of Polynomial
Equations, (2) Computer Science and Computational Complexity. Systems of
polynomial equations can be thought of as describing the dependence relations
between physical quantities in some models. The solution set of them describes
the geometric shape of the model. Natural phenomena, and hence the model
describing them, often come equipped with a rich symmetry. Hence it is natural
to use symmetry-based methods to study them. The proposed research will lead to
a better understanding of the geometry as well as the utility of the model. A
second theme of the project is the complexity of matrix multiplication (a matrix
is a rectangular array of numbers). Finding efficient ways to multiply matrices
is the topic of a subfield of Computer Science known as complexity theory. In
1968, Strassen discovered that the widely used algorithm for matrix
multiplication which was assumed to be the best possible, is in fact not
optimal. Since then, there has been intense research in both determining just
how efficiently matrices may be multiplied and determining the limits of how
much Strassen's algorithm can be improved. The PI proposes to use modern
mathematical techniques to tackle those problems. This project will have a
substantial broader impact through the development of new software for the open-
source computer algebra system Macaulay2, and through the PI’s interest in
broadening participation in mathematical research.

The proposal involves several main themes: Weyman-Kempf geometric techniques,
syzygies and minimal free resolutions, secant varieties and the study of tensor
ranks. The first goal is to find new examples and analyze existing examples to
extend Weyman-Kempf geometric techniques to study non-normal varieties. The
second goal is the study of nilpotent orbit closures and determinantal
thickenings. The PI will use technical tools such as spectral sequence and Lie
superalgebra representations to compute numerical and homological invariants of
related varieties. The third topic is the computation of different tensor ranks
and their application to matrix multiplication complexity. Using tools from
modern algebraic geometry such as deformation theory, the PI will tackle a
number of longstanding open conjectures.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program in the
Division of Mathematical sciences, and by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.