* 2302163
* Moduli of higher dimensional varieties and families of hypersurfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kristin DeVleming, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 05/31/2026
* USD 168,238.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of objects defined by polynomial equations,
called varieties. These equations can be studied algebraically (e.g. solving the
equation to find all solutions) or geometrically (e.g. graphing the shape
defined by the equation) and algebraic geometry uses the tools from both
perspectives to analyze varieties. An overarching goal of the field to be
explored in this project is to classify all possible varieties, which is done
through the construction of moduli spaces, or parameter spaces for varieties of
a given type. The study of moduli spaces has a rich history and these spaces
arise naturally in algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, differential
geometry, enumerative geometry and combinatorics, mirror symmetry, number
theory, and physics. The work involved with this project has connections to each
of these fields. The PI will mentor both undergraduate and graduate students and
continue with a variety of activities that encourage the participation of women
in mathematics.

The main objective of the PI is to research moduli spaces of higher dimensional
algebraic varieties, specifically to study degenerations of hypersurfaces
(varieties defined by a single polynomial equation). The PI will approach two
related questions: studying smooth limits of hypersurfaces from a moduli-
theoretic perspective, focusing on when such limits are again hypersurfaces, and
also an explicit classification of singular varieties appearing in these moduli
spaces, focusing on degenerations of projective space, Fano varieties, and log
Calabi-Yau pairs. The main tools used to accomplish these goals will be wall
crossing in K-stability and KSBA moduli, the minimal model program, geometric
invariant theory, and interpolation between these different perspectives on
moduli spaces. The projected outputs of this project include several theoretical
results, such as (non-)existence of particular degenerations of projective
space, techniques for constructing moduli of log Calabi-Yau varieties, and some
classification of smooth limits of hypersurfaces. The outputs will also include
several explicit examples of moduli spaces of log canonically polarized, log
Calabi-Yau, and log Fano pairs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.