* 2302688
* EAGER: Exploring Graphene Mechanical Switch for Future RF ICs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Albert Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Project Title: EAGER: Exploring Graphene Mechanical Switch for Future RF ICs
(Proposal #: 2302688; PI: Albert Wang)

Proliferation of wireless communications, enabled by semiconductor radio-
frequency integrated circuits, has forever changed our life. Today, it is hardly
to imagine a life without smartphone and wireless internet. The current pursuit
for an “always connected” world in the emerging era of internet of everything
demands for new generation (Next-G) wireless technologies, beyond the fifth
generation (5G), which depends upon advanced radio-frequency integrated circuit
chips to support higher frequencies, broader bandwidth, and more spectrum bands
in order to achieve higher data rates, lower power consumption and shorter
system latency. Imagine hundreds of users in the same area utilizing smartphones
at the same time, how to avoid crosstalk in between? This is where a radio-
frequency switch device will play a critical role in modern wireless
communications, especially for Next-G wireless system. Unfortunately, the
traditional semiconductor transistor based radio-frequency switch could not
support Next-G wireless communications due to its inherent technical problems,
such as poor crosstalk immunity and high signal loss, which will be addressed by
the proposed research. This project will explore a disruptively new radio-
frequency switch technology that utilizes a novel graphene-based
microelectromechanical system switch to be designed and heterogeneous integrated
into semiconductor integrated circuit platform to realize a new breed of switch
devices featuring ultrahigh crosstalk isolation, ultralow signal propagation
loss, ultrafast switching speed to support Next-G wireless communications.

This two-year EAGER proposal will explore a revolutionarily new graphene-based
mechanical switch concept to address the fundamental technical challenges
inherent to semiconductor field-effect transistor (FET) based radio-frequency
(RF) switch technologies, including poor isolation, high insertion loss, not
suitable for next-generation (Next-G) wireless communications. The proposed new
transfer-free graphene based bridge-contact mechanical switch (gSwitch) device
structure will be designed and fabricated in complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuit (IC) platform (CMOS-gSwitch) using
heterogeneous integration (HI) technology. gSwitch device represents a
disruptively new switching device with several novelties: gSwitch utilizes
electrostatic actuation and bridge-contact ohmic contact on/off switching
mechanisms to possibly realize an ideal switch with ultrahigh isolation in OFF
state, super low insertion loss in ON state and negligible power consumption.
The light mass density and high Young’s modulus of graphene membrane can
potentially achieve pico-second level switching speed. The bridge-contact
structure can potentially prevent the stiction problem. The excellent mechanical
strength of graphene may ensure high endurance of gSwitch devices supporting
billion switching cycles. This project has several tasks: Task-1 to prove the
new gSwitch device concept; Task-2 to develop wafer-scale transfer-free metal-
carbon-insulator interface based graphene-on-silicondioxide synthesis technology
for making gSwitch devices on silicon wafers; Task-3 to develop a HI fabrication
flow to integrate new gSwitch devices into CMOS; Task-4 to demonstrate RF switch
ICs using gSwitch for Next-G systems; Task-5 to demonstrate a frequency mixer
using gSwitch. Integrated research-education activities are planned, and
diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) will be promoted during this project. If
successful, the societal impacts will be significant by always-connecting the
world for unlimited internet of everything (IoET) applications, contributing to
reduce the global wireless disparity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.