* 2302520
* Homotopical Methods in Arithmetic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tony Feng, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Number theory is the study of structures which may be broadly called number
systems. Number systems come in very different flavors and have a wide variety
of applications; for example, the physical world is modeled on real numbers,
computer systems are modeled on binary numbers, cryptographic and encoding
schemes are often designed in the context of modular numbers, etc. Recently, a
rich connection has formed between number theory and homotopy theory, which is
an algebraic abstraction of ideas inspired by the study of shapes and topology.
This project seeks to apply powerful new techniques originating in homotopy
theory to resolve outstanding questions about numbers. In addition, a
significant component will be devoted to the support and training of young
researchers.

In more specific terms, the project will develop a new theory of “derived
Fourier analysis”, an expansion of Fourier analysis to derived vector spaces and
motivic coefficients. This has anticipated applications in enumerative geometry,
especially to modularity conjectures for arithmetic theta functions, and in the
investigation of categorical period conjectures pertaining to relative Langlands
duality, as formulated by Ben-Zvi – Sakellaridis – Venkatesh. Another direction
will be the study of cohomology operations in p-adic geometry, using new
perspectives on prismatic and syntomic cohomology due to Drinfeld and Bhatt-
Lurie, with an eye towards resolving old questions about Brauer groups. Finally,
methods of algebraic K-theory will be combined with the theory of Shimura
varieties (extending joint work with Galatius and Venkatesh) in order to better
understand the cohomology of arithmetic groups and related Galois
representations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.