* 2302947
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing carbon centric circular economy technologies for advanced manufacturing solutions (KY, TN)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Ian McClure, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Florence Rabanal
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on convening
industrial, R&D, community, workforce, investment and entrepreneurship ecosystem
stakeholders across the Southeastern Commerce Corridor (SCC) of Kentucky and
Tennessee, to design and develop an innovation ecosystem for next-generation
manufacturing and supply chain in the region. By 2034 the SCC will be a global
leader in next-generation manufacturing and supply chain innovation for the
circular economy, supported by an inclusive and diverse workforce. The SCC is
the heart of the country's manufacturing and supply chains. Kentucky and
Tennessee will have more freight tonnage passing through its borders by 2040
than nearly every other state in the country. It is no coincidence that four of
the country's major logistics companies have their hubs in the SCC. Moreover,
many of the critical components for priority industries, such as metals and
electric vehicle (EV) batteries, will be manufactured in this region. The region
comprises high-potential innovation growth centers of Louisville, Lexington,
Nashville, Knoxville, and Chattanooga, with premier research universities and a
national laboratory leader in next-generation manufacturing research, but also
distressed urban communities and a rural region with >50% of its counties
qualifying as economically distressed. Led by the University of Kentucky and 12
other Core Partners, including four R1 research universities, three doctoral
universities, an R2 HBCU, a leading national laboratory, the SCC's community
college systems, its premier tech-based economic development non-profits,
leading industry participants, and the lead organization's state government, the
GAME Change Engine is supported by 53 total other collaborating partners in the
SCC, including 23 industry partners.

Utilizing expert-led technical thrusts related to next-generation manufacturing
and supply chain, the Development Award aims to establish an innovation
ecosystem across the SCC. It will allow the project team to engage the GAME
Change industrial and community partners in a comprehensive process - leveraging
Major Gap Validation Workshops - designed to identify, validate, consolidate,
and prioritize a more focused set of use-inspired technology opportunities and
gaps. The Engine will then leverage GAME Change Summits located in underserved
communities across the region to ensure community-based representation and input
from diverse stakeholders in producing a GAME Plan for the subsequent phases of
the Engine. A use-inspired research Playbook will establish research scopes to
prove concepts. Technology-Scale Centers equipped with venture studios located
in underserved communities across the region will be designed to serve as
community-engaged venues for testing, scaling, startup development, and
workforce training related to resulting innovations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.