* 2302003
* ERI: Stretch Effects on Combustion Characteristics of Flames with Non-Uniform Curvature
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Vinicius Maron Sauer, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,993.00

From the flame of a match to state-of-the-art power and heat generation systems,
combustion is ubiquitous in the world economy. Despite its prevalence, the
complexity of the underlying processes in a flame still represents a challenge
for scientists and engineers, especially considering the need for more stringent
regulations for harmful emissions, uncontrolled fires, and climate change
mitigation. To simplify the analysis of practical burners, it is common to
employ reduced sets of physical and chemical processes retaining essential
characteristics of the overall phenomenon. However, such an approach often
oversimplifies relevant combustion attributes by neglecting the effect of
curvature and stretch inherent to real-world flames. Therefore, the primary goal
of this project is to provide a deep understanding of the influence of
topography and stretch on combustion and sooting characteristics of non-
uniformly curved flames. Results from the proposed investigation will generate
data for combustion model development and validation to advance power and heat
generation technologies to sustain U.S. energy security using clean fuels and
its position as a global leader in sustainability. The project will also allow
students from CSUN, a Masterâ€™s Hispanic Serving Institution, to participate in
cutting-edge research and develop skillsets critical for preparing the future
workforce in science and engineering.

The proposed work will detail the effect of topography and stretch of non-
uniformly curved non-premixed flame structures in their combustion and sooting
characteristics. To this end, this project will study stretched curved flames to
provide: (1) novel non-premixed counterflow configurations with non-uniform
curvature; (2) experimental data detailing stretch and non-uniform curvature
influence on the flame structure, stability, temperature, soot formation, and
extinction; (3) a simplified theoretical framework for the description of
stretched non-premixed flames with non-uniform curvature. New non-premixed
opposed-flow experimental burners employing quadric surfaces, and combinations
thereof, will be developed to produce flame topographies equivalent to those
observed in flame elements from practical combustion systems. Particle image
velocimetry will be used for fluid flow characterization, whereas soot and thin
filament pyrometry will be employed to determine soot formation and flame
temperature. Simplified reacting flow models based on potential flow solutions
and infinitely fast chemistry will be developed to describe curvature effects on
overall flame characteristics theoretically. The analysis and configurations
proposed in this project will allow a better understanding of curvature and
stretch influence on flame phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.