* 2302794
* Collaborative Research: RETTL: Story Studio: Coaching Data Storytelling at Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Louise Yarnall, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 479,995.00

Professionals in data science and analytics excel in data storytelling, a
complex skill of communicating stories using data. If done well, data
storytelling can enhance public understanding, decision-making, and action.
However, postsecondary educators in data science have not been able to train
data storytellers effectively at a large scale. To address this issue,
researchers from the University of Alabama and the University of Maryland,
Baltimore County, and learning scientists from SRI Education are working
together on this project to create, develop, and test Story Studio. This
platform aims to augment data science educators’ capacity to teach their
students the skill of data storytelling.

This project features four phases: 1) Extracting knowledge from data science
professionals through structured interview methods grounded in Evidence-Centered
Design and Cognitive Task Analysis, developing design patterns of key data
storytelling steps and competencies, and engaging postsecondary educators and
students in vetting the concept and design of Story Studio. 2) Iterative
development and small-scale beta testing of Story Studio’s basic architecture
for coaching elementary aspects of data storytelling. 3) Expanding beta testing
to comprise more advanced Story Studio functionalities, namely, intelligent
recommendations and assessments to support students in the story construction
process. 4) Conducting classroom pilot studies of Story Studio in data
science/analytics courses at two campuses and evaluating the new tool’s
effectiveness in improving students’ data storytelling competencies. Research
products about Story Studio will be disseminated through education and outreach
activities such as storytelling workshops on the researchers’ university
campuses, community college partnerships, and teacher training workshops.
Finally, the software, algorithms, and de-identified log data will be shared
through an open-source database, contributing to learning science and analytics
research in data storytelling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.