* 2303109
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Hydrogen-Density Based Laws for Plasticity in Polycrystalline Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Sangid, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2026
* USD 274,960.00

Hydrogen-induced degradation of structural materials is responsible for
unexpected component failures across the aerospace, marine, energy, and
infrastructure sectors. Similarly, concerns over hydrogen-induced embrittlement
are a primary factor hindering the broader adoption of a hydrogen-based fuel
economy. Current efforts to prevent these failures are complicated by challenges
with accurately predicting hydrogen-related damage and its dependence on
hydrogen concentration. This study will use a combined experimental and modeling
approach to address these questions, resulting in new fundamental understanding
of how hydrogen affects material behavior. This research will also benefit the
national welfare in clean energy efforts by enabling the prediction of hydrogen-
induced damage under conditions where hydrogen-assisted fracture is of concern.
Moreover, in addition to training multiple graduate students, this project will
actively engage in educational outreach with middle and high school students
through dedicated events, lectures, and laboratory demonstrations.

The researched study will establish how hydrogen affects plastic damage
accumulation and leverage developed insights to create a hydrogen-sensitive
crystal plasticity framework. First, conventional (mechanical testing) and
advanced (high-energy X-ray diffraction) techniques will be employed to
elucidate the effect of hydrogen concentration on the deformation behavior of
pure single crystal and polycrystal Ni under monotonic and cyclic loading
conditions. Second, this dataset will be leveraged to derive consistent
hydrogen-sensitive laws for crystallographic slip and hardening that incorporate
hydrogen effects on backstress development and dynamic recovery, enabling use
for a wide range of hydrogen concentrations and loading conditions. Third, these
deformation laws will then be integrated into a crystal plasticity framework,
which will undergo validation using both experimental mechanical testing data
and spatial distributions of microstructure-scale elastic strains via electron
backscatter diffraction techniques to demonstrate model efficacy. The researched
study will have broad impact as the hydrogen-informed crystal plasticity
framework will be critical to supporting a hydrogen-based fuel economy.
Additionally, all experimental data from this effort will be made available to
the research community. Middle and high school students will get exposure and
insight into critical issues for hydrogen embrittlement based on interactive
Virtual Labs, case studies, and hands-on laboratory investigations that
illustrate hydrogenâ€™s effect on deformation behavior and potential component
failure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.