* 2303585
* NSF INCLUDES Design &amp; Development Launch Pilots (DDLPs): Engineering Community Inclusion of Individuals with Autism (ECIIA)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Ellie Giles, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,100.00

The Engineering Community Inclusion of Individuals with Autism (ECIIA), an NSF
INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilots project, will employ virtual
reality (VR) technology to engage more high school students with autism in
engineering. ECIIA builds off the NSF-funded Engineering for US All (e4usa)
project, a high school program that expands student and teacher access to
engineering. Inclusive practices are a critical element to ECIIA, and
participants and all who engage in the project will be representative of the
broad spectrum of autism and intersectionality of race, ethnicity, gender
identity, sex, and socioeconomic status. The project will engage Community
Collaborators, including stakeholders such as e4usa high school educators and
students, engineering education and VR researchers, and engineers in industry.
ECIIA will also ensure that individuals with autism serving the role of Autism
Advisor will inform all stages of the project and support Community
Collaborators as they develop a collective commitment to the project and
individualized commitment goals and objectives that will further sustain and
scale ECIIA.

ECIIA will focus on the following research questions: (1) Is virtual reality
(VR) effective in increasing access to engineering education for individuals
with autism?; (2) Does participation in the VR environment and accompanying
support result in the development of engineering identity, engineering self-
efficacy, engineering interest, and an understanding of the engineering design
process?; (3) Does supporting individuals with autism in the VR environment as
Community Collaborators result in increased understanding, and presumed
competence and advocacy for individuals with autism to be included in
engineering industry? What knowledge of autism is needed to be effective?; (4)
Does the project lead Community Collaborators to increase collective and
distributed leadership? Three hands-on activities from the e4usa curriculum will
be developed within a VR environment to provide an authentic and immersive
experience that is responsive to the unique needs of each participant with
autism. Participants will engage in the engineering design process, which will
support the development of engineering identity, self-efficacy, and interest.
The Collective Impact (CI) Framework will be applied to engage diverse
individuals that are committed to addressing complex issues and triggering
change in engineering pathways for this historically excluded population. Both
quantitative and qualitative data will be collected to evaluate participant
engagement, explore the project’s impact on participants’ engineering self-
efficacy, identity, and understanding of the engineering design process, and
determine a change in Community Collaborators. In sum, ECIIA will lead to the
development of VR that is disability-responsive and lay the groundwork for
change by building a network of Community Collaborators to broaden participation
and foster authentic inclusion in the field.

This project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the
Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering
and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate
collaborative infrastructure building to advance and sustain systemic change to
broaden participation in STEM at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.