* 2303712
* Atomistic mechanisms and dynamics of hydrogen-based reduction of iron ores
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Guangwen Zhou, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 04/30/2026
* USD 470,728.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Steel is one of the most important industrial materials, with more than 2 billon
tons produced annually. Its production, however, comes at a steep price for the
environment. Steelmaking accounts for 7-11% of all human-made greenhouse gas
emissions. Facing escalating pressure from governments and investors to reduce
emissions, the steel industry is experimenting with green steel projects that
reduce greenhouse emissions by using hydrogen instead of traditional carbon-
intensive manufacturing. However, fundamental understanding of the chemical
processes that transform Iron oxide into Iron by use of hydrogen is required
before green steel technology can advance. This process is called hydrogen-based
direct reduction. This project uses highly advanced techniques to understand
hydrogen-based direct reduction by acquiring never before seen observations of
the chemical reaction at the level of atoms along various points throughout
time. This project combines these atomistically resolved experiments with
computation in tightly integrated feedback loops, to achieve new real-time
observations which vary both spatially and temporally. As part of this research
program, students at the graduate and undergraduate levels are learning and
using new microscopy, spectroscopy, kinetic measurement and modeling techniques
to work on materials issues that are at the forefront of current energy and
environmental research. Results from this project are also being incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate courses as well as high school outreach
programs.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Although oxide reduction plays a crucial role in many
technologically important processes, a significant portion of current knowledge
is based upon work at the mesoscale that is too coarse to reflect underlying
microscopic details. This project addresses this knowledge gap by elucidating
the atomistic mechanisms underlying the hierarchical interplay of oxide
reduction pathways. By employing a unique combination of in situ experiments and
coordinated theoretical modeling, this project elucidates i) the elemental steps
of H2 adsorption leading to the onset of oxide reduction; ii) microscopic
mechanisms governing the propagation of oxide reduction and microstructure
evolution via multi-interfacial transformations; and iii) atomistic processes
leading to reversible oxidation-reduction cycles due to the countering action of
H2 and gaseous product H2O. Clearly addressing these questions provide essential
insights into reaction active sites, transient states, mass transport
mechanisms, reaction activation energies and reaction pathways. The study
identifies critical structural and chemical parameters for controlling the
efficiency, kinetics and metallic yield, which are leading to more efficient
H2-based direct reduction methods, with potentially high impact on the urgently
needed decarbonization of the steel industry. The sum of experimental and
theoretical efforts also provide fundamental knowledge for construction of
predictive and hierarchical multi-scale models of oxide reduction that naturally
link different reaction stages, relate the atomistic processes with the
macroscale behavior, and open the door to tailoring gas-solid reactions via
controlling underlying atomic processes. Such fundamental insights are shedding
light on other fields such as corrosion, electrochemistry and catalysis, where
the prototypes of basic processes also occur.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.