* 2303933
* Super-Resolution Imaging of Surface Adsorption on Single Nanoparticles for Electrochemical Dechlorination
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Peng Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2026
* USD 435,381.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Peng Chen of Cornell University
is applying and developing high-resolution imaging approaches to quantify the
adsorption behaviors on single palladium (Pd) nanoparticles of molecules
involved in electrochemical hydrodechlorination reactions as well as to
determine their relations to the electrochemical potential and the original Pd
nanoparticle surface structure and size. Chlorinated hydrocarbons are
extensively used in industrial and agricultural applications, but they are also
environmental hazards. Dechlorination is a key detoxification process, for which
electrochemical hydrodechlorination is more efficient and environmentally
friendly by using electric power to drive reactions for which Pd nanoparticles
are promising electrocatalysts. The research in the Chen group can generate
fundamental knowledge that can help improve electrochemical dechlorination of
chlorophenols, a large class of pollutants in aquatic environments, thus
positively impact societal well-being. The imaging approaches are also generally
applicable and thus can broadly impact measurement science in nanoscale
materials science.

For surface reactions, including electrocatalysis on nanoparticles, molecule-
surface interactions are crucial. For Pd nanoparticle-catalyzed electrochemical
hydrodechlorination little is known, however, about the quantitative adsorption
behaviors of the chlorophenols and the product phenol on Pd surfaces, which are
key steps in the electrocatalytic cycle. It is generally challenging to quantify
adsorption under electrochemical reaction conditions, especially on
nanoparticles, whose individuals can differ markedly in size and shape. The
proposed research can provide quantitative insights into the energetics of
reactant/intermediate/product adsorption on Pd nanoparticles at various applied
electrochemical potentials and how they are related to the initial surface facet
structure and particle size. This knowledge can guide the efforts of using
dynamic electrochemical potential modulation to manipulate molecular adsorption
on Pd-based electrocatalysts to improve the efficiency of electrochemical
hydrodechlorination. The graduate student working on this project is gaining
experience at the forefront area of single-molecule catalysis as well as in the
development of novel techniques for super-resolution imaging of nonfluorescent
processes by optical microscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.