* 2303575
* SCC-PG: Towards A User-Centered and Equity-Aware Micromobility Sharing Co-Design Network to Interact with A Distressed Municipality
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Chuanrong Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this Smart and Connected Communities Planning Grant (SCC-PG)
project is to explore the use of micromobility resources as an affordable and
flexible micro-mobility solution to connect riders with employment and other
life-essential needs. It envisions a dockless electric scooter sharing program
that helps alleviate mobility inequality prevalent in distressed neighborhoods
of Hartford, Connecticut. Key research questions are 1) how low-income riders
have been served by existing resources and infrastructures; and 2) how these
riders would respond to the new interactive, user-centered program. The team
proposes conducting big mobility data analysis and engages both current and
potential electric scooter riders, service providers, government policymakers,
and other stakeholders to form a community-driven planning roundtable. The
project outcomes are applicable to other emerging micromobility systems and
similar municipalities at various scales and locations. Students from
underrepresented groups are recruited and trained.

This project reveals essential geospatial, infrastructural, socioeconomic, and
policy factors to inform the design and distribution of micromobility resources.
Through a case study in Hartford, Connecticut, the research team works with the
service provider, civic partners, and rider community to gather their inputs on
and co-design an equity-aware micromobility sharing program. The findings and
techniques support the deployment of future micromobility systems in low-
resourced or marginalized communities with mobility challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.