* 2303831
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: Our Galaxy's Formation: Decoding the Clues Concealed in its Center
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Madeline Lucey, Lucey, Madeline
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Madeline Lucey is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at the University of Pennsylvania. Lucey
will use large spectroscopic surveys and machine learning to study the
chemistry, and movement of stars in the inner regions of our Galaxy. Results
from this work will illuminate the major physical processes driving the
formation and evolution of our Galaxy. For the educational component of this
project, Lucey will mentor undergraduate students in related research projects,
run a book club in the physics department focused on equity in science
education, and perform outreach activities through Philadelphia's Astronomy on
Tap chapter.

This research project will use spectroscopic data of millions of stars to better
understand the chemical and dynamical structure of the inner Galaxy, while
making use of cosmological zoom-in simulations to test how those structures are
impacted by the processes of Galaxy formation. For the first part of this
project, Lucey will investigate the relation between chemistry and dynamics in
the pressure-supported inner Galactic halo in order to illuminate the relative
roles of hierarchical and secular evolution in the Galaxy's early formation
history. For the second part, Lucey will study the rotation-supported Galactic
bar by determining the chemical distributions of the bar orbit families in order
to trace the bar's formation history.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.