* 2303654
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Radar Meteorology Instruction with an Open, Flexible, Online Course
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Andrea Smith, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2028
* USD 326,956.00

A free, online, customizable, college-level course in Radar Meteorology will be
created with this award. This project aims to educate the general public,
professional partners, and students about the uses, applications, and
limitations of weather radars. Data from public and private weather radars are
being used in everyday decision making at local, regional, and national levels,
including in emergency response situations such as tornadoes and flash floods.
However, not all weather radars have the same attributes, capabilities, or data
quality. If weather radar data is used inappropriately, it can potentially
jeopardize public safety. To optimize the use of radar in decision making, it is
critical that all end users of weather radar data have access to high-quality
instructional material explaining the physical meaning, accurate interpretation,
and limitations of radar products. Absent access to such open educational
materials, the quality of radar meteorology education will remain uneven,
disadvantaging those learners who may not have access to expensive software and
textbooks. The Radar Meteorology course will be published as a series of lessons
on the COMET Meteorology Education (MetEd) web site, which already hosts
hundreds of free atmospheric science and geoscience lessons. The radar
meteorology lessons will be designed to meet the needs of diverse users with
different needs and ability levels, but also comprehensive and detailed enough
to incorporate into university-level instruction. Additionally, the lessons will
incorporate multimedia graphics and virtual reality (VR) renderings, allowing
users to connect radar-sensed variables to atmospheric processes and properties.
All media assets will be openly downloadable and reusable. This online,
multimedia approach will make radar meteorology education broadly accessible to
diverse users, increase public knowledge about the capabilities and limitations
of weather radar data, and inform decision makers in the use of radar. This
project aligns with NSF’s missions to support education and broaden
participation in science to diverse learners. Comprising a series of online
lessons at the undergraduate level, this multimedia, interactive course will be
created through a collaboration between Purdue University and the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research's COMET program. The course will exist on
COMET’s Meteorology Education (MetEd) website and will prepare meteorology
students, professional partners, and the general public to understand and apply
polarimetric weather radar products, as well as novel radar system architectures
(such as phased array radar) that they are likely to encounter in the future.
The lessons will cover topics including polarimetric electromagnetic scattering,
signal processing, physical interpretation of weather radar variables, and real-
world applications of weather radar and its data, among other topics. A case
study gallery will include examples from a variety of weather radars observing
many atmospheric phenomena. This gallery will include examples from the National
Weather Service operational radars (WSR-88D), Purdue University’s X-band weather
radar (XTRRA), and experimental/field data from the National Center for
Atmospheric Science’s Earth Observing Laboratory’s archive, extending the
longevity of these assets. Additionally, open-source software-based examples
will instruct users on the interrogation and analysis of weather radar data. The
online course will expand beyond the traditional textbook-based style of
teaching radar meteorology to include interactive, multimedia, and programming
demonstrations. Lessons will be developed following COMET's formal design and
development process. COMET will define relevant learning outcomes and objectives
based on the science content and survey results and choose an effective
instructional approach and design paradigm. The effectiveness of these lessons
through the use of pre- and post-course assessments, completion rates, and
access metrics (automatically collected by COMET). An advisory board and student
user testing participants will review lessons.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.