* 2303857
* Physical and chemical cues synergistically direct collective cell migration
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michelle Starz-Gaiano, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Cell migration is required for animals, including humans, to develop normally
and is essential for functions including immune response and wound healing. This
process is highly conserved and controlled by various signals that direct cells
to move to the correct places. However, it is not understood how these cues from
the cellâ€™s environment are changed in complex and dynamic tissues as they
develop. It is known that migratory cells behave differently in different
contexts, but not known how those cells interpret physical cues versus chemical
cues or how they integrate these sets of information. This project takes
advantages of interdisciplinary approaches combining the well-characterized cell
biology and genetics of fruit flies and mathematical modeling. These systems
will be used to ask how chemical and physical cues are combined to result in
accurate cell migration. This research will be complemented with ongoing,
strategic efforts to broaden and improve research training and biology
education. This includes efforts to mentor and train undergraduate and graduate
students in research, analysis, and interpretation; expand participation of
historically underrepresented individuals in scientific careers; strengthen the
quantitative reasoning skills of undergraduates, as part of the NSF-Improving
Undergraduate Science Education (IUSE) initiative, in large classes; improve
upper-level courses and research training through implementation of best-
practices in pedagogy and mentoring; and partner with scientific community
outreach programs. Thus, the project will advance our understanding of
developmental biology while providing cutting-edge education and new
opportunities for people interested in science.

This project utilizes molecular, genetic, imaging and modeling approaches to
examine how cells interpret a combination of physical and chemical information
to migrate correctly. It is not well understood how cells sense small
differences in concentrations of chemical cues to orient themselves in a
chemoattractant gradient, or how this signaling works accurately as tissues grow
and remodel. In addition, how cells mechanistically respond to the physical
characteristics of the substrates along which they move is not well established.
Moreover, the impact that physical structure has on chemical cue distribution in
a heterogenous tissue is not well characterized. In cases when clusters of cells
move together, it is also unclear how they communicate spatial information to
each other as they move. This work will address these questions through the
characterization of a cluster of motile cells, called border cells, that migrate
between germline cells in response to receptor tyrosine kinase signaling during
Drosophila oogenesis. This research aims aim to identify the relationship
between changes in the migratory behavior of border cells and the varied
physical structures they encounter while moving through the egg chamber;
determine the distribution of active chemoattractants in egg chambers and the
physical and chemical components that govern this pattern; and uncover the
dynamics of guidance receptor signaling within a motile cell cluster that
mediate concentration-dependent migratory behaviors. The results will provide
insight into general mechanisms of developmental signaling, directed cell
motility, and coordinated changes of cell behaviors in vivo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.