* 2303486
* Warm Pliocene mid-latitude upwelling sites, with implications to future southwestern North America aridity under climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 449,535.00

The early Pliocene (5.3–3 million years ago) was the most recent naturally-
occurring warm period. It had an estimated carbon dioxide concentration of 400
ppm, similar to the level reached at present due to anthropogenic emissions. The
Pliocene climate is often held up as a past analog for 21st-century climate.
Today, cold deep water rises to the surface in the California coastal ocean
upwelling system. Climate reconstructions suggest that the surface water in that
region during the Pliocene was dramatically warmer than at present—by some 9
degrees C. Other evidence suggests that southwestern North America was very wet
at that time, also in contrast to today. Those Pliocene reconstructions differ
significantly from Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projections
of near future climate. The IPCC projections suggest that parts of the
southwestern USA will get drier, not wetter. The IPCC projections of the
California upwelling system are very uncertain. The proposed research will
examine a possible explanation of the Pliocene observations. It will lead to a
better understanding of possible future changes to mid-latitude coastal
upwelling systems. Such systems are critical to the fishing industry. The study
will also lead to a better understanding of our ability to predict the aridity
of southwest North America in a warmer climate. The project Broader Impacts
include training of a graduate student, undergraduate students doing term and
summer research projects, and high school student summer interns. The Broader
Impacts activities will also include outreach to STEM college students via an
open course on the science of climate change.

The planned work will examine a proposed feedback that may explain these past
climate observations. In this feedback, weaker upwelling leads to a warmer
upwelling-region sea-surface temperature (SST), which enhances precipitation
over the adjacent land and creates wetlands there, and then the existence of
wetlands weakens the upwelling-favorable coastal winds and, therefore, further
weakens the upwelling itself. The significance of the proposed study arises from
the exploration of a novel feedback with important socioeconomic consequences.
This work will study some related fundamental aspects of ocean upwelling systems
and use a hierarchy of ocean and atmospheric models that will provide the
opportunity to test the proposed feedback mechanism and study its consequences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.