* 2303574
* Electrowetting Effects and Nanoscale Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Paul Bohn and his group at the University of Notre Dame
are studying the design, behavior, and possible applications of new artificial
materials inspired by Nature, particularly architectures consisting of layered
films where each layer has a different pore structure. The work is motivated by
applications ranging from molecular separations to catalysis. For example, these
materials can selectively remove unwanted components in applications such as
beverage clarification, clearance of pathogens from blood, and in controlled
release of drugs and highly selective sensors for disease-specific biomarkers.
These experiments will establish the know-how to control the wetting
characteristics of the liquid on the wall, thereby making it possible to use
advanced fluid control concepts in technological applications, such as
separations in complex fluids. The work is also coupled with the development of
new multi-university programs that cut across disciplinary lines and address
specific NSF goals, including the development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce, increased
partnerships between academia and industry, and increased economic
competitiveness.

The project addresses transport in nanoscale confined volumes, which highlights
a core set of scientific phenomena - wetting/dewetting, hydrophobicity,
stochastic fluctuations in fluid flow, electrokinetics, etc. - that exhibit
fundamentally distinct behavior on the nanoscale. The research is organized
around two overarching objectives: developing single molecule-based
electrokinetic and spectro-electrochemical probes of transport in one-
dimensional (1D) nanostructures; and applying these tools to explore the
interaction between electrically-modulated wetting phenomena and nanoconfined
flows. The first objective will be addressed by fabricating structures to access
transport in the ultralow Pecl√©t number regime; developing correlative and
frequency-domain measurements to characterize fluid transport and fluid-wall
interactions; and implementing these measurement strategies to study
electrokinetic flows in confined 1D nanocylinder and nanochannel flow formats.
The second objective will be pursued by developing nanoconfined architectures
that support electrowetting phenomena; and applying electrowetting principles to
control nanoconfined flow in both model systems and in hierarchically-organized,
multi-lamellar structures with depth-varying porosity. These experiments will
establish the conditions necessary to control the wetting characteristics of the
solvent-wall system. Studies will be implemented in a well-defined water-organic
solvent interface that can support quantitative electrochemical and
spectroscopic experiments capable of reporting on the state of the aqueous-
organic interfaces as a function of applied potential. These studies are
directed at establishing the design rules, structural motifs, and operating
principles needed to achieve a high level of control over molecular transport in
nano-confined volumes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.