* 2303870
* RAPID: Monitoring postfire geomorphic response on humid slopes of the North Cascade Range, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2024
* USD 49,443.00

Recent hot and dry summers have worsened wildfires in the western United States,
broadening their impact well into the cool and wet slopes of coastal Pacific
Northwest (PNW) that have rarely been burnt. Growing evidence suggests that
drier climatic conditions and increasing wildfire size and severity could make
cool and wet steep slopes of the PNW more susceptible to runoff-driven debris
flows, landslides and rockslides. Because wildfires have been rare in coastal
slopes, there is limited understanding with respect to their postfire geomorphic
response. A recently burned Bolt Creek Fire within the North Cascade Range of
Washington state produced high soil burn severity on steep forested slopes,
where landslides and debris flows are dominant forms of geomorphic transport.
Steep slopes and evidence of soil hydrophobicity present a perishable data
collection opportunity for anticipated postfire runoff and geomorphic response
during the fall and early winter, when most of the extreme precipitation events
fall in the region. Runoff-driven debris flows are usually expected before soil
infiltration rates improve with soil wetting and vegetation growth. This team
will collect geospatial data using ground- and UAV-based lidar and aerial
imagery, soil water repellency and vegetation states as soon as possible to
establish baseline conditions, and following major storms that trigger
geomorphic response. Digital Elevation Model (DEM) time series will be created
to map erosion and deposition patterns using DEM differencing, and to test and
refine existing debris flow models and data-driven landslide hazard mapping
methods. The Washington Department of Natural Resources Landslide Hazard Program
will collaborate with them in data collection and analysis. A female
undergraduate student will participate in the surveys and data analysis, be
trained by RAPID facility staff, develop skills for data post-processing and
participate in DEM differencing and erosion mapping analysis.

Our current conceptual understanding of postfire landscape response suggests
that, immediately after a wildfire, impacted areas are at high risk for flash
floods and runoff-initiated debris flows. This high risk comes from progressive
sediment bulking caused by infiltration-excess runoff on water-repellent
hillslopes. While infiltration excess runoff-driven debris flow risk subsides
within months as soil infiltration capacity recovers, saturation-driven
landslide risk peaks within several years due to decaying tree roots losing
tensile strength to hold soils. This conceptual framework, as well as early
warning models for postfire debris flows have been largely developed and tested
on observations and data acquired from inland regions of the Western United
States and Southern California, where fires are more frequent and climate is
drier than the coastal PNW. While runoff-driven debris flow events were rarely
reported in the past, more recent evidence suggests growing risk for such events
in the coastal PNW. The data set this team will develop will provide a rare
opportunity to observe the nature of postfire geomorphic in coastal PNW. If
runoff-driven debris flows occur, the data will provide the unique opportunity
to study their initiation and transport mechanics, as inferred from topographic
change and the characterization of the surrounding soil and vegetation. The data
will also provide initial topographic conditions for studying landslides, which
are anticipated within several years of root decay, but may in fact happen
during the observational period under extreme rainfall. Rockfall observations in
relation to vegetation and precipitation have been rare and their observations
will contribute to the refinement of existing rockfall models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.