* 2303493
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing forest ecosystem management and forest product innovations (NH, ME, VT)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Joseph Short, Northern Forest Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 998,056.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on a future where
advanced forest ecosystem management and forest product innovation unlock new
opportunities in a circular bioeconomy for northern New England. Through a
strategic regional partnership, this Development Award will enable the team to
leverage knowledge in precision forest management, traditional wood products,
and bio-based materials to complement past successes and infrastructure
investments with emerging forest-based sustainable products and technologies.
The Development Award will unify capacities within the industry, institutions of
higher education, workforce development, and the public sector into a regional
innovation ecosystem that matches the multi-state scale and diversity of the
Northern Forest ecosystem. Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont are three of the
most forested states in the US, with economies and communities tightly linked to
their natural resource base. Globalization has wrought fundamental changes in
the forest sector. The impacts of climate change are stressing the forest and
highlighting the critical role that a healthy Northern Forest and the wood-based
products that come from it play in storing and sequestering carbon. From these
complex challenges comes a critical opportunity: to re-tool and reinvigorate a
forest-based economy to contribute to US competitiveness while building rural
community equity and strengthening economic development.

Three specific objectives will be addressed during the Development Award: (1)
accelerate advances in forest resource management, wood products manufacturing,
and emerging forest-based technologies; (2) implement best practices for
intelligent utilization of Northern Forest resources for economic, ecological,
and climate benefit; and (3) improve workforce skills and participation in
forest-based careers, including expanded participation by historically
underrepresented populations. Three focus areas include (1) precision forestry
for climate-smart sustainable management and operations (e.g., advanced forest
inventory, carbon accounting, geospatial assessment); (2) conventional forest
products (e.g., dimensional and pattern solid sawn lumber, wood composite
panels, pulp and paper, bioenergy); and (3) emerging forest bioproducts (e.g.,
nanocellulose, forest biochemicals, mass timber, additive manufacturing).
Outcomes will include a strategic roadmap that provides: (1) identification of
the existing and needed research & development processes, infrastructure, and
practices for building a thriving regional innovation engine; (2) facilitated
collaboration to create a commercialization and innovation strategy based on
Northern Forest assets and capabilities; (3) development of networks, resources,
and pathways for integration of commercialization and innovation framing of
research, education, and workforce development; and (4) preparation for a full
NSF Engine Award.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.