* 2303577
* A Model-Data Approach to Better Understand Paleoclimate Records of Stable Water Isotopes in High-Elevation, Lower-Latitude Glaciers
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhengyu Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 892,703.00

This project generally aims to develop a framework using modeling approaches to
interpret climate variability from ice core delta Oxygen-18 in low-latitude and
tropical glaciers. Specifically, the researchers will examine water isotopes not
only in surface precipitation, but also in relationship with the vapor delta
Oxygen-18 throughout the atmospheric column. The key regions of investigation
are the tropical Andes and northwestern Tibetan Plateau where isotopic
observations of ice from the tropical Andes are presumed a proxy for atmospheric
temperature while the Tibetan Plateau evidences a mixture of temperature and
precipitation signals.

Vapor delta oxygen-18 is studied and used most extensively to represent
temperature variability in the polar regions or precipitation variability in
cave speleothems in low-land tropical monsoon regions. Its climatic
interpretation in ice cores from mid-latitude and tropical mountain glaciers,
however, is more poorly understood, raising a question for the paleoclimate
community: Is vapor delta oxygen-18 from ice cores recovered from tropical and
mid-latitude glaciers a proxy for temperature or precipitation?

Furthermore, to facilitate comparisons of ice core records and simultaneously
reduce model bias due to unrealistically low model topography, the researchers
will perform high-resolution model experiments with model topography elevated to
the actual altitude of the ice cores. The goal of the model-data integration
exercise is to improve understanding of how to interpret climate variability
from ice core delta Oxygen-18 precipitation in low-latitude and tropical
glaciers.

The potential Broader Impacts include support of a post-doctoral scholar and
doctoral student, annual outreach activities to the public through the Byrd
Polar Climate Research Center, and, importantly, addressing a knotty climate
science interpretation issue.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.