* 2303902
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: All Shook Up: Understanding the Chemistry, Dynamics, and Kinematics of the Diffuse Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Rybarczyk, Rybarczyk, Daniel R
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 06/30/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Daniel Rybarczyk is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Wisconsin–Madison. Rybarczyk will use radio/millimeter observations of atomic
hydrogen (HI) and various molecular species to study the role of shocks in
shaping the structure and chemistry of the diffuse interstellar medium (ISM).
Rybarczyk will measure the abundances of these key ISM constituents in regions
where molecule formation is just getting under way to understand the first steps
in the process of molecular cloud formation, which plays a critical role in star
formation and galaxy evolution. Rybarczyk will also conduct an outreach program
hosting public school visits (with a focus on schools with students from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM fields) to the University of
Wisconsin–Madison's Astronomy Department, including its planetarium and Washburn
Observatory.

Recent work has argued that shocks are crucial to the physical and chemical
evolution of the diffuse ISM, playing a vital role in the very first stages of
the star formation process, but direct observations of shock tracers in these
environments are rare. Rybarczyk will roughly triple the existing sample of
diffuse sightlines with observations of the molecule SiO — generally believed to
be an unambiguous tracer of interstellar shocks — in the diffuse ISM, targeting
directions where shock chemistry is implied by indirect tracers or filamentary
structure. These measurements and a comparison to non-equilibrium chemical model
predictions will test our understanding of shock chemistry in a low-density
regime largely unexplored in the existing literature. Further observations of
the molecules HCO+ and CO will complement the SiO measurements, probing the
molecular gas content of the diffuse ISM and testing our ability to detect
diffuse molecular gas using different tracers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.