* 2303284
* SCC-PG: Building a smart and connected rural community for improved healthcare access through the deployment of integrated mobility solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Steven Jones, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Various programs have been established to extend and promote healthcare services
to low-income rural Americans facing financial barriers. These programs offer a
wide range of healthcare services at little to no cost. However, despite the
availability of these services, challenges arise in bringing patients to
healthcare providers in a timely manner for healthcare. Many individuals in
rural communities are unable to receive recommended services, primarily due to
transportation challenges. These challenges, in turn, significantly impact their
care-seeking behaviors and hinder their access to timely healthcare. Patient no-
shows not only delay diagnoses but also result in lost revenue for healthcare
providers due to under-utilization of medical facilities and staff resources. To
address these issues, the ongoing mobility transformation fueled by on-demand
services may offer affordable transportation solutions to improve healthcare
access and reshape care-seeking behaviors among people in under-served
communities. This project focuses on West Alabama, specifically the health-
disadvantaged Black Belt region, to investigate preventive care-seeking
behaviors. The primary objective is to explore the impacts of on-demand mobility
services on these behaviors among under-served individuals.

This project will create a Smart and Connected Rural Community (SCRC) comprised
of interdisciplinary researchers, healthcare providers, transportation
providers, and community stakeholders to promote preventive healthcare in rural
communities through deploying on-demand mobility services. This project will
conduct integrative research with objectives covering both technological and
social science dimensions: 1) Technological Dimension – By partnering with local
health providers and transportation providers, this project will develop a Smart
Health and Mobility System (SHMS) to leverage and coordinate existing
transportation resources within the study area to offer on-demand mobility
services to patients and doctors/nurses in need of traveling between medical
facilities and patient homes; 2) Social Science Dimension – Through community
engagement activities (e.g., meetings, focus groups, and surveys), this project
will explore the impacts of on-demand mobility services on preventive care-
seeking behaviors among uninsured or under-insured patients. This project will
significantly advance the knowledge by exploring the impacts of mobility
services on care-seeking behaviors in disadvantaged rural communities. The
knowledge will aid healthcare providers and stakeholders make informed decisions
to leverage emerging mobility services to deliver cost-effective healthcare
services and improve quality of life in disadvantaged rural communities. The
project is expected to set the groundwork for implementing on-demand mobility
solutions to enhance healthcare in these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.