* 2303983
* SHF:Small: Extensible Models and Proofs via Family Polymorphism
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Nada Amin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2025
* USD 396,914.00

Proof assistants enable interactive development of models and their machine-
checked proofs. These developments provide guarantees that a model has certain
properties, such as security, correctness, and soundness of systems. They are
also used as a teaching vehicle, for example in classes on the semantics of
programming languages. Unfortunately, proof assistants such as Coq lack a
mechanism for extensible design of models and proofs. Today, when a model and
its corresponding proofs need to be extended, developers typically copy-paste
the development and manually propagate the changes. This leads to a
proliferation of developments that are not linked together and that duplicate
one another, obscuring concepts. This project brings built-in extensibility of
models and proofs to proof assistants. In particular, it prioritizes code reuse,
code modularity, and soundness of extensions. The project also aims to make
extensibility intuitive for the user and a minimal disruption to the user
experience. The project’s novelties are the built-in nature of extensibility —
since related solutions are largely add-ons or plug-ins, as well as the use of
family polymorphism to support extensibility of proofs. The project’s impacts
are the rapid, incremental verification of evolving systems, code modularity and
reuse in the proof setting, and lowered barriers to entry for beginners in
verification.

This project brings family polymorphism to the world of proof assistants. Family
polymorphism is a mechanism in the theory of programming languages by which
families of features can be inherited integrally. Families provide
organizational benefits, such as code modularity, as well as extensibility
benefits, such as type safety of code in the presence of inheritance. Family
polymorphism will support extensible designs of models and proofs, facilitating
code reuse and proof reuse. Furthermore, it will be possible to specify and
prove family-polymorphic guarantees for any sound family derived from a base
family. A derived family is sound if it satisfies all the proof obligations
inherited from a base family. Family polymorphism supports both a “vertical”
extension, where features are extended in a single hierarchy, as well as
“horizontal” extension, where features are combined independently. The latter is
achieved with traits and mixin composition in systems such as Scala. Since
nested family polymorphism enables the encoding of mixin composition, the same
mechanism for both vertical and horizontal extensions can be used. This project
uses family polymorphism as a unifying mechanism for its set of extensibility
strategies for the proof setting. The challenges include integrating family
polymorphism and extensibility strategies with the dependent type theory of
proof assistants, finding strategies to reuse proofs as well as models, and
making the integration seamless for practical use. Informed by these challenges,
the project researches three main areas related to modular reuse in proof
assistants: (1) meta-theories, (2) strategies, and (3) implementations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.