* 2303495
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing biosecurity, biodefense, and biomanufacturing technologies (KS, MO)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Beth Montelone, Kansas State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Xueying Han
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,990.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on building a
robust network of research institutions, secondary and post-secondary
educational institutions, non-profits, economic development agencies, and for-
profit industries that together constitute an emerging focus of economic
development centered around biosecurity, biodefense, and advanced
biomanufacturing in the northeast and central Kansas and northwest Missouri
region. This geographic entity is home to anchor players in this domain,
including Kansas State University, the University of Kansas, the National Bio-
and Agro-defense Facility, the Kansas City Animal Health Corridor, BioKansas,
BioNexus KC, NetWork Kansas, numerous companies, and others. Many of the
proposed participants have already come together in a variety of interactions
that will support the planned Engine development. The Kansas City Animal Health
Corridor serves as an established model for building a cluster of private, non-
profit, educational, and government entities that support research, education,
training, and commercialization in the general area of biosecurity and
biodefense.

Kansas State University and University of Kansas researchers have significant
strengths in bioprocessing, biomanufacturing, biosecurity, biodefense, and
value-added agriculture product development. Use-inspired challenges addressed
by the engine include diagnostics/prophylactics-therapeutics/vaccines for
diseases that threaten animal and plant agriculture as well as zoonotic
diseases; disease mitigation and surveillance of vectors and vector-borne
disease; alternatives to address antimicrobial resistance; improvements to
value-added agriculture and biomanufacturing processes; and animal feed. The
proposed strategy will create a continuum of capacity for discovery,
commercialization, and manufacturing to ensure that technologic advancements
achieve practical application and promote economic development. A future NSF
Engine would streamline the process of discovery to commercialization for
industry partners. The critical mass of talent and infrastructure in the region
will attract companies, entrepreneurs, and venture capitalists. By enhancing
existing programs and building partnerships, the Development Award will increase
the transition velocity of transformational products into the marketplace;
create tangible economic value by addressing complex challenges and advancing
the economic growth interests of biosecurity and biodefense companies; enhance
appropriate economic return and build ecosystem sustainability through
university-industry partnerships; advance entrepreneurial activity growth; and
attract, educate and retain diverse, skilled, and adaptable talent to meet
regional workforce needs. The Development Award will enable the project team to
prepare for an NSF Engine by beginning to build the infrastructure needed for a
full Engine. This includes teams dedicated to use-inspired research, economic
development, corporate attraction, growing small businesses, workforce
development, and inclusion of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility in
all aspects of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.