* 2303588
* Workshop Proposal: Enabling interdisciplinary and collaborative science through integration of biological and environmental data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Barbara Thiers, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 99,963.00

During the last two decades, a wealth of data on biodiversity and associated
environments have been mobilized in digital form. Collectively, these data
provide a powerful resource that when curated and integrated with intention can
provide critical information to inform emerging complex global biological,
environmental, and public health challenges. Tapping the vast potential of
specimen, observation and environmental data requires us to integrate diverse
and complex datasets, connect domain-specific communities, and bridge
discipline-specific social norms and data infrastructures. Linking data and
their respective communities are critical next steps to creating the accessible
and enriched data source needed to empower broad integrative biological research
and education. An integrated and open data network will enable researchers to
understand the rules that govern how organisms grow, diversify, interact with
one another, and impact their environment, and how environmental change and
human activities affect those rules. This project will convene stakeholders from
across the spectrum of biodiversity, ecological, and environmental data
providers, curators, and users with the goal of initiating a collaborative and
accessible partnership towards an integrative and expanded data network. Virtual
discussions will focus on advancing data culture and infrastructure that meets
emerging needs in research, education, conservation, biosecurity, and the
bioeconomy. This project will inform the next steps of data integration with
attention to supporting formal and informal education, including engagement
through outreach and community science, and providing new opportunities and
access for individuals from historically underrepresented groups to engage in
biodiversity research and education.

Employing principles of open and team science, the Biodiversity Collections
Network (BCoN), in collaboration with the American Institute of Biological
Sciences, will partner with representatives from various data domains to plan a
series of stakeholder listening sessions aimed at building collaborations among
disparate data communities – highlighting an iterative process of building a
larger, interdisciplinary community from within. Community building and
stakeholder engagement will target graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
early career professionals from traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM.
Six emerging career professionals will be mentored with opportunities to engage
in leadership and facilitation, gaining experience conducting and moderating
interdisciplinary collaborative discussions. Listening session discussions will
build on and bridge the Extended Specimen Network (ESN) vision, championed by
BCoN, with other existing conceptual frameworks for data integration and
application. Representatives from federal agencies, the ecological data
community, climate and environmental data community, genetic data community, the
biodiversity informatics community, the One Health community, international
initiatives, and other stakeholder groups will subsequently be invited to
participate in a more expansive, interdisciplinary online workshop. The planned
engagements will connect siloed biological and environmental data communities
and augment existing initiatives to develop a consensus on the next steps for
building an integrated, open, FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
Reusable) data network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.