* 2303756
* POSE: Phase II:  Establishing an Open-Source Ecosystem for Tethys Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Daniel Ames, AQUAVEO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,436,017.00

Tethys Platform is a web framework that facilitates the development, deployment,
and hosting of communication tools that help scientists, engineers, decision
makers, first responders, and the general public engage with scientific data in
a meaningful way. The vision of a Tethys Platform OSE is to enable scientists to
better communicate the latest science and thereby enable outcomes like more
informed response in the face of a natural disaster, better policies for
sustaining our environment, better management of Earth’s resources, and
increased public literacy and understanding of the complex processes and
interactions at play in the natural environment. Already, the seeds for a global
OSE have been sown by various organizations around the world that rely on the
use of Tethys Platform. Many of the tools developed by these organizations using
Tethys Platform are acting as a global leveler, providing access to science and
data from premier organizations to other organizations in countries where there
is a dearth of such scientific research and data. The communication channel
created by these tools often leads to subsequent collaborations between the
participating organizations. An example of the impact of these collaborations is
the resulting knowledge transfer between the Regional Centre for Mapping of
Resources for Development (RCMRD) in Eastern Africa and The International Centre
for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) in Nepal, which led to the
development of a flood early warning system in Malawi that was formed around
tools developed with Tethys Platform and helped to minimize the impact of
flooding that occurred due to Cyclone Ana in early 2022. This project seeks to
maximize this type of results by cultivating and growing the Tethys Platform
community, fostering an inclusive, diverse OSE community, and providing learning
and growth opportunities in STEM.

The work that will be carried out in this POSE project is organized into four
high level activities: Form a Managing Organization, Build the User Community,
Build the Contributor Base, and Improve the Tethys Platform Distribution. The
first activity will involve establishing a non-profit managing organization for
the Tethys Platform OSE, codenamed Tethys Software Foundation (TSF). The mission
of the TSF will be to promote better communication of the geosciences through
the use and advancement of Tethys Platform, facilitate contribution to the
Tethys Platform codebase, maintain stewardship of the intellectual property and
trademarks of Tethys Platform on behalf of the community, and grow the already
diverse international community of Tethys app developers and celebrate their
work. The second activity will be focused on growing the user community and
expanding it to include scientists in more geoscience disciplines. This will be
done through a number of discovery and promotion activities including
establishing domain working groups to identify development and other needs
specific to each discipline, promoting Tethys Platform at conferences, improving
educational curriculum, and holding regular Tethys user conferences. The third
activity will involve growing the contributor base. This activity will encourage
more Tethys app developers to become contributors to the platform in a pay-it-
forward fashion and develop contributor training resources with a formal
onboarding process for would-be contributors. The fourth activity will focus on
improving quality control, security, and privacy aspects of the Tethys Platform
distribution. Examples of specific tasks that will be undertaken include
expanding test code coverage and ensuring testing is performed on all major
platforms; implementing security scanning of the repository, dependencies, and
artifacts; addressing data privacy issues; and establishing formal mechanisms
for giving credit to the external intellectual content and data contributors.

Website: http://www.tethysplatform.org/ Source Code:
https://github.com/tethysplatform/tethys Documentation:
http://docs.tethysplatform.org/en/stable/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.