* 2303988
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Propulsion
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Ankur Bhatt, HOVERR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR project is to develop and
commercialize a propellant-less electric vacuum thrusterâ€”a novel and cleaner
method for object propulsion. This inventive thruster employs electronic
components and sources to move objects, eliminating the need for traditional
fuel. Successfully achieving these goals could potentially bring about a
revolutionary transformation in the transportation industry. For example, a
fully developed thruster could be used as a boost-on device for a wide range of
current motors to increase efficiency (reduce energy consumption) while
increasing range. Beyond developing the proposed thruster device into a usable
product, this project also is expected to deepen the scientific understanding of
its operational principles. All these enhancements hold the promise of enabling
the device to move heavier objects with reduced energy consumption. Due to its
suitability for use both on Earth and in space, a developed thruster product has
the potential to improve the efficiency of all modes of transportation,
including automobiles, boats, and spacecrafts.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and optimize the proposed electric
thruster device, an exciting new way to move objects. Currently, objects and
vehicles are moved using fuel-based propulsion technologies. This, coupled with
the low efficiency of hydrocarbon and electric motor systems, is bad for the
environment and not sustainable. This proposed product and technology platform
presents a new type of cleaner propulsion technology. The proposed electric
drive works by accelerating electrons between closely spaced electrodes in a
capacitor using electric fields generated by a battery. The accelerated
electrons form a Rindler horizon (Unruh Effect) behind the cathode of the
capacitor which alter vacuum fluctuations within this zone. This modification
creates a force that propels objects forward. The thruster device is expected to
be cost-effective and lightweight, and initial experimental results appear
promising. The project's goals are to (1) develop and improve a prototype using
state-of-the-art materials and several design refinements, and (2) to confirm
the technology's performance through third party validation. Demonstrating the
thruster device's reliability and scalability is expected to provide a path to
commercialization. Through development, optimization and validation, this
project not only pushes the boundaries of propulsion through development of a
usable product but also presents an exciting path as a platform technology with
future potential for a wide range of practical, efficient, and environmental
transportation solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.