* 2303099
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing semi-conductor technologies in the Northwest (OR, ID, WA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Gregory Herman, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Geoffrey Brown
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Engine Development Award is focused on eventually creating a
semiconductor ecosystem in the northwest region of the United States. The
project's region of service includes Oregon, Idaho, and Washington, and partner
institutions include semiconductor manufacturing and supply chain industries,
national laboratories, state and local governments, and educational
institutions. The semiconductor ecosystem encompasses use-inspired research
related to the semiconductor industry, expands innovation and entrepreneurship,
creates training programs to enable a workforce that includes associate to
graduate degrees, and increases access and awareness of diverse groups leading
to recruitment into STEM fields. The leadership team includes Oregon State
University, University of Washington, Boise State University, Oregon Business
Council, and the City of Hillsboro, along with industry and national laboratory
partners, including Intel, Micron, Meta, American Semiconductor, Pacific
Northwest National Laboratories, Idaho National Laboratories, and other
organizations.

Regional stakeholders have identified a need to catalyze R&D in several use-
inspired semiconductor research areas. Initial technical focus areas include
artificial intelligence and machine learning, semiconductors, nanolithography,
memory, and beyond-Moore functionality. The leadership team will analyze the
potential of these focus areas to advance semiconductor technology and then
refine the scope and scale of the initial use-inspired research topics to have
the greatest technical and economic impact on the region. The semiconductor
ecosystem can accelerate translation through integrative programs supporting the
full cycle from business case development to business funding while offering
cohesive services around entrepreneurship and translation to practice as
critical components of the innovation engine. Working closely with diversity,
equity, inclusion, and access partners, this project will expand its impact to
increase underrepresented minority participation in STEM degree programs and
professional careers. Collaborations with regional STEM outreach efforts,
community colleges, and undergraduate/graduate programs will be leveraged to
train a diverse advanced workforce. The NSF Development Award enables the
project team to create a framework for an Engine by identifying the state of
practice and existing gaps, determining use-inspired research directions,
emphasizing translation to practice, expanding workforce growth, and creating a
strategic plan that integrates diversity, equity, inclusion, and access and a
culture of innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.