* 2303637
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing energy and resilience technologies in the Permian Basin (TX, NM)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on ensuring that
the communities of the Permian Basin participate in and equitably accrue the
economic and environmental benefits of the global transition to a low-carbon
energy system. The Permian Basin Energy Technology and Resilience Alliance
(PETRA) will leverage the region's considerable energy infrastructure and
expertise - developed through decades of producing energy on a globally
significant scale - to support research, development, and commercialization of
advanced energy solutions and technologies. A 66-county region encompassing
eastern New Mexico and West Texas, the Permian Basin includes urban centers
(e.g., Midland, the region's "oil capital") and vast rural territory. Its
economy is uniquely and deeply tied to the fossil fuel industry. Yet, while
sharing many economic and environmental challenges and opportunities, its
communities are quite diverse, each with distinct cultural values and
specialties in energy production. PETRA's broad coalition of partners, based in
and around the region, is focused on the success and service of these
communities. The Cynthia and George Mitchell Foundation's local ties and
outreach will ensure that the engine's activities are community-driven. New
Mexico State University, New Mexico Tech, Midland College, Odessa College, Texas
A&M University, University of Texas (UT) of the Permian Basin, UT El Paso, and
UT Austin will share their considerable resources in use-inspired research and
educational programming, as will the National Renewable Energy Laboratory and
Sandia National Laboratories. The Midland and Odessa development corporations
and local colleges will support workforce development. Industry partners,
including GTI Energy, will support translating innovation to practice.

The envisioned PETRA project will support the development of a regional clean-
energy technology and applied-research framework to engage and inform other oil-
and gas-dependent regions. To do so, it will develop and demonstrate advanced
energy technologies at scale; improve systemic environmental performance; share
the benefits of the energy economy with local communities through place-based
economic development approaches and fit-for-purpose education; and implement
best practices in community-engaged, use-inspired research to grow the region's
innovation ecosystem from its current Development Phase into a Nascent Phase of
a full NSF Engine. In preparation for a compelling full NSF Engines proposal,
this development award will support PETRA's continued efforts to build a
platform for collaboration among diverse stakeholders and engage the resources
of diverse entrepreneurial ecosystems offered by the PETRA partners to ensure
that community and economic development are equitable, scalable, and central to
the future of energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.