* 2303743
* Time Resolved Studies of Fundamental Mechanisms in Natural Photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Yulia Pushkar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,879.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Yulia Pushkar of Purdue University will study the oxygen
evolving complex (OEC) of photosystem II, a protein that contains manganese and
calcium ions. This protein, which uses the energy of sunlight to catalyze the
splitting of water molecules into protons, electrons, and oxygen molecules,
provides the majority of oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere. Application of
spectroscopic methods to the study of the catalytic cycle will provide insight
into the roles of the manganese and calcium ions and their protein environment
in the light-driven formation of dioxygen. In the longer term, insights gained
in the study of Nature's OEC in this project have the potential to enable the
design of new methods for the production of energy that is CO2-neutral. The
planned educational and mentoring activities range from hands-on research
involvement of high school students to the training of postdoctoral fellows. New
results from photosystem II research will be integrated into the biophysics
curriculum that is delivered across multiple Purdue Departments at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels. Professor Pushkar will create research
opportunities for and advise undergraduate students including those
participating in the Sloan Foundation Equitable Pathways Program Partnering in
Research Mentoring for Minoritized Students in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics). Professor Pushkar also actively participates in
Purdue’s Women in Physics and Women in Science Programs.

Research in this project will be focused upon a comprehensive vibrational
analysis and time-resolved vibrational spectroscopic study of the oxygen-
evolving complex (OEC) of photosystem II and its functions in the O-O bond
formation. Low-frequency IR (infrared) spectroscopy is capable of detecting Mn-O
vibrations in the OEC, even in the presence of the large protein. This is due to
high IR activity of the Mn-O vibrations in Mn4OCa clusters. Low-frequency IR
spectroscopic and isotopic labeling will be used to determine the molecular
identity of the S3 state of photosystem II and its proposed isomers. Near-IR
resonance Raman spectrascopy will be used in a parallel for the selective
detection of Mn4OCa cluster vibrations and changes in the molecular structure of
the cluster during the Kok cycle. The experimental results will be interpreted
within the framework of currently available structural models of the OEC.
Complementary density functional theory (DFT) calculations will be conducted to
monitor the energy profile of the proposed chemical transformations in the OEC.
Together this combined spectroscopic/computational study of the OEC is expected
to provide new insights into the mechanism of this remarkably efficient, natural
Mn-based water splitting machine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.