* 2303565
* Emergence of an anthropogenic salinity signal in the IndoPacific
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* SARA SANCHEZ, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 442,344.00

Temperature changes in the Indian and Pacific Oceans have profound impacts on
distant societies, ecosystems, and economies. The El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) is a clear example. ENSO can cause temperature changes that prompt large
shifts in global weather. It can influence heatwaves, droughts, floods, and
storms. Despite the significance of the IndoPacific, it is still not clear how
this region will respond to rising greenhouse gases. Climate models agree that
human-caused climate change will alter global temperature and rainfall patterns.
However, climate models often disagree on the magnitude and even the sign of
those changes. Another challenge to understanding climate change in the
IndoPacific is that internal variability can mask trends. Long records from the
tropical oceans are essential to untangle this uncertain response, but few
instrumental exist. This project develops new ways to evaluate climate change in
the data-sparse regions of the IndoPacific. Coral data can provide information
about past temperature and hydrological conditions. This project will synthesize
centuries of data from corals, instrumental observations, and climate models.
These data will be used to reconstruct climate variability. Reconstructions of
temperature, salinity, and precipitation will be compared with climate model
simulations. This research will bolster scientific understanding of the tropical
hydrological cycle response to climate change. Finally, this work will support
an early career scientist, a graduate student, and undergraduate researchers.
This project will evaluate the emergence of an anthropogenic signal in the
tropical IndoPacific by leveraging long, seasonally-resolved tropical coral
records with instrumental observations in an offline paleoclimate data
assimilation (paleo-DA) framework. The proposed work will utilize novel methods
to synthesize diverse sources of data (paleoclimate proxies, reanalysis
products, isotope-enabled models, large ensembles, paleo-DA) to evaluate the
range of internal variability and changes in temperatures, salinity, and
precipitation variability from the 18th-century to the present. In particular,
this work seeks to fill a critical data gap linking sea surface salinity to
coral oxygen isotopic records (d18Ocoral) and coral-derived reconstructions of
the oxygen isotopic composition of seawater (d18Osw) at seasonal to multidecadal
timescales. This project aims to rigorously quantify uncertainties related to
using coral d18O and coral-derived d18Osw to examine historic hydroclimate
change and to establish best practices for inferring relationships with sea
surface salinity at a variety of timescales. Interpretation of the timing,
magnitude, and spatial patterns associated emergence of an anthropogenic signal
in the coral-derived reconstructions will be contrasted with CMIP6 Large
Ensemble historical and anthropogenically forced simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.