* 2303624
* Scalar curvature and geometric variational problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Chao Li, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 380,500.00

Curvature describes local bending of a space, and is used to distinguish how two
shapes are different. This project concerns a particular notion of curvature,
called the scalar curvature. Scalar curvature determines the amount by which the
volume of a small geodesic ball in a Riemannian manifold deviates from that of
the standard ball in Euclidean space. Curvature arises throughout the natural
sciences, and particularly in general relativity, where scalar curvature is the
Lagrangian density of the Einstein-Hilbert action. A natural yet deep question
is to understand the effects of scalar curvature on the global properties of a
manifold. In particular, the project will focus on geometric variational
problems, including minimal surfaces and soap bubbles. Minimal surfaces arise as
the mathematical model of a number of interfaces in nature. In general
relativity, minimal surfaces occur as “apparent horizons” of black holes; soap
films and capillary interfaces also provide examples of minimal surfaces. Some
key questions include the existence, regularity and topology of minimal
surfaces. These two aspects of the research are deeply related, and will advance
our understanding of the shape of nature. The PI will integrate this research
with a variety of knowledge-disseminating activities that include organizing
seminars, conferences, mini-courses, and reading groups, and giving public
lectures.

The proposed research concerns a range of topics in differential geometry,
geometric measure theory and partial differential equations. Particularly, the
PI would like to focus on the following four main topics. The first topic is the
investigation of the obstruction problem for manifolds with positive scalar
curvature, including the well-known `K(pi, 1) conjecture’. The second topic is
to further understand the geometric comparison theorem for scalar curvature
lower bound using Riemannian polyhedra. Minimal surface and soap bubbles are key
technical tools for such problems. The third topic is to further investigate the
stable Bernstein problem for minimal surfaces in R^n. The fourth topic is to
further study the moduli space of positive scalar curvature metrics on
3-manifolds (with or without boundary). Understanding such questions has
potential applications in 4-dimensional general relativity and in topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.