* 2303948
* CAS: Oxidation from the Top Down and the Bottom Up by the OH Radical: Lifetimes and Fates of Important Ingredients of Pesticides, Pharmaceuticals, and Consumer Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 212,003.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Barbara Finlayson-Pitts and her team at the University of
California, Irvine will study the degradation of contaminants of emerging
concern in the environment. These include a broad spectrum of human-made
products, including pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and consumer products. Their
deleterious impacts on humans and the environment often become apparent only
after such compounds have become distributed widely in air, water, and soils.
This is to a significant extent due to their degradation in the environment to
form unanticipated products that are more toxic than the parent compound. The
focus of this project is on compounds that contain nitrogen. The goals are to
measure how fast selected members of this group, which includes pesticides and
pharmaceuticals, degrade on contact with atmospheric constituents, and to
identify the products that are formed. The data generated in this project will
form the core needed to assess how these synthetic chemicals are degraded under
atmospheric conditions. Through a partnership with a local environmental justice
community group, high school students from historically disadvantaged
communities will join the team to work in their labs during the summer. The
proposed research will also provide training to undergraduates and postdoctoral
fellows in the integration of experiment and theory to address current important
environmental problems.

Two different environmentally relevant oxidation systems will be explored:
hydroxyl radical (OH) oxidation from the top down, representing gas phase OH
impinging on a solid, and OH oxidation from the bottom up, representing
oxidation of an adsorbed organic by OH generated from a nitrite ion or TiO2
substrate. Top-down studies will probe the oxidation of thin films of the
organics using attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared
(ATR)-FTIR spectroscopy or in situ oxidation of organic particles in a flow
system. Bottom-up studies will use OH from photolysis of solid nitrite salts or
TiO2 in the presence of water. Loss of the organics and formation of products
will be monitored using IR, UV and a variety of mass spectrometric techniques.
The structures of the strongest binding complexes between OH and the organics
will be predicted using semi-empirical quantum chemical calculations, and
molecular dynamics simulations will be applied to each of these complexes in
order to provide insights into the molecular basis for the experimental results.
This combination of experiment and theory will help elucidate the role of OH
oxidation in the degradation and fates of these synthetic compounds by these two
different oxidation systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.