* 2303586
* Symplectic groupoids and quantization of Poisson manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rui Loja Fernandes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

Groups typically emerge as symmetries associated with a specific object.
However, the concept of a groupoid allows for more general symmetries that act
on collections of objects rather than just a single one. This project tackles
fundamental questions of importance in differential geometry and the
mathematical theory of quantization by employing a combination of groupoid
techniques and semi-classical analysis. The project's significance lies in its
potential to uncover new fundamental aspects in geometry and unravel mysteries
surrounding the nature of quantization in physics, which are crucial for
understanding the geometric aspects of our universe. The project involves
collaborations with researchers from Europe and South America. Additionally, the
project's lead investigator will be involved in the organization of
international meetings, summer courses, and a weekly seminar at the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

The project consists of three main tasks. The first task introduces a novel
approach to non-formal deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds, where the
star products have kernels defined by semi-classical Fourier integral operators.
This approach has two objectives: establishing a connection to integrability
through symplectic groupoids and proving the existence of star products for a
wide range of Poisson manifolds. The second task focuses on the PI's research on
Poisson manifolds of compact type (PMCT), which are central objects in Poisson
geometry analogous to compact Lie algebras in Lie Theory. The current goals are
to develop the theory in the non-regular case and study Hamiltonian spaces of
PMCTs, extending classical results for Lie group actions. This includes
investigating Hamiltonian spaces of symplectic torus bundles, which generalize
symplectic toric manifolds. The third task continues the exploration of an
approach to classification problems of geometric structures using Cartan's
realizations and employing Lie groupoid techniques, pioneered by the PI and
collaborators. The PI will expand previous work on finite-dimensional families
to include the infinite-dimensional case.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.