* 2303922
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: Investigating the Origins of Hot Jupiters Orbiting A-type Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Giacalone, Giacalone, Steven A
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Steven Giacalone is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the California Institute of
Technology. Giacalone will conduct observations of transiting hot Jupiters (HJs)
orbiting A-type stars to better understand their properties and demographics.
Results from this project will provide novel insight into how these giant
planets arrive at their close-in orbits. For the education component of this
project, Giacalone will develop and lead an annual coding workshop for students
studying physics and astronomy at nearby community colleges.

Using planets detected by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite, this
research will determine if (1) HJs are more common around A-type stars than they
are around cooler stars, (2) the angles between the spin axes of A-type stars
and the orbital axes of their HJs are consistent with theorized migration
mechanisms, and (3) the atmospheric compositions of HJs orbiting A-type stars
are indicative of formation in the outer regions of protoplanetary disks. With
these studies, the investigator will improve our knowledge of the formation and
dynamical histories of HJs, the precise origins of which are still poorly
understood. This work will also complement concurrent and future studies of
long-period giant planets possible through direct imaging and astrometric
surveys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.