* 2303986
* INCLUDES DDLP: UL-ASSIST: University-Led Action on Student and Systemic Inequities in STEM Transfer
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Peter Plavchan, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 556,798.00

The University-Led Action on Student and Systemic Inequities in STEM Transfer
(UL-ASSIST) project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across
the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative as a Design and Development Launch
Pilot (DDLP). The INCLUDES Initiative seeks to motivate and accelerate
collaborative infrastructure building to advance and sustain systemic change to
broaden participation in STEM at scale. DDLPs explore new strategies and models
for collaborative approaches to broadening participation in STEM. The goal of
UL-ASSIST is to increase access to STEM graduate school and employment pathways
for community college students who transfer to four-year institutions. More than
half of U.S. students begin their college careers in America’s community
colleges, and there is strong intersectionality between community college and
underserved and minoritized populations. Multiple studies indicate that transfer
students who successfully complete STEM baccalaureate degrees lag in the
attainment of their post-baccalaureate academic and professional goals.
Investment in career readiness for STEM transfer students is a key strategy to
aid in the development of STEM professional identity, and to address national
participation and workforce challenges. UL-ASSIST’s pilot framework serves as a
strong foundation for testing and expansion of promising practices that can be
leveraged, replicated, and scaled regionally and nationally. UL-ASSIST provides
a holistic approach to increasing participation among community college transfer
students in STEM and advancing pathways to graduate study, STEM-sector
employment, and career equity.

UL-ASSIST’s transfer-focused intervention model is grounded in nearly two
decades of research, including high impact practices and development of STEM
professional identity. The UL-ASSIST initiative addresses structural obstacles
in the two-to-four year college transition by 1) increasing access to, and
completion of multiple STEM undergraduate research experiences through a three-
part bridge to research model that includes course-based research and mentored
research by university faculty trained in transfer-informed multi-mentorship
approaches, 2) mitigating gaps in STEM career knowledge by community college
students and advisors through targeted professional development to community
college STEM faculty and student services professionals that will enhance the
quality of early career advising provided to community college students, and 3)
supporting STEM professional identity-building and sector-specific career
readiness of community college transfer students, which will increase access to
post-baccalaureate outcomes such as graduate study and STEM-sector employment.
The UL-ASSIST pilot tests six targeted interventions. Three are student-focused
and three address higher education systems. Needs-assessment and intervention
frameworks, results, and lessons learned are amplified through a UL-ASSIST
Symposium to engage and inform project stakeholders and regional and national
institutions. Additionally, UL-ASSIST regularly engages with the INCLUDES
National Network to share formative, summative, and post-initiative learnings
and outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.