* 2303014
* I-Corps:  Monitoring trees for water stress via a smart sensing system
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Ashley Matheny, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sensing system that may provide invaluable and continuous
insights into tree health and forest function at both large and small scales.
The market for this device will range from individual to industrial scale
farmers wishing to tailor automated irrigation systems directly to address when
trees (e.g., all varieties of tree nuts, avocado, coffee, fruits, etc.)
experience stress or require specific moisture conditions to stimulate flowering
or fruiting. Other users may include governments and non-government
organizations (NGOs) seeking to manage forested regions to assess the potential
for wildfire ignition and spread, as well as scientific instrumentation
companies who supply researchers seeking to understand forest responses to
climate and disturbances.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a smart-sensing system for
the detection of water stress in trees in response to local microclimates. Trees
experience water stress at different intensities and time scales that may often
be decoupled from soil moisture status. The proposed smart sensing system
combines standard meteorological observations with novel measurements of within-
tree water flow and content. This system features a tree-water content sensor
capable of continuously monitoring water within different layers of a tree’s
xylem tissues. Prior field research has shown that xylem tissues that are no
longer actively transporting water may still serve as a water reservoir during
times of drought for some species. Observations of tree water storage have shown
promise in their ability to pinpoint the onset of water stress within a living
plant in real time. In addition, data collected by this sensing system may be
combined with remote sensing observations to extend predictions from single
trees or orchards to entire regions to develop predictions for wildfire ignition
potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.