* 2303713
* Mechanisms of Pathogenicity and Host Specificity of the Oomycete Plant Pathogen Phytophthora palmivora
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Erica Goss, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2027
* USD 25,000.00

Phytophthora palmivora is a fungus-like eukaryotic microorganism that causes
devastating diseases of numerous agriculturally and ecologically important
plants, including cacao, a tropical perennial tree that produces the major
component of the multi-billion-dollar chocolate industry. The annual global loss
on cacao due to diseases caused by P. palmivora is at least one billion U.S.
dollars. As a very aggressive pathogen, P. palmivora is often capable of
infecting almost all plant parts of a host, rendering its control extremely
challenging. As a result, it has become an increasing threat to agricultural
production and ecosystems. Diseases caused by P. palmivora are managed by
frequent application of fungicides with limited success. The long-term goal of
this project is to develop novel, effective and environmentally friendly
strategies to control P. palmivora based on the fundamental understandings of
its infection mechanisms. To this end, the specific objectives of this project
are to identify the key pathogenicity factors of P. palmivora, how these factors
act on plant cellular components to contribute to disease, and how their
presence/absence in a P. palmivora isolate determines which plant species to
infect. This project is expected to generate significant foundational knowledge
essential for developing desirable disease control measures, thereby
significantly contributing to food security, sustainability of natural
ecosystems and the bioeconomy. In addition, the project will contribute to STEM
workforce sustainability by providing training opportunities to graduate,
undergraduate and high school students, and introducing plant pathology and
gene-editing technology to middle/high-school teachers to attract a new
generation into agriculture and life sciences.

Oomycetes form a distinct phylogenetic lineage of eukaryotes, with many causing
devastating diseases of plants and animals. Phytophthora palmivora is a
destructive broad-host-range oomycete plant pathogen with host specificity. P.
palmivora delivers a diverse array of effectors to manipulate the host cellular
processes to facilitate infection, including the superfamily of RxLR effectors
that are defined by an N-terminal signal peptide followed by a canonical RxLR
(or RxLR-EER) translocation motif that mediates entry into host cells. The P.
palmivora RxLR effector designated PpalRxLR1 contains a functional nuclear
localization signal with potential DNA-binding activities and was identified as
a key pathogenicity factor on cacao. It is present in all examined P. palmivora
isolates obtained from cacao infections, but exhibits presence/absence
polymorphisms across the species, suggesting that it may be a determinant of
host range and specificity. This project is to: 1) determine the mechanisms by
which PpalRxLR1 confers pathogenicity on cacao by determining its nuclear-
localized molecular interaction dynamics and the subverted host cellular
processes during infection, 2) determine the role of PpalRxLR1 as a key
component in host range evolution of P. palmivora by analyzing its evolution
relative to the species and association with host range, 3) identify additional
effectors with key roles in pathogenicity of P. palmivora on specific or a broad
range of hosts using the natural variation of P. palmivora isolates. Integrating
across specific aims is expected to transform understanding of the molecular
basis of pathogenicity and host range evolution of P. palmivora, key aspects of
plant-microbe interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.