* 2303487
* Collaborative Research: P4Climate--Testing Hypotheses of Mesoamerican Hydroclimate over the Last Several Glacial Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Lachniet, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 474,797.00

This project seeks to test climate forcing hypotheses for past regional climate
in the Mesoamerican monsoon that include sea surface temperature, ocean
circulation, Heinrich event forcing, and other glacial-interglacial boundary
condition data against stalagmite delta Oxygen-18 from southwestern Mexico
spanning several glacial cycles. New proof-of-concept stalagmites from JX Cave,
Mexico, cover a time period from approximately 53,000 to 105,000 years before
present (BP), and a new sample from Sistema Huatla, Mexico spans 115,000 to
340,000 years BP.

The preliminary data from these samples departs from a smooth sinusoidal orbital
insolation hypothesis, and instead shows abrupt threshold-like behavior
including monsoon collapses apparently coincident with Heinrich events in the
North Atlantic, notably during the relatively warm interval of Marine Isotope
Stage (MIS) 5b. The research will focus on weak monsoon intervals during non-
glacial warm periods such as MIS 5, 7, and 9, because these times may represent
paleo-analogs of future aridity associated with the projected weakening of ocean
circulation due to anthropogenic climate change.

Why this research and why now? The prevailing orbital monsoon hypothesis
describes a strong and positively coupled relationship between summer incoming
solar radiation (insolation) on orbital precession (21,000 year) timescales and
regional monsoon strength. Long monsoon paleoclimate records are revealed in the
inverse correlation between regional scale monsoon strength and speleothem
oxygen isotope values. The orbital control on monsoons is strongly expressed in
the East Asian and South American monsoon systems where speleothem oxygen
isotope time series show smooth sinusoidal variations that are paced by orbital
insolation. However, in other tropical areas the orbital insolation hypothesis
fails to explain hydroclimate variations, notably in Central America, where
speleothem oxygen isotope does not correlate to summer insolation. This
disconnect suggests that paleoclimate variations in southern Mexico and Central
America (Mesoamerica) may be explained by the orbital monsoon hypothesis.

The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include supporting a graduate student
training and engaging students from historical underrepresented groups students
in Nevada and also at Fort Valley State University, an Historical Black College
and University (HBCU) in Georgia. In addition, the researchers will involve the
indigenous Mazatec community in Plan Carlota near Sistema Huatla in cave science
research as well as the development of cave education posters in Spanish and
Mazateco.

Direct potential scientific benefits to society from this project include an
improved understanding of tropical hydro climate variability in a region which
is very vulnerable to climate change. The results of this research may also help
to inform policy makers about the amplitude and timing of abrupt events in the
past and the potential of similar events in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.