* 2303740
* POSE: Phase II: Building open source ecosystems in molecular sciences through collaboration and technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* David Mobley, OPEN MOLECULAR SOFTWARE FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,499,353.00

Karmen Condic-Jurkic and David Mobley of the Open Molecular Software Foundation
(OMSF) are supported by an award from the Pathways to Enable Open-Source
Ecosystems (POSE) program in the Directorate for Technology, Innovation and
Partnerships (TIP) to democratize infrastructure for molecular design. Computer
modeling plays a key role in modern science, including chemistry and biology,
where it provides new scientific insights and drives discovery, including
guiding the design of molecules with specific properties for target
applications. However, software quality and availability delays progress, as
many new innovations are poorly implemented and difficult to use, locked behind
paywalls, or both. As a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, OMSF seeks to unlock new research
and innovation globally via collaborative development of high-quality open
source software, freely available to the scientific community. Our organization
brings together researchers from industry and academia to jointly develop key
research infrastructure for molecular sciences and share their expertise. In
this project, we will 1) create resources to better support open source
molecular software projects and their communities, such as legal and training
materials; 2) build technical solutions to improve software quality and
security; and 3) strengthen OMSF’s position as the key partner for multi-
institutional collaborative open source projects pushing the scientific frontier
in chemistry and biology. This project will build and support strong and diverse
open source communities with transparent governance and development practices,
helping ensure responsible and sustainable creation and stewardship of future
technologies in molecular sciences.

The Open Molecular Software Foundation (OMSF) is a nonprofit organization with a
mission to facilitate collaboration and support an ecosystem of open source
projects in molecular sciences. OMSF seeks to address the challenges of
establishing and managing multi-institutional collaborations, build expertise in
managing and governing collaborative open source projects, improve research
software quality and explore pathways to sustainability while accelerating
innovation. Our aim is to support systematic progression of state-of-the-art
methods into stable, customizable, and interoperable software to further expand
research capabilities and improve modeling outcomes. Our approach involves
collaborating with experts from industry and academia, coordination of efforts,
pooling resources and making resulting materials widely available for reuse and
further development to enable large scale collaborations and more inclusive
science practices, and to unlock new research and innovation potential on a
global level. As a part of this grant, OMSF will create resources to better
support open source projects and their communities, such as: 1) "molecular
sciences OSE playbook" – a combination of legal templates, onboarding guides and
training materials for users and contributors, and governance and management
processes for projects; 2) technical solutions to improve software quality and
security, such as reusable kit frameworks, project cookiecutters, automated
testing on different hardware platforms, and deployment via distribution
systems; and 3) improved organizational framework for large, distributed and
collaborative projects and a “neutral ground” for the wider community to tackle
common infrastructure challenges in computational molecular sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.