* 2303652
* RUI: Characterizing Valence, Temporary, and Non-valence Anions: Computational Methods and Photo-detachment Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Thomas Sommerfeld, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 152,308.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Thomas Sommerfeld of Southeastern
Louisiana University will model temporary molecular anions. Negatively charged
molecular ions that decay by spontaneous electron emission are called temporary
anions as they show lifetimes similar to other species. Temporary anions cannot
form stable compounds, but they occur as critical intermediates in many natural
and technical processes including plasma etching, atmospheric chemistry,
radiation damage to living tissue, and cancer therapy. Modeling temporary anions
is far more challenging than modeling of stable molecules. Dr. Sommerfeld and
his group aim to simulate the quantum mechanical equations describing all
electrons of the temporary anion including the outgoing electron. Professor
Sommerfeld will work to develop reliable, cost-efficient models to compute the
lifetime of temporary anions, a critical parameter for more coarse-grained
simulations. Moreover, Dr. Sommerfeld’s group will apply the developed methods
to aid with the interpretation of photo-detachment spectra measured by Dr. Chick
Jarrold’s group at Indiana University. Since Southeastern is a PUI
(predominantly undergraduate institution) located in a rural, low-income region
of a traditionally low-income state, and since the research will be conducted
with undergraduate group members, the impact on disadvantaged students and their
access to the research infrastructure is expected to be significant.

Under this award, Professor Thomas Sommerfeld and his group will combine method
development for resonance states with the study of photo-detachment experiments.
Dr. Sommerfeld will extend his framework for systematic method comparison from
model potentials into the electronic structure world and from L²-methods to
projection-operator approaches. Methods for resonances combine at least five
aspects: a continuum approach, an electronic structure method, a valence basis,
a diffuse basis, and a data analysis. Owing to the large number of factors
entering these calculations, comparisons are challenging, and Dr. Sommerfeld
will focus on an unbiased comparison of continuum methods. For this purpose, Dr.
Sommerfeld will implement symmetry-conforming confinement potentials into the
open-source Psi4 package. Dr. Sommerfeld will use the new and traditional
methods to aid in the interpretation of photo-detachment spectra by elucidating
initial state distributions, identifying short-lived intermediates, and
suggesting mechanisms. These studies from the Sommerfeld group have the
potential for broad scientific impact; most importantly, the development of a
systematic framework for comparing continuum methods and the confinement
potential based methods in Psi4 would be beneficial for the research community
in the area of temporary anion electronic structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.