* 2303822
* RUI: Promoting Through-Space Charge Transfer via Arylene Ethynylene Templates
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nathan Bowling, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 379,908.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Nathan Bowling of the University of
Wisconsin-Stevens Point will design and synthesize new molecules that display
behavior potentially useful for modern catalysts, organic light-emitting diodes
(OLEDs), and molecular sensing devices. Specifically, Professor Bowling and his
students will generate molecular templates that hold different molecular
components in proximity and study how the relative orientation of the components
affects their interactions and electronic properties. The fundamental knowledge
to be gained will help advance the development of next generation, charge
transfer-based devices and catalysts. Synthesis, purification, and
characterization of these compounds will be performed exclusively by
undergraduate students and Professor Bowling at the University of Wisconsin-
Stevens Point. Hands-on experience with cutting edge research projects will
position these students well to excel in the chemical industry or in graduate
studies.

This project aims to develop a variety of templates to promote efficient charge-
transfer between electron-rich and electron-poor aromatic subunits in solution
and the solid state. The primary method for promoting through-space interaction
of these subunits is a twisted arylene ethynylene framework upon which the
subunits interact in an intramolecular fashion. Rotation around a central tolane
forces complementary electron-rich/electron-poor arms of the rotor to collide.
Electronic (UV-vis) and crystallographic (x-ray) studies will provide insight
into how the orientation of subunits in these through-space collisions impacts
charge transfer behavior. Additionally, halogen bonding and metal complexation
will be used as driving forces to mimic the geometry of the twisted arylene
ethynylene systems. The onset of visible color expected with charge transfer may
provide opportunities for colorimetric quantification of host-guest interaction
in these dynamic systems. After initial characterization, template design will
focus on controlling the relative orientations of electron-rich/electron-poor
pairs for optoelectronic, sensing, and catalyst applications. The designed
systems are expected to provide a method for studying charge transfer behavior
that is otherwise difficult to study. In the longer term, the work has the
potential to establish a foundation for advances in next-generation electronic
devices and light-driven catalysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.