* 2303563
* CAREER: Synthesis and Control of Cyber-Resilient CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Andrew Clark, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2025
* USD 176,315.00

This project seeks to develop design methodologies for the synthesis of cyber-
physical systems (CPS) that verifiably satisfy given safety and performance
requirements when an unknown set of system components is compromised. The need
for such design methodologies is exemplified by recent intrusions into nuclear
facilities and ransomware attacks on municipal governments, in which adversaries
found weak points in cyber defenses that were leveraged to control safety-
critical physical infrastructures. The research plan is grounded on two
application scenarios: (i) a group of unmanned vehicles that must complete high-
level task objectives while avoiding collisions in the presence of false and
malicious sensor and control inputs, and (ii) a smart building in which IoT apps
send malicious commands to the building HVAC and other safety-critical systems.

The PI will develop algorithms to compute control policies in the presence of
attacks that inject arbitrary sensor measurements or control signals, disrupt
availability of sensor or control messages, and/or modify controller set points.
The first research thrust will investigate and develop control strategies for
safety and reachability of nonlinear systems under attack by extending the
notions of control barrier and control Lyapunov functions to adversarial
settings. The second thrust will investigate resilient synthesis of more complex
task specifications using the control algorithms of thrust one as building
blocks. The PI will develop novel approaches to model adversarial cyber-physical
interactions as stochastic games by developing resilient finite-state
abstractions of nonlinear systems. Finite-state control policies will be
developed by approximating the game solutions. This thrust will investigate
contract-based decomposition algorithms for solving the games in a distributed
system with multiple (potentially malicious) decision-making agents. Each thrust
of the project will be validated through experimentation and testing on two
custom platforms, namely, a multi-robot testbed and a smart building simulation
framework. This project will result in models and algorithms to improve safety,
performance, and security of CPS including connected and autonomous vehicles,
industrial control systems, intelligent traffic management systems, medical
devices, and manufacturing CPS. The PI will develop “serious games” to enhance
public interest while providing insight into human decision-making. Algorithms
for secure control developed in the project will be experimented on by
undergraduate capstone students under the supervision of the PI’s graduate
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.