* 2303334
* Quivers in quantum symmetry: a path algebra framework for algebras in tensor categories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ryan Kinser, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2026
* USD 298,003.00

The concept of "symmetry" has been recognized since time immemorial, because of
its ubiquitous presence in the natural world. Symmetries can be immediately
visually apparent, as with mirror images or circles, but also may be more
abstract. For example, solutions to an equation may have symmetries that help us
better understand them, or molecules may have symmetries that affect how they
interact with one another. There are a number of ways to use the language of
mathematics to formalize the concept of symmetry, and some of these lie within
the field of Abstract Algebra. Informally, this project will work with
symmetries of an object computationally, somewhat like familiar number systems
used in everyday life, but more complicated. The project lies within the newly
evolving field of "quantum symmetry" which allows for greater flexibility in the
concept, at the expense of losing some intuition. However, it can be formalized
just as rigorously using mathematics, specifically in the language of Hopf
algebras and tensor categories. The proposed work broadens participation in
mathematics by having specific subprojects for a diverse group of doctoral
students, which will prepare them for their own research careers, in academics,
business, industry, or government.

More precisely, this project extends the foundations of representation theory of
finite dimensional associative algebras to the setting of algebras in tensor
categories. The PI will particularly focus on finite tensor categories and
expects the strongest results for fusion categories. The proposed extension of
quivers and their representations to the setting of finite tensor categories
will accommodate richer underlying structures than just vector spaces, such as
the action of a group by automorphisms or a Lie algebras by derivations, as well
as vector spaces graded by groups, and even non-classical structures where the
objects have fractional (Frobenius-Perron) dimension, and thus cannot be
considered to have an underlying vector space in any natural way. A specific
class of tensor categories which will receive detailed attention are
representation categories of Hopf algebras. This includes many examples of
interest across broad areas of mathematics, such as quantum groups. This project
is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.