* 2303089
* Nitrous oxide production by salt marsh sediment fungi: its significance and mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Annie Bourbonnais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 05/31/2026
* USD 709,532.00

Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas and ozone-depleting substance released
from natural and agricultural environments. Coastal wetlands are one of the
largest natural sources of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere, with most of the gas
flux attributed to microbial processes in the sediment. In soil environments,
fungi are significant contributors to nitrous oxide production, but in coastal
wetlands the role of fungi is largely unknown. This project examines the role of
understudied fungi in nitrous oxide production in salt marshes under varying
environmental conditions in isolated fungal cultures and field-collected salt
marsh sediments. Research findings are expected to improve future climate
predictions and guide the restoration and management of salt marsh habitats to
reduce nitrous oxide production. In addition to research training graduate and
undergraduate students, this project will enhance scientific and conservation
training to local high school students from diverse backgrounds through a
partnership with a local zoo.

This project aims to estimate the overall contribution of fungi to nitrous oxide
release from salt marsh sediments and determine the metabolic basis for fungal
nitrous oxide production under different oxidation-reduction and nutrient
conditions. The researchers will cultivate fungi isolated from marsh sediments
and use transcriptional profiling to reveal key genes that control nitrous oxide
production. They hypothesize that salt marsh fungi produce nitrous oxide
primarily by the anaerobic respiration of nitrate or nitrite. The project will
constrain the contribution of fungi to nitrous oxide production with novel
15N-tracer incubations and inhibition of either the prokaryotic (i.e., bacteria)
or the eukaryotic (i.e., fungi) components of the microbial community. This
project will improve understanding of how microbial fungi survive the absence of
oxygen and drastic daily changes in oxidation-reduction conditions.

This project is jointly funded by Ecosystem Science and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.