* 2303245
* Collaborative Research: Spatio-temporal changes in Red Sea surface hydrology and controls on deep ocean circulation since the 1700s
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Sujata Murty, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 339,771.00

Understanding the variability and long-term trends in hydrography of the Indian
Ocean and connected seas (e.g., Red Sea) has implications for predicting the
impacts of changes in climate across the region. Red Sea ocean circulation is
vital for Indian Ocean circulation and ecosystems. This circulation supplies
oxygen to critical marine ecosystems within the Arabian Sea. Evaporation within
the Red Sea also plays a fundamental role in the regional hydrologic cycle and
freshwater balance. These are critical for the largely agrarian societies in the
region. Yet, little is known about how Red Sea ocean circulation varies across
years and decades in response to changes in climate. This project will generate
four records of past climate and ocean changes using corals from across the
eastern edge of the Red Sea. Chemical analyses of the cores will be compared
with existing instrumental data to generate records of temperature, salinity and
density that extend back 200-400 years. These climate and ocean records will
provide insight into how Red Sea circulation patterns change across space and
time in response to climate systems. This project will support two early career
female scientists. The project will also support the next generation of graduate
and undergraduate scientists. These students will receive mentoring and training
in marine geochemistry and paleoclimate research. In addition, the PIs will
participate in art-science outreach initiatives such as Synergy II. This
includes exhibitions to showcase the potential for combining geochemistry and
paleoclimate to understand past variability and future threats to vulnerable
societies. This project will reconstruct Red Sea surface hydrography using
comparisons of multi-century coral proxy records to examine the role of spatio-
temporal climate variability in preconditioning the surface ocean for deep water
formation. Specifically, the study will use measurements of ฮด18O and Sr/Ca in
coral skeleton to reconstruct seasonal to multi-decadal variability in Red Sea
sea surface salinity and temperature over the past 300 years. Links between the
precursors for Red Sea deep ventilation in the north and broader surface ocean
hydrography will be evaluated using comparisons of coral records spanning 6ยบ of
latitude. These records will test the hypothesis that variability in salinity of
northward-flowing Red Sea surface currents serves as an indicator for the
strength of deep ventilation. Linkages between the spatio-temporal perspective
of surface ocean precursors for deep water ventilation and regional atmospheric
and climate phenomena (Arctic Oscillation, AO; North Atlantic Oscillation, NAO)
will be examined, utilizing observations and instrumental climate indices. These
records of Red Sea variability will identify the surface controls of deep ocean
circulation and constrain variability during periods of sustained warm/cold
climate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.