* 2303489
* POSE: Phase II:  An Open-Source Ecosystem for the cvc5 SMT Solver
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Clark Barrett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Modern society critically relies on computer systems, but these systems are
frequently unreliable. Many techniques that aim to produce more reliable
software rely on producing and proving mathematical formulas that capture
properties of the software. These formulas are called verification conditions,
and the research field of automated reasoning is dedicated to the effort of
proving such formulas automatically. In the last two decades, automated
reasoning tools have evolved from theoretical curiosities to industrial
workhorses, now proving billions of verification conditions daily, for a variety
of mission-critical workflows. One of the most successful paradigms for
automated reasoning is called satisfiability modulo theories (SMT), and tools
using this paradigm are called SMT solvers. The goal of this project to help
transition a specific, highly successful, SMT solver project, cvc5, from an
academic project to a full-blown open-source ecosystem (OSE), The project's
novelties include: establishing and growing this ecosystem; defining and
implementing organizational and governance principles and structures; building a
broad community of developers and users; and establishing a plan for the
sustainability of the tool and its ecosystem. If successful, the project's
impact will be considerable, with outcomes including: a thriving international
community of developers and users of cvc5; a sustainable plan for ongoing
coordination and governance among members in this community; and adoption of
industry best-practices for security and code quality in cvc5. All of these
will, in turn, positively impact academic and industrial tools and workflows
using cvc5, ultimately serving the larger goal of helping improve the robustness
and reliability of software.

In order to grow the SMT ecosystem, the project will raise awareness of SMT
solvers and their capabilities, make cvc5 available on more platforms and in
more contexts, and develop tutorials and other learning materials to make SMT
solvers more accessible to a broader audience. To build and grow the community,
the project organizes a series of workshops for developers and for users, and
establishes organization and governance procedures to onboard new authors and
developers. The project address many aspects of project sustainability,
including technical debt, security concerns with proof production and checking,
and a broad set of monitoring and evaluation procedures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.