* 2303580
* Collaborative Research: Organized Nanochannel Materials from Biomolecular Magnetic Organic Frameworks-
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Non-technical description Controlled transport of biomolecular ingredients
during nanoscale filtration of solutions is a vital task for many applications
in fine chemistry, pharmaceutical research, drug delivery, and other
sophisticated purification and materials making processes. To date, random
morphologies and poorly controlled porosity of paper-based materials have
significantly prevented tailoring biomolecular transport and catalytic
phenomena. Current bio-derived and synthetic materials possess random porous
morphologies with wide distributions of functionalities and porosities that
compromise their effective molecular transport and biocatalytic activity,
especially in relationship to enantiotropic biological compounds. Therefore,
deeper understanding of potentially strong and flexible membranes with long-
range ordered low-dimensional structural elements is required to advance the
fundamental knowledge of novel nanoporous bio-derived materials with inclusion
of novel open pore organized materials with controlled and responsive channel
organization. For this purpose, we suggest using peptide segments with well-
defined ability for selective interactions including chiral-related transport
and magnetic clusters/atoms for coordination of open unit cells with molecular
pore dimensions. Moreover, external magnetic field can be explored to create
larger-scale responsive materials with transport properties directed by its
direction and strength. Experimental research will be guided and assisted by
machine learning and computational approaches. Finally, the research project
will provide interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students
with diverse backgrounds in experimental and computational biomaterials science
for advanced material and biomolecular industry.

Technical description This proposal will consider novel classes of organized
nanochannel biomolecular nanomaterials for understanding the design principles
of efficient organized gel-like adaptive materials with enhanced porosity
dimension and topological control, materials and energy transport, chiral
biomolecules selection and storage/release, and prospective chiral biocatalytic
templates. Numerous critical issues must be addressed in order to establish
principles of assembly of low-defect bio-metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) such as
problems with limited unit sizes and pores due to the very short peptide
sequences, small pore sizes, limited symmetries achievable, and high
concentration of defects for directional and responsive loading, transport or
potential for enantiotropic selection and biocatalytical abilities. The major
novel units that the team will synthesize, design, and study are biomolecular
magnetic organic frameworks (BiMOFs) based upon biologically encoded peptides
with metal-binding terminal groups for coordination with magnetic ions/clusters.
The key fundamental question to be addressed is how the guided co-assembly of
functional biomolecular elements can be introduced as a tool for directed
construction of large-scale organized hierarchical materials with stable and
precisely controlled morphology of pore dimensions, channel topology,
continuity, and chirality, and adaptive ionic and mass/energy transport
properties. Design of biologically encoded magnetic bio-framework unit cells and
biomolecular crystals of different symmetries and dimensions will be explored
via site-specific metal-peptide coordination with tailored unit cell parameters,
pore dimensions, channel dimensionalities, magnetic moment configuration, pores
and microcrystal stability, and restructuring abilities of large-sized pores
with biomolecular selectivity and chirality. The experimental work will be
guided by theory, machine learning, and large-scale molecular simulations to
understand the underlying scientific principles. The proposed research will
leverage multi-scale modeling and machine learning powered by experimental
verification to develop “technology-specific” rules for the design and assembly
of robust but adaptive nanochannel BiMOF architectures with inherent ability to
reconfigure. The work can enhance fundamental understanding of complex trasport
phenomena in organized multi-phase nanomaterials with long-range organized
assembly of nanocrystals and nanosheets. Finally, the PI’s mini-workshops
Homecoming Series: Life and Career will be used to facilitate student readiness
by interacting with former students and post-docs invited to visit their alma
mater who enjoy successful careers in industry, national labs, and academia.
This project will provide teaching the integration of experimental,
computational, and data science tools; specifically, project-based modules will
be designed and incorporated into upper-level courses and distributed through
nanoHUB.

This project is jointly funded by the Biomaterials (BMAT) and the Metals and
Metallic Nanostructures (MMN) Programs of the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.