* 2303622
* Equipment: Helium Recovery Equipment for a Regional NMR and EPR Laboratory at Wayne State University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Long Luo, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2026
* USD 219,353.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry, Professor Chekmenev at Wayne State
University (WSU) is implementing a closed helium recovery system to sustain
three shared research Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) instruments, one teaching
NMR instrument, and a 7-Tesla Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass
Spectrometer (FT-ICR MS). The instruments are used to identify and characterize
molecules and are essential research tools. These instruments utilize high-field
superconducting magnets that require liquid helium to maintain their fields.
There is a global shortage of helium – a non-renewable natural resource – which
has negatively impacted our ability to maintain these magnets. The helium
recovery system will mitigate resulting uncertainty, enabling continuation of
WSU research at the forefront of science in the fields of synthetic chemistry,
biological chemistry, catalysis, food science, biomedical sciences and
technology, microelectronics/sensing, and biomaterials.

A closed-loop system will capture helium from the superconducting magnets
associated with the NMR and mass spectrometry instruments in the WSU chemistry
department facility. The collected gas will be temporarily stored in medium-
pressure tanks before being liquified at a centralized station and then
transferred to a separate mobile Dewar receptacle to be used for magnet fills.
the recovery rate will be monitored and reported to NSF. A high rate of recovery
is expected. The ability to recycle precious He to sustain the NMR and MS
instruments at WSU Chemistry will help drive the recruitment and training of a
diverse group of students as an integral part of the research and teaching
missions of the department .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.