* 2303296
* Surface Chemical Effects On Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance In Metal Oxide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Delia Milliron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2026
* USD 523,379.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Delia Milliron of the University
of Texas at Austin is combining surface chemical reactions and advanced chemical
analysis to study how the optical and electronic properties of metal oxide
nanocrystals are influenced by their surface chemistry. In these tiny crystals,
highly mobile electrons move under the influence of light, harnessing energy and
concentrating otherwise diffuse infrared light into local regions the size of
individual molecules. However, the very small size of the crystals means that
their surfaces have a big impact on their mobile electrons and their interaction
with light. Professor Milliron and her students are using chemical reactions to
change the properties of the nanocrystal surfaces to understand and control the
influence of surface chemistry. Their discoveries could lead to improved
optoelectronic devices, like solar cells and displays, and to more sensitive
chemical sensors to detect toxins or biochemical indicators of disease. The team
is using virtual outreach strategies, especially targeting younger audiences, to
broaden public awareness of science and to make science more accessible.

This project involves the post-synthetic surface chemical modification of doped
metal oxide nanocrystals. Aliovalent dopants are incorporated in the
nanocrystals during colloidal synthesis, introducing a high concentration of
free electrons and leading to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) in the
infrared spectral region. Their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)
absorption spectra and the near-field enhancement of electromagnetic field
intensity are strongly influenced by the presence of surface electronic states
that induce band bending. This project employs post-synthetic surface chemical
reactions to modify the electronic structure of the nanocrystal surfaces.
Dipolar organic molecules are attached to the surface to shift the energy levels
and modify the depletion layer. During overgrowth of insulating metal oxide
shells by colloidal atomic layer deposition, reactions with the chemical groups
responsible for band banding shift the energy levels of the associated surface
states. Optical analysis will be combined with photoemission spectroscopy to
analyze the mechanisms by which surface chemistry influences LSPR, with the aim
of establishing the foundational understanding needed to develop sensitive and
chemically specific detectors, and to direct the flow of energy to tune and
enhance catalytic processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.