* 2303703
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Tools to Elucidate Glycolipid Biosynthesis and Transport in the Corynebacterineae
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Benjamin Swarts, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2026
* USD 406,500.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Benjamin Swarts of Central Michigan University
and Mary Jackson of Colorado State University are developing chemical tools to
investigate a class of complex glycolipids, or sugar-linked lipid molecules,
that are present in the cell envelope of hundreds of bacterial species from the
suborder Corynebacterineae. These glycolipids, which are referred to as
phosphatidylinositol mannosides (PIMs), play essential roles in bacterial
cellular defense, integrity, and immunological activity. While PIMs and related
molecules are unique to the Corynebacterineae and contribute to these organisms’
distinctive physiological and pathogenic characteristics, many aspects of how
these glycolipids are constructed and organized in bacterial cells remain
unknown. Such knowledge gaps remain because PIMs are challenging to study using
traditional techniques and there is a lack of modern tools for analyzing them.
This project seeks to develop new chemical biology tools to allow specific
tagging and tracking of PIMs and related glycolipids in cellular contexts.
Applications of this toolbox could provide a better understanding of how the
Corynebacterineae construct their cell envelope. Undergraduate and graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow working on this research will acquire
interdisciplinary training in organic synthesis, chemical biology, and
microbiology. To promote interdisciplinary training and communication, students
and postdocs at both institutions will meet regularly virtually to discuss the
project. This project will be integrated into an outreach program to introduce
community college students to chemical bacteriology research and to encourage
their continued education in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics). The tools generated in this project are expected to be broadly
applicable and support other scientists pursuing research on the
Corynebacterineae.

Phosphatidylinositol mannosides (PIMs) and their highly glycosylated
derivatives, lipomannan (LM) and lipoarabinomannan (LAM), are difficult to
investigate using traditional techniques of biochemistry and molecular biology
because they consist of highly complex, non-genetically encoded lipids and
sugars. To address this problem, this research project seeks to develop
synthetic carbohydrate-based probes that exploit native and genetically
engineered metabolic pathways to introduce chemical tags into PIMs, LM, and LAM
in live bacteria. Fluorescently labeled glycolipid molecules will be tested in
whole cells, potentially providing a means to track the glycolipids specifically
in a cellular context. The probes developed in this project are expected to
provide information on (i) the spatiotemporal dynamics of PIM, LM, and LAM
construction in live bacterial cells; and (ii) the identity of the protein(s)
that is/are responsible for transport of PIMs across the bacterial inner
membrane. The findings from this project are expected to provide an improved
understanding of glycolipid biosynthesis and dynamics, which could provide
insight into the physiology of bacteria in the Corynebacterineae suborder.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.