* 2303748
* POSE: Phase II: CONNECT: Consortium of Open-source plaNNing models for Next-generation Equitable and efficient Communities and Transportation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project, funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE), aims
to promote a healthy and equitable society with diverse mobility options by
addressing traffic congestion, air quality, and sustainability issues through
efficient and effective multimodal transportation planning. The project will
achieve this by extending the General Modeling Network Specification (GMNS) to
GMNS+ through the Consortium of Open-Source Multimodal PlaNNing for Equitable
and Sustainable Communities and Transportation Systems (CONNECT). The project's
novel features include integrating a multimodal network modeling approach,
ensuring equity among diverse communities, employing cross-resolution
strategies, offering personalized mobility options, and utilizing time-sensitive
network data. Additionally, the project will establish an extensive open-source
ecosystem for a wide range of transportation solutions. Its impacts encompass
fostering efficient, sustainable, safe, accessible, and inclusive transportation
systems and facilitating informed decision-making at national, state, and city
levels. With numerous Metropolitan Planning Organizations and Regional Councils
in the United States, the project's streamlined process and open-source
ecosystem will support informed decision-making at various governance levels.
The research team adopts a technical approach that capitalizes on existing data
formats to create seamlessly integrated multimodal networks, fostering offline
and real-time data sharing among agencies and software packages. This strategy
empowers the execution of dynamic multimodal analysis, heralding a new age of
standardized data in transportation science, and making the examination of
extensive multimodal datasets more approachable through a versatile and
adaptable tool—potentially transforming data science within transportation. The
team aims to integrate open data specifications with system optimization tools
to optimize efficiency and equity within the urban transportation infrastructure
community. By implementing sustainability governance, the project will
strengthen the connection between real-world challenges faced by practitioners
and the research community, ensuring product competitiveness and overall
sustainability. The GMNS+ ecosystem holds the potential to significantly impact
data science by facilitating the study of large multimodal datasets using
innovative, highly flexible, and scalable computational and educational tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.