* 2303352
* Collaborative Research: Diagnosing Global Climatic Responses to Large Volcanic Eruptions in Climate Reconstructions and Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 493,422.00

The specific research effort for this project involves providing proxy-based
global estimates of the spatiotemporal changes in temperature and hydroclimate
after large volcanic eruptions. A global picture of proxy-estimated climate
responses to volcanism is now possible because of new paleoclimate data
assimilation products, which may provide new insights into how volcanoes
influence changes in surface temperatures, hydroclimate, and climate dynamics.

The ultimate aim of the project is to quantify risks and improve societal
preparedness for climatic variations influenced by large volcanic eruptions.

The research team intends to achieve the projectâ€™s research goals by assessing
the temporal persistence of responses across multiple paleoclimate data
assimilation outputs and ground-truth the estimates against other state-of-the-
art proxy reconstructions and documentary evidence. The researchers will also
characterize how dynamic climate responses are manifest in reconstructed sea-
surface temperature and atmospheric pressure indices, as well as the positioning
of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). All of these responses will be
assessed seasonally and in terms of eruption latitudes. The proxy-based
estimates will in turn be compared to an ensemble of Common Era simulations to
characterize the dynamical responses to volcanic eruptions and understand
associated uncertainties in the proxy-based products, volcanic forcing
estimates, and the coupled climate models.

The potential Broader Impacts include training two graduate students, hosting an
annual workshop event for undergraduates aimed at encouraging careers in
science, and recruiting women and underrepresented minorities through the AGU
Bridge Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.