* 2303791
* SBIR Phase II: CAS: Advanced Scalable and Sustainable Waste Disposal System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Tamara Webb, PHOENIX WASTE SOLUTIONS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to complete the development of "The Phoenix", a zero-fuel
furnace that converts trash to ash and energy with 30% less greenhouse gas
emissions per ton than landfills or conventional incineration. This technology
enables municipal solid waste to be managed in a decentralized manner, avoiding
the expense and negative environmental impacts of long-distance transportation.
The zero-fuel Phoenix is very cost effective as the only inputs are water,
filtration media, and labor to operate the machine. Amortizing the cost of the
machine over 4 years, waste disposal cost is estimated at $20/ton which is half
the cost of the cheapest landfill tipping fees in the US. Heat from the water
scrubber can be utilized to generate 106.7 KWe of electricity, with a potential
5 to 10-fold increase if utilizing direct heat from the furnace. The ash
byproduct has beneficial reuse as a construction material or soil amendment.
Glass and metal are not destroyed by the process and can be retrieved from the
ash chamber for recycling, reducing the costly process of separation. These
circular economy benefits help increase the economic competitiveness of the U.S.
recycling and waste management industry.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project focuses on the
commercial application of low temperature plasma to enhance thermal degradation
of municipal solid waste in a clean and highly cost-effective manner. The
technology would complete the development of a patent-pending mobile waste
disposal, low-temperature plasma furnace with electricity cogeneration while
avoiding the generation of numerous toxic compounds, including dioxins and
furans traditionally associated with conventional incinerators. An ion generator
utilizes proprietary technology to break down the oxygen molecule into two
oxygen atoms and thereby limiting the generation of complex pollutants. However,
this process may still form carbon monoxide. The Phoenix system uses a catalytic
process to convert carbon monoxide, CO, to carbon dioxide, CO2, at low
temperature. The Phase II project will primarily continue to improve the
emissions quality of multiple feedstocks with a focus on plastics. The team will
also select the most efficacious and cost-effective catalyst for CO conversion
and perform extended testing to evaluate long-term operations of the unit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.