* 2303897
* ECCS-EPSRC: Advanced III-N Devices and Circuit Architectures for mm-Wave Future Generation Wireless Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Patrick Fay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 04/30/2026
* USD 395,248.00

Ubiquitous, high-performance communication is the backbone of our society, and
promises to play an increasing role not only in individual's daily lives, but
just as importantly in the background with communication among devices (e.g.,
vehicle-to- infrastructure for mobility, process control and monitoring in
industrial and manufacturing, virtualization of full environments for the
metaverse, among others). The resulting explosion in data that must be processed
and communicated requires extraordinary bandwidth and network ubiquity, which in
turn demands supporting electronics that is high performance, power efficient,
and low cost. This proposal targets advancements in the most critical link, the
wireless power amplifier, that is essential to realizing a vision of ubiquitous,
high-speed, transparent mobile communication. Power amplifiers are among the
most critical elements in any communication system as they dictate the overall
efficiency of the system. GaN-based HEMTs are especially promising for high-
performance power amplifiers, but current GaN-based systems suffer from limited
frequency coverage, efficiency and linearity due to a combination of factors,
including device design and materials issues. In this program, we leverage
transformative advances in both GaN-based transistor design and novel circuit
topologies to dramatically improve the efficiency, bandwidth, linearity, and
cost of the key wireless elements of a communication system, through co-design.
The technology is based on polarization-engineered graded channel GaN HEMTs that
show a substantial improvement in linearity in comparison to conventional HEMTs.
By combining with thorough investigation of their underlying device physics
including trap states and thermal management, we address major effects that
degrade the performance of GaN at increasing frequencies (i.e. Ka band up to 40
GHz) by optimizing device design and fabrication. We will design harmonically
terminated amplifiers based on our new class of contiguous modes, that allow
designers wider choice of impedances for desired characteristics of efficiency,
linearity and output power. This will greatly enhance the promise and potential
of future communication systems, such as 6G wireless communications.

The proposed technology development will be based on recent advances in
polarization engineering in III-N materials and devices. We will demonstrate
high-linearity, high-efficiency polarization-engineered GaN transistors, with
performance sufficient to eliminate the need for external linearization in
wireless power amplifiers. This program targets third-order intermodulation
products below -30 dBc under large-signal conditions, sufficient to support a
PAE > 50% under operational (rather than saturated) conditions. At this
performance level, the adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR) is anticipated to be
sufficient to meet regulatory performance mandates without complex and costly
linearizers. We will also demonstrate high-linearity broadband amplifiers with
PAE > 50% and high tolerance to impedance mismatch, through the use of our new
class of contiguous mode amplifiers to provide designers a flexible design space
for optimizing linearity, output power and efficiency. To advance physical
understanding, an in-depth study of the underlying device physics of
polarization engineered GaN HEMTs, with nanometer scale resolution. This will
provide thorough understanding of process, device and memory effects at both the
device and circuit level, which is critical to meeting the device and circuit
performance targets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.