* 2303606
* Building Arctic seagoing research capacity: Arctic Chief Scientist Training cruise
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Laurie Juranek, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 01/31/2024
* USD 120,242.00

The National Science Foundation supports vessels dedicated to oceanographic
research in the Arctic. Conducting successful research cruises on these ships
requires scientists (particularly those in supervisory roles on the survey trips
– or “chief scientists”) to understand the planning and logistics of how to
request time on ships, how to coordinate personnel and equipment, how to plan
for operations and survey tasks at sea, and how to work with vessel crew and
staff – as well as how to deal with unexpected issues which may arise. To
maintain a robust scientific workforce that can effectively request, plan, and
lead this type of work, early career scientists need to gain training and
experience, with consideration for the unique challenges of work the Arctic,
such as planning survey routes through sea ice. There is a particular need for
this training and capacity-building at the present time, given increasing
interest in Arctic research and a lag in research cruises (and thus junior
scientist training) during the COVID-19 pandemic. This project will host up to
12 early career participants on a week-long R/V Sikuliaq transit between Seward
and Nome, AK. Participants will participate in virtual pre-cruise meetings, a
one-day pre-cruise workshop, and diverse training modules on the cruise to
develop proficiency, build confidence, and become part of an early career arctic
oceanographer cohort.

This project will implement an early career chief scientist training cruise
onboard the R/V Sikuliaq in Alaskan waters to help train a new generation of
oceanographers who have the skills and confidence to lead these types of
expeditions. Participants will be recruited through an advertisement process and
will be introduced to the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF), the University
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), and cruise planning and
logistics through several virtual pre-cruise meetings prior to the training
cruise. Participants will have the opportunity to plan their cruise sampling,
communicate plans with the vessel crew, and arrange for mobilization of any
required supplies. Topics will include strategies for using the Marine
Facilities Planning system and the Cruise Planning workflow, learning how to
request and use resources from the UNOLS van pool and other community-based
vessel equipment and support groups, and how to coordinate and manage shipboard
and shore-based personnel. During a pre-cruise one-day shoreside workshop,
participants will engage in targeted activities to build leadership and explore
interpersonal dynamics prior to boarding. During the cruise, science mentors and
vessel scientific staff will provide guidance to participants and lead a series
of presentations and group discussions about how to manage a successful marine
survey. Participants will have the opportunity to engage in sampling and daily
activity planning. After the cruise, participants will ship any samples
collected to their home institution, archive data, and create a cruise report.
Specific desired outcomes include developing a well-trained seagoing scientific
workforce to promote U.S. national interests in the Arctic through oceanographic
research on NSF-supported platforms. The project will help to develop a cohort
of early career researchers who can become future mentors among the polar
science community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.