* 2303610
* Using Emergent Constraints to Reduce Uncertainty in Regional Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alexander Hall, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 899,544.00

There is a growing need for robust projections of future climate change at
spatial scales relevant to policymakers and stakeholders. However, our
understanding of the many risks associated with climate change at these regional
scales is often limited by uncertainty in climate model projections (i.e.,
different climate models give different answers about future climate). The range
of answers across the models is particularly large when it comes to changes in
the water cycle, which are of great societal relevance. Here, the investigators
will rely on a leading climate model evaluation technique that uses observations
of the current climate to narrow the range of climate model answers regarding
future changes to precipitation, drought, and streamflow across regions of the
globe. Moreover, this work will expand our knowledge of the key sources of model
disagreement to inform areas of future development for climate modeling centers.
The investigators will also, for the first time, apply this methodology to a
collection of high-resolution climate model simulations covering the Western
United States. These simulations better represent the complex topography of the
region than global climate models, and thus allow for more reliable depictions
of mountain snowpack, which plays a pivotal role in the region’s water cycle.
This research will seek to reduce uncertainty in the snowpack’s response to
future warming and apply this knowledge to better understand risks associated
with freshwater availability and drought.

By focusing on climate metrics relating to the water cycle, which have enormous
implications in water-stressed regions like the Western United States, this
research will be valuable to a variety of constituencies outside the scientific
community. Building off existing stakeholder collaborations, the investigators
will engage with several groups across the Western United States to help shape
the research so that the results have broad societal relevance. This project
will provide training opportunities for a graduate student and a postdoctoral
scholar. Additionally, the investigators will convene sessions at the American
Geophysical Union’s Fall Meeting to catalyze discussions regarding relevant
research. Lastly, a virtual workshop involving representatives from water
resource management, wild land and fire management, and public health
communities from across the Western United States will be held to disseminate
the research as a capstone to the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.