* 2303540
* SBIR Phase I:  Metal-implanted materials (MIMs) for fast, cost-effective and reproducible mixing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Elisabet Rosas, QUANTUMMED INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 268,521.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project includes improving the reproducibility of automated life science
workflows while simultaneously reducing their carbon footprint. Automated life
science workflows are increasingly prevalent in medical (e.g., laboratory tests
and diagnostics) and research (e.g., next generation sequencing) applications,
and mixing is a ubiquitous and often repeatedly performed operation in these
assays. The novel mixing technology to be developed will confer myriad benefits.
By reducing assay turnaround times and improving assay reliability, it will
decrease wait times for medical screening, diagnosis and monitoring, enabling
faster diagnoses and treatments. By decreasing the materials costs of the
assays, this technology may reduce the costs of medical testing and improve
access to care. It also can enhance partnerships between academic and industry
laboratories by giving academic laboratories access to industry workflows that
are currently prohibitively expensive. Finally, by eliminating a substantial
portion of the single-use plastic consumed by assays, this novel mixing
technology will help curb the waste generated by life science assays, which will
help alleviate the single-use plastic waste crisis. The proposed project will
deliver an innovative mixing technology that is based on a photo-acoustic
streaming phenomenon. Briefly, when glass implanted with metal nanoparticles
(metal-implanted materials (MIMs)) is excited by a pulsed laser, it causes an
adjacent fluid (liquid or gas) to begin streaming for the duration of the
illumination. This streaming creates an opportunity to precisely control mixing,
but key technical challenges include optimizing the MIMs’ form factor and
devising an effective, yet also inexpensive, illumination system. The proposed
project’s objectives address these challenges by: (i) evaluating the
effectiveness of mixing solutions with a novel MIM form factor that can be
incorporated easily into existing automated life science workflows, (ii)
determining if functional MIMs can be fabricated in bulk by procuring them from
a supplier and characterizing them for nanoparticle implantation and laser-
induced solution streaming, and (iii) testing an alternative laser light source
that powers mixing and consists of a low-cost light emitting diode (LED) laser.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.