* 2303460
* SBIR Phase II:  Meat substitutes combining cultured animal cells with plant-based fibers
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Luke MacQueen, TENDER FOOD, INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2025
* USD 997,986.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is the advancement of sustainable and ethically produced meat
alternatives. Most people have tried or know someone who has tried plant-based
meats. Opinions vary but most people acknowledge that meats made from animals
are not accurately recreated using plants, especially for unprocessed whole cuts
like chicken breasts and beef tenderloins. The question remains if plant-based
meat can be more like animal meat in terms of texture, taste, and nutrition. One
approach is to test if plant-based meats improved when they are combined with
cultured animal cells. To address this hypothesis, this project will advance the
technological understanding of realistic plant-based meats by developing methods
to combine cultured animal cells with fibrous plant-based scaffolds. By finding
out how many animal cells are needed to enhance plant-based meats, and what
types of animal cells to add, this project will help define commercialization
strategies for this emerging market.

This project will test methods for adding cultured animal cells to plant-based
whole cut meats. Animal cells are expensive to produce, and the quantity of each
cell type needed to improve plant-based meats is not known. For example, what is
the number of muscle cells, fat cells, or skin cells needed to make a plant-
based chicken breast taste better? What are the best ways to add cells? How do
different cell types like muscle, fat, or skin get placed in the right spots?
What other plant-derived additives can enhance the flavor that cultured cells
may provide? These questions can be answered by making plant-based meats with
real meat texture and testing different methods of incorporating animal cells
into them. Food-grade plant protein fibers that are the same size as animal
skeletal muscle fibers will be packed together like muscle tissue to replicate
the structure and texture of conventional meat. Animal cells will then be added
to enhance the taste, aroma, and nutrition. This project will focus on
developing methods to add animal cells to plant-based pork, chicken, and beef.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.