* 2303003
* Conference: Partnership to Grow Research Capacity in Emerging Research Institutions
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Aditi Pai, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 11/30/2023
* USD 637,800.00

This project will support an in-person workshop and mentoring activities in
support of capacity-building efforts by NSF to enable the participation of
minority-serving institutions, community colleges, and two-year and four-year
institutions to participate in regional innovation ecosystems. To support
institutions in building collaborations, identifying resources, and preparing
competitive grant applications, the activities under this project will connect
Emerging Research Institutions (ERIs) with experts in research development and
broader impacts work.

Specifically, the project will leverage resources from the Center for Advancing
Research Impact in Society (ARIS), Spelman College, and the National
Organization of Research Development Professionals (NORDP) to support ERIs as
they work through the submission of research capacity-building proposals by
establishing relationships among and between ERIs and experts in research
development and broader impacts. The activities will focus on the workshop
participants' ability to create partnerships with external organizations to grow
in workforce development, research and development, and translation of research
to practice. The proposed partnerships represent a unique opportunity for
researchers and administrators at ERIs to join with one another and benefit from
the guidance of experts to develop and submit strong collaborative research
proposals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.