* 2303707
* Conference: "EXTREME Design": Examining Frontiers and Research in Extreme Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Maria Yang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 01/31/2024
* USD 98,270.00

Society faces many grand challenges, including environmental sustainability,
water insecurity, climate change, and global poverty. These challenges demand
system-level solutions that bring together multiple disciplines commensurate
with rapid growth in the complexity of solutions and that reach beyond standard
conditions and approaches. Extreme Design (XD) is an emerging field of design
research that is, by its nature, focused on exceptional topics, from designing
for extreme environments to designing systems of extremely high complexity. This
award will support two conference workshops with interdisciplinary researchers
from the US Northeast region to better define and advance academic research in
this field. This award reflects NSF’s mission to advance scientific progress and
address issues affecting national welfare and security.

The workshops will include scholars from diverse disciplines, including
engineering, design, economics, public policy, architecture, geoscience,
management, psychology, physics, life sciences, and anthropology. The workshops
will include panel discussions, facilitated breakout sessions, and the
development of research concept papers. The workshop sessions will explore,
define, and develop research opportunity spaces and related research questions
for the emerging Extreme Design field. In addition to identifying compelling
research questions, workshop participants will investigate and contextualize
where gaps exist in current design tools, processes, and methods when addressing
extreme design challenges. This workshop series will serve as a springboard for
outreach on the topic of Extreme Design within and outside the engineering
design and systems engineering (EDSE) communities, and will be used to stimulate
further discussion and community building through follow-on academic conference
sessions, journal special issues, and industry collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.