* 2303590
* A Doppler Radar Climatology of Updraft Proxy Characteristics in Supercells
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Michael French, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 440,962.00

The project concerns the use of weather radar signatures to estimate the size
and tilt of an important storm feature, the storm updraft, within severe
thunderstorms. The updraft is an area of rapidly rising air that is transported
aloft to form clouds and eventually precipitation. The updraft contributes to
every hazard that a storm produces, notably large hail and tornadoes. Past work
has provided evidence that larger storm updrafts produce stronger tornadoes and
larger hail compared to storms with smaller updrafts. In addition, studies have
hinted that storm updrafts that are vertically upright, as opposed to tilted,
are also more likely to produce tornadoes. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
directly observe and measure characteristics of the storm updraft. However,
upgrades performed to the U.S. radar network have introduced new options to
track features that serve as a proxy for the updraft. In this project, the
researchers use the size and tilt of this radar feature as an estimate for those
same characteristics in the updraft in more than 100 actual storm cases to
better determine how closely linked updraft size and tilt are to tornado and
hail occurrence. The researchers also will determine if the weather conditions
feeding into the storm are linked to the size and tilt of the updraft. The
project objectives ultimately aim to provide forecasters with new tools that may
help them alert the public to storms that are about to produce strong tornadoes
and/or very large hail.

The storm type being studied is the supercell thunderstorm, which generally
produces the strongest tornadoes and largest hail. To estimate the size and tilt
of supercell updrafts, the researchers use a novel algorithm that automates
detection and area of a dual-pol radar signature, the ZDR column, which forms
when an updraft lofts rain and small hail above the freezing level. Those data
will be used in tandem with traditional radar analyses to identify links between
updraft proxy characteristics, the near-storm environment, and hazard production
in large numbers of supercell cases. Specifically, this project seeks to (i)
determine a firm link between midlevel updraft area, low-level updraft area, and
tornado and large hail occurrence, (ii) quantify the degree to which updraft
vertical alignment is necessary for tornado production, (iii) the near-storm
environmental controls, if they exist, on both updraft size and alignment, and
(iv) combine the results from (i) and (ii) with data of another dual-pol radar
signature, the ZDR-KDP separation vector, to optimize known predictors of
tornado formation and peak tornado intensity for possible operational use. In
addition, depending on project results, the ability to accurately assess these
characteristics and their potential use in nowcasting of hazardous weather will
be explored.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.