* 2303842
* SBIR Phase I: Bioreactors for Upcycling Pyrolyzed Polystyrene Waste into Organic Fertilizer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Samuel Baker, PRAG LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,718.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to enable the recycling of common polystyrene foam waste into
soil amendments: creating a valuable agricultural product out of a pernicious
and ubiquitous waste. Annually, millions of pounds of polystyrene waste fill
landfills, blot roadsides, or pollute waterways – making up 80% of all ocean
plastic waste. Taking centuries to decompose, when finally broken down
polystyrene may have terrible impacts on health. This project seeks to combine
proven technologies with newly discovered abilities in microorganisms to digest
polystyrene, to demonstrate a means by which polystyrene can be reconstituted
into nutrient-rich material useful in agriculture. Because of the vast supply of
polystyrene waste and the great commercial need to dispose of it, this project
taps into a commercial potential not only to provide waste disposal services to
a much underserved market but can do so while simultaneously producing a
valuable agricultural good. This project supports the NSF’s mission by advancing
the science of bioremediation, advancing the health and welfare of the nation by
removing a harmful waste product from the environment, and supporting national
prosperity by providing a much-needed service to a large industry.

This project seeks to use a unique combination of technologies to demonstrate
that polystyrene foam waste can be processed and bioremediated rapidly into a
soil amending “castings” ready for use in gardening, farming, or landscaping.
The project's research and development effort lies in the complex process of
converting polystyrene from an unprocessed waste into both bioplastics and
organic acids by way of thermal and biological methods, before further
amelioration by decomposer organisms and the formation of a usable agricultural
product. Bioreactors featuring numerous strains and species of microbes never-
before deployed for this purpose will be used in tandem with macro-organisms
whose capabilities for this application are likewise mostly or entirely
unstudied. This research will uncover the specific abilities of numerous species
to digest polystyrene waste at multiple scales and will evaluate several
potential pathways through which the resulting digestate could be further
processed. Large sample sizes, stepwise variances in conditions, and
permutations of species’ combinations will be used to ensure statistical
veracity. These methods, coupled with the use of cutting-edge analytical
equipment, will ensure a high precision in results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.