* 2303608
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Planktic Foraminiferal Ecology Using Compound Specific Isotope Analysis of Amino Acids
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Catherine Davis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 295,061.00

Current climate change is unique in human history. To understand how the Earth
and life on it responds to comparable change it is necessary to look millions of
years in the past. A huge amount of what we know about past climate comes from
the fossils of marine plankton. Specifically, a group of single-celled organisms
called foraminifera. Foraminifera make tiny fossil shells which capture the
chemistry of the water they grew in. As a result, they can be used to
reconstruct ancient ocean waters and climate. To use the fossil shells of
foraminifera to their greatest effect, the ecology of the living creature must
be understood. Variables like what the foraminifera ate, what depth it lived at,
and whether it had symbionts will all impact how shell chemistry is interpreted.
Compound-specific nitrogen and carbon isotopes of specific amino acids (CSI-AA)
represent a unique approach to study these variables in living plankton. This
proposal would test how well this approach can be applied to fossil shells. If
successful, this would provide powerful ways to describe the ecology of long
extinct planktic foraminifera. In doing so, one may better understand the
records they hold of Earth’s past. The project broader impacts include support
for a postdoctoral researcher, development of a career-opportunities workshop to
introduce students from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions to geoscience
research, and content contributions to a summer program for at-risk STEM
transfer students at UC Santa Cruz.

Specifically, this project will investigate and develop multiple aspects of CSI-
AA to better understand the species-level ecology of planktic foraminifera. This
is key to generating paleoclimate and paleoceanographic records that can
contextualize the Ocean’s future climate and trajectory. The proposed project
will use CSI-AA to constrain three key aspects of planktic foraminiferal
ecology: depth habitat, diet, and symbiosis. CSI-AA from shell-bound organics
will be used in foraminifera for the first time to refine species-level
inferences about these ecological traits. First CSI-AA applications in extant
species will be ground-truthed using plankton tows, sediment traps, and recent
sedimentary samples from the Santa Barbara Basin. Lessons learned will then be
applied deeper into the fossil record to elucidate the trophic ecology of
extinct foraminifera. Finally, amino acid molar ratios and racemization (the
diagnostic shift between amino acid forms which occurs with fossil age) will be
used to assess amino acid preservation in fossils and ultimately test the limits
of this approach by targeting a suite of abundant species from the Miocene,
Eocene, and Cretaceous.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.