* 2303097
* RAPID: Information Sufficiency, Source Preferences, and Mitigation Behaviors Surrounding Hurricane Ian
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Kenneth Lachlan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 72,035.00

Natural disasters, such as the devastating Hurricane Ian in southwest Florida,
present a unique opportunity to examine risk information seeking behavior. When
faced with a high-risk weather event, individuals are likely to be motivated to
seek information in order to alleviate anxiety and gather information about how
to protect themselves. While these tendencies are well documented, less is known
about the extent to which media dependency translates into desired behavior, and
whether specific source dependencies are contingent on information sufficiency.
Recent studies in other emergency contexts have suggested that these
dependencies may cluster around information depth, but this has not yet been
linked empirically to sufficiency thresholds. The extent to which engagement
with risk news content motivates mitigation and evacuation efforts surrounding a
natural disaster has also not been directly examined. The findings contribute to
our knowledge base by filling a significant gap in the social science literature
on emergency response by evaluating the links between self-perception,
processing styles, source preferences, and protective actions.

The study consists of an online survey distributed to 1,000 residents of
southwest Florida impacted by Hurricane Ian. Participants are identified by zip
code and drawn from counties in Florida that were directly impacted by the
storm. Participants are asked about the relative importance of varying news
outlets, sources of first alerts, time spent seeking information, risk
perception (including magnitude and probability), mitigation and evacuation
behaviors, and information sufficiency thresholds. The aim is to extend previous
research by investigating the extent to which risk perception and information
sufficiency are tied to specific source preferences, and the degree to which
these dependencies are subsequently associated with mitigation and evacuation.
By examining preferences for specific news outlets, along with the role of
information sufficiency thresholds in information consumption and response,
these organizations may be able to develop best practices for message placement
and content. The data may also provide valuable guidance to emergency managers
and crisis responders in terms of identifying audiences that are less inclined
to internalize risk and/or take protective actions, and appeal to those
audiences directly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.