* 2303146
* CAREER: Emerging Challenges in Wave Turbulence Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Minh-Binh Tran, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 286,462.00

Wave turbulence (WT) is a general physical phenomenon describing the nonlinear
dynamical interactions of waves far from thermal equilibrium. Examples of wave
turbulence occur in classical surface water waves and also in quantum dynamical
systems involving a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). Even though wave fields
describing the processes of random wave interactions in nature are enormously
diverse, there is a common mathematical framework that models and describes the
dynamics of spectral energy transfer through probability densities associated
with weakly non-linear interactions in quantum or classical wave systems. The
probability densities are solutions of wave kinetic (WK) equations, whose
nonlocal interaction operators are of kinetic type. This project aims to tackle
open challenges in the theory of nonlinear waves via the study of the associated
wave turbulence theory. An integral part of the project is its educational
component and the opportunities to involve students from all levels in the
research. To this end, the principal investigator will organize summer schools
for underrepresented and disabled K-12 students, design graduate courses on
Partial Differential Equations, Wave Turbulence and Statistical Physics, and
organize an undergraduate and graduate research internship program of excellence
and a mathematics-physics conference for young researchers. In addition, the
principal investigator will participate in the NSF RTG SMU summer undergraduate
research program, with participants from both SMU and Texas Rio Grande Valley
University (a Hispanic-serving institution) as well as the SMU Hamilton
Undergraduate Research Scholars and the SMU Undergraduate Research Assistant
Programs. This project concentrates on three main topics in WT theory. The first
topic is to study the rigorous justification of 3-wave kinetic equations, by the
Feynman diagrammatic approach. The second topic is to establish a mathematical
foundation for the Garrett-Munk spectrum of the ocean, using the renormalization
group method. The third topic is the proof of the finite time formation of
singularities of solutions to the finite temperature BEC system, with the
addition of a new, previously missing, collision operator derived by Yves Pomeau
and the principal investigator. Several ideas from kinetic theory, dispersive
equations, oceanography, and quantum mechanics will be combined to study the
proposed problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.