* 2303508
* Canonical Kahler metrics and complex Monge-Ampere equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Bin Guo, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 152,862.00

The project will focus on addressing open problems in geometric analysis and
exploring their applications in various fields such as geometry, topology and
mathematical physics. These problems play a central role in active areas of
research in mathematics, including differential geometry, partial differential
equations (PDE), and high-dimensional supergravity. Given the interdisciplinary
nature of this project, it will foster collaborations among researchers from
various disciplines, and the outcomes of the project will introduce novel
approaches and provide valuable insights into the analytic study of the geometry
of singular varieties. An important objective of the project is to establish a
foundation for the integration of research and education, enriching the
mathematics curriculum and enhancing the mathematics education at Rutgers -
Newark. In line with this objective, the Principal Investigator (PI) will
organize seminars and deliver lectures, aiming to contribute towards the
advancement of mathematics education nationwide. The PI will also engage in
mentoring at at high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels.

The PI will continue to develop novel approaches in the regularity theory for
linear and fully nonlinear PDEs on complex manifolds, with a specific focus on
the complex Monge-Ampere equations and the associated Kahler metrics. The
geometry of these metrics will be investigated from both analytic and geometric
perspectives. An emphasis will be placed on studying the degeneration of a
family of Kahler metrics, including the geometric convergence of Kahler-Ricci
flow and other flows arising from geometry and physics. To this end, the PI will
advance the techniques of auxiliary differential equations, aiming to analyze
the compactness of the space of the family of Kahler metrics. Along this path,
it is expected that new analytic tools such as uniform Poincare and Sobolev
inequalities, as well as heat kernel estimates, will be developed. Furthermore,
combined with techniques from complex geometry and algebraic geometry, these
tools will be employed to investigate the asymptotic behavior of metrics near
singularities. In addition, the PI will continue to explore the parabolic
approach, introduced by the PI and collaborators, in high-dimensional
supergravity. This exploration aims to discover new ansatz and construct new
solutions to the coupled systems, thereby deepening the understanding of the
underlying space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.