* 2303536
* Probing topological effects in multiterminal Josephson junction devices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Venkat Chandrasekhar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 510,414.00

Non-technical Abstract The sorting of materials into different classes such as
solids, liquids and gases helps to clarify our understanding of the properties
of these materials and consequently enhances our ability to use them in
technologically relevant products. Recently, there has been a major shift in the
way materials in condensed matter physics are classified: the properties of many
materials can now be understood in terms of their topological classification.
Topology is a fundamental characteristic of objects and materials. Two seemingly
disparate objects may belong to the same topological class: a donut and a coffee
cup may seem to be entirely different objects, but both have a single hole, and
hence are topologically similar. Many groundbreaking scientific discoveries of
the past century such as the quantum Hall effect have now been reinterpreted in
terms of the topological properties of their constituent materials, and in doing
so, new insights have been gained. Designing materials and devices with specific
topological properties also has potential technological advantages: for example,
quantum computers based on topological qubits may be especially resistant to
errors due to quantum decoherence. However, synthesizing materials and devices
with specific topological properties has proved messy and difficult. This
project explores a new way to develop devices with topologically important
characteristics using superconducting hybrid devices, devices in which a
superconductor is placed in contact with a material like gold or graphene. The
properties of such devices mimic those of real crystals, and by appropriate
design, analogs of topologically interesting crystals can potentially be
fabricated, enabling the study of topologically distinct systems. The devices
themselves are fabricated using sophisticated nanolithography techniques and
measured at temperatures a few millidegrees above absolute zero. The underlying
physics and experimental techniques used in this proposal are applicable to a
wide range of scientific research, ensuring that the students engaged in this
project will be well trained for future careers in either academia or industry.

Technical abstract Materials with topologically non-trivial band structure are
being studied intensively at the moment due to their potential applications in a
number of areas, including in topological quantum computation. The focus of this
project is to create analogs of topologically non-trivial crystals using
superconducting hybrid devices, or devices in which superconductors are placed
in contact with a normal material such as gold or graphene. The energy levels of
quasiparticles in a normal metal in contact with two superconductors depend on
the phase difference between the superconductors in much the same way as the
energy levels of electrons in a crystal depend on the crystal momentum. With
more than two superconductors, analogs of higher dimensional crystals can be
fabricated. The goal of this effort is to search for signatures of non-trivial
topology in specifically designed devices using electrical transport
measurements at millikelvin temperatures, with the devices being fabricated by
sophisticated nanolithography techniques. In addition to furthering our
understanding of topological systems, the knowledge and understanding gained in
this project about the nature of the superconducting proximity effect,
particularly in the ballistic devices, will improve the understanding of
superconducting correlations in proximity effect devices targeted to topological
quantum computing. The nanolithography and low temperature experimental
techniques required are similar to the techniques needed in emerging fields in
quantum information science, ensuring that students involved in the project are
well trained in skills required for the quantum workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.