* 2303539
* CAREER: Elucidating the role of sigma-hole interactions in advanced functional materials
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Davita Watkins, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 97,162.00

Professor Watkins at the University of Mississippi conducts research to gain a
deeper understanding of how chemical structures and interactions between
molecules affect the light absorbing and electronic properties of organic
materials. This fundamental chemistry knowledge is important for the future
design of functional materials for technological applications such as electronic
and solar devices, which are ubiquitous in our daily lives. Moreover, the
project provides research training to the next generation of scientists and
engineers. Integrated with the CAREER plan are opportunities to increase the
interests of young women and underrepresented minorities (URMs) in science by
immersing high school seniors into a summer research program called Operation
ICB (I Can Be). The program helps to increase the retention in STEM-related
career fields via networking and extended mentorship.

The operational efficiency of organic electronic devices such as organic field
effect transistors and organic photovoltaics depends not only on the molecular
components but also on the supramolecular structure formed by the pi-conjugated
molecules. The research focus of this CAREER project, which is jointly supported
by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program and the EPSCoR
Program of NSF, is to establish the foundation for utilizing halogen bonding
between novel pi-conjugated molecules to form high-performing optoelectronic
materials. This project aims to develop molecular design principles for
controlling the self-organization of pi-conjugated molecules in nanoscale arrays
and enhancing the light-harvesting and electronic properties of these
assemblies. This award increases the interest of young women and
underrepresented minorities (URMs) in science by immersing high school seniors
into a summer research program. The program also increases the retention of
student in STEM-related career fields via networking and extended mentorship.