* 2303556
* Mathematics and Data for Social Justice Summer Seminar
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Julia Walk, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,965.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by supporting professional
development for mathematics and statistics faculty to increase equity within
mathematics and statistics education. Evidence-based practices show that a
commitment to culturally relevant and responsive curriculum and pedagogy
designed for the diversity of today’s learners is one way to advance such
equity. Through this project post-secondary mathematics and statistics faculty
will convene for an intensive three-day seminar that will equip participants
with skills and expertise to meaningfully incorporate social justice themes such
as electoral issues and environmental justice, into their curricula and teaching
practices. Post-seminar activities include sessions or workshops at two regional
conferences hosted by the North Central Section of the Mathematical Association
of America (MAA-NCS), and virtual engagement of faculty from the section to
provide ongoing collaboration and peer-to-peer support as faculty make changes
to their teaching. By engaging faculty across diverse institutions, this seminar
will serve as a regional model for sustained professional development aimed at
advancing equity in STEM fields. The Mathematics and Data for Social Justice
Summer Seminar will support two and four-year post-secondary mathematics and
statistics educators in their efforts to transform their teaching to be
culturally relevant and responsive through social justice curricula and
pedagogies. The seminar derives from the need to address inequities and reduce
persistent gaps in STEM access, engagement, and persistence. Four expected
outcomes for the participants guide the work of the seminar. First is to
increase their ability to incorporate equity and social justice issues into
their teaching practice. Second is to engage and collaborate in a community of
practice focused on equity and social justice in mathematics. Third is to
develop capacity to facilitate discussions of equity and social justice in the
classroom. Fourth is to adapt or generate new curricula in mathematics and
social justice. Following the seminar participants will engage in a community of
practice that will encourage further development and dissemination of any
developed classroom materials and to provide immediate and responsive
collaborative support to each other. The community of practice will engage in
person at semi-annual conferences of the MAA-NCS, and connect in virtual
collaboration and conversations throughout the year following the seminar.
Participants will be invited to focus group discussions, which will thereby
inform the structures and practices of the MAA-NCS governing board. Developed
resources will be shared through professional meetings and online discussion
platforms of the MAA. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.