* 2303909
* Conference: ACM SIGSPATIAL Conference 2022: Student Activities and U.S.-Based Students Support
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Yao-Yi Chiang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cornelia Caragea
* 11/30/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports 29+ U.S.-based students to attend the 30th Association for
Computing Machinery Special Interest Group on Spatial Information (ACM
SIGSPATIAL) International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, November 1-4, 2022, in Seattle, WA. The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference is
the world's premier Spatial Information and Geographic Information Systems
research conference. The conference brings together researchers, developers,
users, and practitioners conducting research and development in novel systems
based on geospatial data and knowledge. The conference promotes
interdisciplinary discussions and research in broad disciplines and
applications, including computer science, geography, urban planning, land use,
and defense. The conference also seeks to foster the development of a new
generation of researchers and practitioners in the critical area of Spatial
Information and Geographic Information Systems.

The ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems 2022 is the 30th event in a series of symposia and workshops
that began in 1993. The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference has established itself as the
world's premier Spatial Information and Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
research conference. The conference provides a forum for original research
contributions covering all conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of
GIS, ranging from applications, user interfaces, and visualization to storage
management and indexing issues. The conference brings together researchers,
developers, users, and practitioners conducting research and development in
novel systems based on geospatial data and knowledge. The ACM SIGSPATIAL
conference will feature research presentations, workshops, demonstrations,
poster sessions, and student-focused activities, including a student research
competition, a spatial computing competition, and mentoring by senior
researchers. Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems will be available in the ACM Digital
Library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.