* 2303457
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Role of Land-Atmosphere Feedbacks on Flash Drought Intensification, Severity, and Expansion
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Tobias Gerken, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 142,090.00

Droughts can lead to massive economic, social, environmental, and agricultural
impacts around the world. They occur across a wide range of total areas and
duration. Flash droughts, which rapidly intensify over multi-week time periods,
pose challenges for traditional drought monitoring and forecasting tools that
are unable to capture rapid changes. Their rapid development has been linked to
connections between the land and atmosphere that can make the land surface dry
even faster, but these feedbacks and the conditions under which flash droughts
occur are poorly understood. This project seeks to better understand the
conditions in which land-atmosphere interactions contribute to rapid drought
intensification and ways observations can be used to accurately describe these
conditions. This project will develop a database that captures both slowly
developing and flash drought events and will investigate metrics to assess
coupling between the land and atmosphere to improve our understanding of flash
drought development. The research tasks will increase our understanding of flash
drought processes and characteristics, and their relationship to large-scale
droughts, which will help answer whether flash droughts indeed present a
separate class of drought. Through research conducted at James Madison
University, an emerging research institution with primarily undergraduate
students, this project will also train undergraduate students in environmental
data science, including data analysis and visualization. The project will
provide opportunities for capstone projects for students in the Integrated
Science and Technology program to apply their systems analysis skills to the
socially relevant topic of drought. Course materials will be developed to bring
drought related materials into the university classroom.

This project is jointly funded by the Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics Program
and Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences to support projects that
increase research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety of
institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.