* 2303197
* Calcium: Chemically and Electronically a Transition Metal?
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hrvoje Petek of the University
of Pittsburgh is investigating the chemical reactivity and properties of calcium
using surface electronic spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microcopy. Calcium
metal is very reactive in ambient conditions, so understanding its chemical and
physical properties has remained elusive. As a result, Professor Petek and his
team will use ultrahigh vacuum methods to prepare calcium films and atomic scale
imaging and spectroscopic methods to investigate reactivity under highly
controlled conditions. Students engaged in this research will gain exposure to
state-of-the-art spectroscopic methods and learn to apply these to fundamental
questions at the interface of physical and inorganic chemistry, including, in
this case, thinking about the role calcium plays in carbon capture at a single
molecule level.

Calcium, which has a fully occupied 4s shell, readily transfers an electron to
interacting molecules; however, it is unclear whether this process involves the
s- or d- orbitals. To elucidate this mechanism, calcene, a structure in which
calcium atoms are arranged in a honeycomb structure and appears to involve
strong d-orbital character, will be investigated under well-controlled
conditions using two-photon photoemission spectroscopy and scanning tunneling
microscopy. These two methods are expected to reveal the ensemble averaged and
atomic scale occupied and unoccupied electronic structures of well-defined
materials, under ultrahigh vacuum to help classify the calcium states as either
alkali or transition metal. By exposing the calcium films to small molecules
such as carbon dioxide, water, and oxygen; their reactivity and electronic
behavior is expected to reveal the electronic character of the bonds that form.
If successful, these studies are expected to lead to broader application of the
approach to other elements/catalytic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.