* 2303007
* Using Extended Reality to Close Equity Gaps in Laboratory Training
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rebecca Broyer, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 793,200.00

Many undergraduates enter college level chemistry classes without prior
experience in a chemistry lab, often due to unequal access to laboratory
facilities in high school. Since lab experience is an integral component of most
traditional chemistry courses, students arriving without this background can be
at a disadvantage, creating feelings of anxiety that could lead to a lack of
persistence in STEM pathways. This Research on Emerging Technologies for
Teaching and Learning (RETTL) project will develop immersive XR (Extended
Reality) and web-based (non-immersive) learning experiences for first-year
college students taking chemistry lab courses. The technology proposed in this
project will provide an effective introduction to the undergraduate chemistry
lab that will reinforce their knowledge of chemistry terminology while
minimizing anxiety associated with performing experiments for the first time in
an unfamiliar and timed setting. Newly designed modules will orient incoming
students to the chemistry laboratory and introduce them to experiments that
augment the lecture portion of their courses. The purpose of these modules is to
supplement and reinforce lab training through an active learning, multi-sensory
learning interface. While many studies have focused on Virtual Reality (VR)
experiences in education, this project specifically examines the emotional and
cognitive impacts of Extended Reality interventions on students and aims to
improve upon the technology, based on student feedback throughout the project.
In addition, as the Covid-19 pandemic highlighted, there is a need to develop
virtual educational tools that provide comparable experiences for all students.

This project examines an innovative introduction to the chemistry lab experience
by applying the use of virtual reality technology to chemistry education. The
study will examine the extent to which VR and XR training modules can prepare
students for entry to a chemistry lab course, reinforce conventional lab
training, boost knowledge of chemistry literacy, and minimize anxiety associated
with performing experiments. The project goal is to deliver transformative
experiences through XR technology that will positively impact the ability of
undergraduates in first-year chemistry courses to engage with and persist in
scientific settings. The project will employ an inclusive design-centered
approach to the development of the XR modules, where extensive suggestions from
students and other stakeholders will refine and improve the technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.