* 2303823
* Hidden Symmetries: Internal and External Equivariance in Floer Homology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Irving Dai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 183,837.00

The central goal of this project is to investigate the shape of abstract
structures in three and four dimensions. The study of such objects has formed a
major area of research in mathematics, which has both drawn from and contributed
to advances in theoretical physics. More broadly, ideas from the field of
topology and geometry have influenced the language of data analysis, biology,
and artificial intelligence. Here, the PI aims to investigate specific questions
in three- and four-dimensional topology and develop tools for understanding
these problems. As part of this program, the PI plans to develop connections and
collaborations with other areas of mathematics and provide an accessible entry
point to research for undergraduate and graduate students.

The project will utilize Floer homology to study geometric questions involving
knots, surfaces, and manifolds in three and four dimensions. The PI aims to
expand the role of symmetry in Floer homology by exploring novel applications of
equivariant Floer theory across a wide range of topological settings. Specific
goals include understanding the structure of various cobordism and concordance
groups, studying exotic phenomena, developing new sliceness obstructions, and
investigating the action of satellite operators. The PI will also seek to relate
different Floer-theoretic constructions with each other in order to better
understand connections between these invariants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.