* 2303463
* Collaborative Research: Paleo Records Of GLacier And Climate changes Inferred from Alaskan Lakes (PROGLACIAL)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ellie Broadman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2026
* USD 86,756.00

Climate change poses a major challenge for society. More information is needed
to put recent climate changes into a long-term context of natural climate
variability. This information helps to foresee possible future climate trends,
especially those that involve slow-moving features of the climate system, which
will continue to change over hundreds to thousands of years to come. A variety
of geological evidence can be used to extend observations of temperature and
other climate variables back in time. This project focuses on reconstructing
glacier fluctuations in Alaska, the Arctic region of the United States, as
evidence for past climate changes extending back for thousands of years. The
research team will estimate past glacier size by studying sediment from glaciers
that is carried by meltwater streams and deposited in glacier-fed lakes. The
sediment samples collected for this project will also be studied for signs of
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions to determine how frequently these damaging
events have occurred in the past and will likely occur in the future. The
project will also help prepare undergraduate and graduate students for careers
in the STEM workforce.

The extent of glacier cover is a prime indicator of climate. Sediments stored in
glacier-fed (proglacial) lakes provide a uniquely continuous record of glacier-
size fluctuations. This project will further develop the ability to reconstruct
the extent of glacier cover within the catchment of proglacial lakes using basic
sedimentary indicators of glacier rock-flour abundance (bulk density, organic
matter, particle size, magnetic susceptibility, and accumulation rate). By
sampling proglacial lakes along an environmental gradient of heavily to sparsely
glaciated catchments in Alaska, the research team will systematically acquire
quantitative information about these well-known glacial indicators, which vary
with glacier size and other environmental variables. This information will be
used to develop a numerical model to estimate past glacier extent based on lake
sediment properties measured in sediment cores taken from multiple lakes in
south-central and northwest Alaska that extend back to around 15,000 years. In
addition to rock-flour indicators, the sediment will be analyzed for terrestrial
and aquatic productivity indicators, including organic pigments and biogenic
silica abundance, which are amenable to generating time series with decadal-
scale resolution. These records will be used to address fundamental questions
related to the timing and extent of climate changes in Alaska that occurred
following the last major ice age. The ages of the lake sediment will be
determined using short-lived radioisotopes, volcanic ash layers, and radiocarbon
dating. This project will also contribute to assessing geological hazards
related to seismic and volcanic activity near the most populated area of Alaska,
supporting and engaging STEM graduate and undergraduate students and early
career researchers, and developing scientific resources, including the popular
Alaska PaleoGlacier Atlas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.