* 2303907
* New Foldamer Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Samuel Gellman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2027
* USD 680,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Samuel H. Gellman of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison will develop foldamer catalysts that are inspired by the
structural diversity of enzymes. Enzymes are large protein-based macromolecules
that act as biological catalysts by accelerating numerous chemical reactions in
living organisms. Some of the most well known reactions catalyzed by enzymes
include conversion of cane sugar into glucose and fructose, breaking of glucose
into ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide, and hydrolysis of fats. Foldamers, on the
other hand, are unnatural scaffolds that mimic protein-like conformational
behavior and potentially also the catalytic properties of enzymes. In this
project, foldamers will be prepared using β-amino acids in addition to the usual
α-amino acid building blocks for natural peptides. During the protein folding
process, key subunits are arranged into the precise three-dimensional arrays
that are essential for binding to other molecules and catalyzing chemical
reactions. In this project, organic and supramolecular chemistries specifically
tailored to enable efficient functional group incorporation into helical
foldamer scaffolds will be utilized to prepare bifunctional and trifunctional
foldamer catalysts. The synthesized catalysts will then be utilized in variety
of metal and non-metal catalyzed carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. This
project will provide excellent training in interdisciplinary research and enable
young scholars to undertake productive careers in academia, industry, or other
settings. Additionally, Professor Gellman will continue to support expansion of
diversity, equity, and inclusion in the scientific community through his
involvement in graduate student recruitment and through his activities as a
Trustee of the Gordon Research Conferences.

This project will seek to expand the range of bifunctional foldamer catalysis by
examining α/β-peptides containing new types of reactive diads. Three paths will
be pursued under the first general goal, focusing on bifunctional catalysis. In
the first path, side chains containing new types of reactive groups that
function via covalent activation of substrates, specifically, hydrazides for
electrophilic activation of α-substituted enals, and thiazolium systems or
related heterocycles for activation of aldehydes toward Stetter reactions, will
be incorporated into foldamer scaffolds. In the second path, side chains
intended to activate substrates noncovalently either through H-bonding or
cation-π-interactions will be explored. The third path will focus on adding
bipyridine or terpyridine units that will be used for complexation with nickel
and subsequently α-arylation of aldehydes. In the second goal, the team will
seek to harness the modularity of foldamer scaffolds to allow three functional
groups to work in coordination to promote a single transformation. This project
seeks to enable the development of new catalysts that are inspired by the
structural diversity of enzymes. The ability to precisely control the location
of multiple reactive sites within foldamers could additionally provide exciting
opportunities of using these enzyme mimics for synergistic catalysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.