* 2303650
* CRII: RI: A Deep Gameplay Framework for Strong Story Experience Management
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Joseph Robertson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 159,613.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Experience managers are intelligent agents that produce personalized stories
that change based on decisions a player makes in a digital game. These agents
create new and powerful types of interactive stories for art and entertainment,
training applications, and personalized education. A central problem for
experience managers is avoiding dead ends, which are situations where story
structure is broken due to a choice by the player. This problem results in
experiences with un-interesting stories, missed training sequences, and long
spells without appropriate targeted educational content. This project will
develop a novel experience management architecture to quickly navigate around
dead end situations during real-time interaction with a human participant. The
architecture is based on recent advances in deep reinforcement learning for
general game playing. This experience management platform will enable new forms
of real-time training and education applications.

This work addresses a fundamental gap in existing experience managers that do
not adversarially plan against sequences of player actions that lead to dead end
situations. The specific research objectives are to create a deep reinforcement
learning-based gameplay agent platform that (1) builds state spaces described by
an action language, (2) identifies dead end states without performing exhaustive
search, (3) relaxes assumptions of zero-sum and symmetric gameplay, and (4)
solves narrative planning problems by compiling specialized narrative reasoning
into a standard action language domain description. If successful, this research
will significantly improve the speed and control of experience management agents
and provide a pipeline to controlling existing and future specialized
interactive narrative formalisms. These improvements will allow control of
larger and more immersive narrative, training, and pedagogical environments
compared to current systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.