* 2303417
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the drivers of hydroclimate change over western North America and Europe in response to the global warmth of the middle Miocene
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Natalie Burls, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 380,445.00

A key question facing society is how will water availability change as the
Earth’s climate system responds to the accumulation of greenhouse gases. To
address this question, a team of researchers are investigating the environmental
conditions during the mid-Miocene, an interval around 15 million years ago, when
the planet was in a warm climate state. The western US and Europe have
experienced drying in recent decades, a trend that has been forecast to
intensify as our planet warms. However, recent reconstructions of Miocene
climate suggest wetter rather than drier conditions associated with past warm
intervals. This project aims to understand and model rainfall during warm
climate intervals in the Miocene to determine how water availability may change
with warming temperatures. The collaborative project supports early career and
mid-career scientists who provide graduate and high school traineeships for
climate modeling at George Mason University and graduate and undergraduate
traineeships in climate reconstruction at the University of Southern California.
Research findings are being shared with the public through community lectures at
nature centers in Virginia and Pennsylvania as well as via a partnership with
University of Southern California’s communication school and the Natural History
Museum of Los Angeles County’s Miocene climate exhibit.

The research aims to resolve the persistent hydroclimate uncertainty in a
warming climate with a model-data integration approach. Low-resolution climate
simulations test hydroclimate response to ocean temperature reconstructions and
sensitivity to proxy uncertainty and coverage. High-resolution simulations
better resolve the North American Monsoon and atmospheric rivers, which
critically determine extreme precipitation events and the subsequent wetter
climate state than the current and projected drying trends. Aiming to fill data
gaps for understanding western US hydroclimate, the project generates additional
proxy reconstructions of ocean temperature and terrestrial hydroclimate.
Extracted hydroclimate evidence from geological, botanical, and faunal records
are processed into a usable data framework for comparison to climate models and
the general scientific community. This model-proxy approach illuminates
processes, sensitivities, and tipping points in our climate future, including a
possible shift from a drier to wetter environment with warming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.