* 2303315
* Conference: TRACK 1 - Strengthening the Community College Pathway to Baccalaureate Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Norman Fortenberry, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,999.00

As partnership between community college leaders and the American Society for
Engineering Education (ASEE), this project aims to broaden the participation and
increase the success of diverse students, particularly under-represented
minorities. This project will convene a conference for community college
administrators, engineering faculty and engineering technology faculty with the
following goals: 1) identify the obstacles which prevent and best practices that
promote diverse community college students to successfully navigate pathways to
degree attainment; 2) establish working groups of community college
professionals to continue to work on specific engineering education challenges
that surface during this conference; 3) better integrate community college
leadership and educators into ASEE’s extensive network of members and resources;
and 4) expand ASEE’s Diversity Recognition Program (ADRP) to include community
colleges recognizing their unique strengths and needs. This convening is the
precursor for additional future meetings to be held virtually and at ASEE
national conferences.

As partnership between community college leaders and the American Society for
Engineering Education (ASEE), this project aims to broaden the participation and
increase the success of diverse students, particularly under-represented
minorities. This project will convene a conference for community college
administrators, engineering faculty and engineering technology faculty with the
following goals: 1) identify the obstacles which prevent and best practices that
promote diverse community college students to successfully navigate pathways to
degree attainment; 2) establish working groups of community college
professionals to continue to work on specific engineering education challenges
that surface during this conference; 3) better integrate community college
leadership and educators into ASEE’s extensive network of members and resources;
and 4) expand ASEE’s Diversity Recognition Program (ADRP) to include community
colleges recognizing their unique strengths and needs. This convening is the
precursor for additional future meetings to be held virtually and at ASEE
national conferences. The conference will be held in the fall of 2023 on Ivy
Tech Community College’s campus in Indianapolis. To maximize scale and impact,
the focus of this effort is on the larger community college systems or multi-
campus colleges with multiple faculty and at least one hundred students in pre-
engineering, engineering, or engineering technology programs. This conference
will produce the following products: 1) a plan for a physical and an electronic
community linking engineering and engineering technology community college
faculty in support of enhanced student learning and transfer success with
particular attention to populations underrepresented in engineering and
engineering technology; 2) a plan for a physical and an electronic community
linking community college administrators in support of more effective teaching
by engineering and engineering technology faculty as well as
recruitment/retainment of more diverse faculty; 3) a plan for incentivizing and
recognizing community college commitment to and success at diversifying their
student and faculty populations including participation in the ADRP program; and
4) a plan for continuing conversations towards the reimagining of engineering
and engineering technology at a national level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.