* 2303345
* Collaborative Research: Back to the Future: Assimilating Paleo Thinning Rates and Grounding Line Positions to Constrain Future Antarctic Sea Level Contributions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jeremy Bassis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,001.00

The Antarctic Ice Sheet has not always been the same shape or size, and past
changes have left behind a record of ice mass loss and gain. Our modern
observational record indicates mass loss and glacial retreat responses
consistent with climatic trends, but the specifics of that retreat, and our
projections of future change, remain a tangle of internal dynamics of ice and
its interactions with its surroundings. The challenge of making credible
projections of the Antarctic contribution to sea-level change from our current
generation of ice-sheet models rests on accurately reproducing past changes.
This project aims to merge archived constraints on past ice-sheet behavior
collected from around, above, and beneath the Antarctic Ice Sheet with a state-
of-the-art ice-sheet model to improve projections of future sea-level rise. In
addition, the project will support intellectual exchange between researchers
across every career stage focusing on past glacial reconstructions and future
projections as well as lower the barrier to entry into polar sciences by
developing modular curricula to be delivered in community college classrooms and
online learning environments.

With hundreds of constraints on deglacial grounding-line retreat and associated
ice-surface lowering around Antarctica, the availability of paleo constraints on
past ice sheet behavior no longer limits integrating these observations into
modeling efforts. This project will integrate paleo-glaciological observations
from the Holocene into the BISICLES model framework used to project future sea
level. The goals of this project are to (i) establish the conditions that
switched the mode of grounding line migration from retreat to re-advance during
the mid-to-late Holocene in West Antarctica; (ii) use differences in forcing,
geologic conditions, and geographic conditions between responses in the Amundsen
Sea and Ross Sea embayments to investigate the differences in marine ice sheet
sensitivity between an "unstable" and "stable" sector of the ice sheet; and
(iii) apply the findings of (i) and (ii) to improve constraints on future sea-
level projections. Investigating the interplay of external forcing, internal
forcing, and geological response to ice-mass loss in West Antarctica is
essential for reducing uncertainty in future sea-level-rise projections. This
project will employ a multidimensional education plan focused on a mentorship
structure that promotes intellectual exchange between researchers across every
career stage focusing on paleo-glaciological reconstructions and future
projections. The project team will co-produce three educational modules with the
Colorado School of Mines Trefny Innovative Instruction Center focused on paleo-
glaciological reconstruction, modern glaciological observations, and models of
future sea-level rise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.