* 2303505
* Collaborative Research:  Cloud-Radiative Feedback as the Coupling Mechanism of the Madden-Julian Oscillation and Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kuniaki Inoue, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2026
* USD 117,062.00

A remarkable feature of weather in the tropics is the occasional appearance of a
vast region of cloudy conditions moving slowly eastward along the equator from
the Indian Ocean to the Pacific, causing an alternation of rain and clear skies
over a period of a month or two. This alternation, called the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO), has a variety of long-range influences, for instance it
affects the chances of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico and landfalling
atmospheric rivers along the California coast. Given its slow propagation and
worldwide effects the MJO is the dominant driver of predictable weather and
climate variations on the subseasonal timescale. Naturally the MJO has been a
topic of intensive research since its discovery in 1971 but we still lack a
satisfactory understanding of it, and models used for weather predictions and
climate simulations have difficulty representing it.

One mystery of the MJO is its dependence on the direction of the stratospheric
winds above it, which changes from easterly to westerly in a somewhat regular
progression referred as the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO). The MJO is
substantially more active in the easterly phase of the QBO, which features
colder temperatures in the equatorial lower stratosphere along with the easterly
winds. Some researchers have argued that the colder temperatures promote the MJO
by reducing upper tropospheric stability and thus strengthening MJO-related
convection. But the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this award hypothesize that
colder temperatures matter because they promote cirrus clouds, which favor the
MJO due to their infrared radiative feedback. The cirrus cloud hypothesis is
motivated by several aspects of the QBO influence, among them that the influence
does not appear prior to 1980. The 1980 onset makes sense because the
stratosphere was warmer prior to 1980 and thus cirrus clouds would have been
less susceptible to the cooling effect of the easterly QBO phase. The QBO-MJO
relationship is explored through a variety of activities including analysis of
data from several satellite missions (including COSMIC, CALYPSO, MLS) and
reanalysis datasets, climate model simulations, and a simple linear model (based
on the one used in AGS-2201441).

The work is of societal as well as scientific value given the influence of the
MJO on weather around the world and the possibility that the MJO could be
predictable given better understanding of its behavior. The PIs conduct a
webinar series to exchange research results with the MJO research community, and
the lead PI is developing an online Spanish language workshop on the role of
cloud processes in weather and climate. In addition, the project provide support
and training to two graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.