* 2303299
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructions of Southern Caribbean Climate Variability using Contemporaneous and Co-Located Corals and Speleothems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 138,373.00

Historical and ancient climate data from paleoclimate proxy records can provide
the long-term climate context necessary to support coastal Caribbean communities
in preparing for, adapting to, and/or mitigating the numerous impacts of
anthropogenic climate change. This project will study coral and speleothem
carbonates from reef ecosystems and cave environments on the island of Curaçao
in the arid Southern Caribbean. Geochemical analyses and dating of these
carbonates will be used to generate records of local temperature and aridity
that span the interval as Earth warmed from the Last Glacial Maximum (~20
thousand years ago) to present. Coupling these geochemical analyses with
monitoring of modern reef and cave environments and numerical modeling will help
determine the extent to which Caribbean Sea climates have varied in the past and
the role that they play in mediating global climate on seasonal to glacial-
interglacial timescales. The proposed research presents a unique opportunity to
develop and apply integrated approaches to understand coeval archives of
terrestrial and marine climate variability at a single, relatively understudied
location. Broader impacts of this research include the dissemination of major
findings through community-influenced geoscience curricula development and
tiered mentorship opportunities for students from the K-12 through postdoctoral
levels. For example, the research will support research exchange opportunities
for University of Curaçao students through a targeted cross-institutional
partnership with the Caribbean Research and Management of Biodiversity (CARMABI)
foundation, in which undergraduate students will work on the Georgia Tech and
Vanderbilt campuses where they will be integrated into a diverse, multi-
institutional team of PIs, postdocs, and graduate and undergraduate students.

Anthropogenic climate change in the Caribbean Sea is projected to extend
seasonal warm periods, increase the frequency and intensity of heavy rainfall
events, and increase periods of prolonged drought. Paleoclimate records from
speleothem and coral carbonates from the wet tropical Northern and Western
Caribbean have provided context for these projections by illustrating the
relevant climate drivers and teleconnections over the past several thousand
years. However, equally extensive and informative records are notably absent
from the arid Southern Caribbean. This project will develop precisely dated, co-
located coral and speleothem proxy temperature and hydroclimate records from
Curaçao, synthesize these records with other regional and global proxies, and
make transformative progress in the understanding of how carbonate minerals in
terrestrial and marine ecosystems record past environmental change in this
region. Trace element-to-calcium ratios (i.e. Sr/Ca, Mg/Ca, Ba/Ca, etc.) and
traditional stable isotopes (δ18O, δ13C, etc.) from actively-precipitating
stalagmites, drip waters, modern coral skeletons, and seawater will be further
integrated with proxy system models and instrumental data to fingerprint the
dominant drivers of terrestrial and marine climate on seasonal to decadal
timescales. This understanding will be applied to jointly interpret speleothem
and coral proxy records of hydroclimate and SST and develop a comprehensive
picture of seasonal to millennial climate evolution since the last deglaciation.
This work includes the development of optimal U-Th dating techniques to jointly
analyze speleothem and coral carbonates, active seawater and cave monitoring,
and the development and application of novel geochemical proxies, including new
methods for the analysis of the calcium isotope quantitative precipitation proxy
in speleothems via collision cell multi-collector ICP-MS. This award is co-
funded by the Division of Earth Sciences and Division of Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences by way of the Paleo Perspectives on Present and Projected
Climate Program, as well as the Division of Earth Sciences funds for support of
projects that increase research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a
wide variety of institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.