* 2303111
* Quantum Chemical Methods for Studying Photon and Electron Driven  Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Spiridoula Matsika, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2026
* USD 484,620.00

With support from from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Spiridoula Matsika of Temple
University is developing and applying computational tools to study chemical
reactions and other phenomena initiated by light or electrons. Heat, photons
(light), and electrons provide different energy sources to initiate chemical
reactions. While reactions initiated by heat and light are well studied,
electron-induced reactions are less well understood, even though they play a
crucial role in biology, chemistry, and technology. Professor Matsika and her
research group are developing efficient and accurate methods to describe
processes initiated by electrons. The developed methods will be tested by
comparisons with experimental spectra provided by collaborators, and they will
be applied to study reactions related to biological damage, astrochemistry and
catalysis. Of special importance will be reactions involved in radiation damage
to components of DNA, related to cancer and cancer therapies. This work will
have broader impacts in the education of graduate and undergraduate students as
well as postdoctoral fellows. Dr. Matsika will also make efforts to enhance
involvement of students from underrepresented groups in research and science.
This research plan will give the opportunity to postdoctoral fellows, as well as
graduate and undergraduate students to get training in theoretical methods
development and in applications of quantum mechanical methods to challenging
problems.

A major problem with electron-driven processes is that the states formed when an
electron is attached to a molecular system are often metastable and can decay
fast via autodetachment, so one must treat them properly as resonances. Since
resonances are not bound states, conventional quantum chemical methods cannot be
applied, and modifications are needed to describe the energies and lifetimes of
these metastable states. To make progress in the theoretical description of
electron-driven processes the Matsika group will focus on the following
objectives: 1) Efficient multireference methods combined with complex absorbing
potentials will be developed. 2) These methods will be used to explore complex
potential energy surfaces and conical intersections between complex surfaces. On
the fly dynamics for temporary anions will be performed, and spectroscopic
observables (such as time resolved photoelectron spectra) will be calculated. 3)
The methods will be benchmarked by collaboration with experimental groups. The
Matsika group will focus on a range of applications that aim at a better
understanding of interactions of electrons with molecules relevant to biology,
astrochemistry, and catalysis. Particularly, the team seeks to obtain a more
complete picture of electron-induced damage to biomolecules, particularly
nucleobases. The methodology developed will be implemented in open-source
software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.