* 2303105
* Conference on Measurement of Atmospheric Mercury: Assessment of New Measurement and Calibration Methods and Development of a Path Forward; Reno, Nevada; October 11-13, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Sarrah Dunham-Cheatham, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 29,813.00

This workshop will bring together researchers that measure atmospheric mercury
(Hg) in order to discuss existing benefits and limitations of current
measurement and calibration methods and to suggest future needs for new
measurement systems. There is recent community consensus that commercially
available instruments that measure Hg have potential biases and this workshop
will gather members of the Hg measurement community in order to discuss these
biases and data gaps as well as work to create consensus on next steps and
future needs.

The workshop has three primary objectives: (1) establish the current state of
the science; (2) develop a consensus about the path forward; and (3) publish a
peer-reviewed paper based on the workshop’s findings. Additionally, a report to
NSF and a workshop white paper will be produced. The workshop will include
presentations, hands-on demonstrations of measurement and calibration methods,
and discussions oriented around the three primary objectives noted above.
Invites will be sent to established researchers as well as graduate students,
early career researchers, and underrepresented groups. The intellectual merit of
this workshop includes a targeted discussion among the Hg measurement community
on known biases and data gaps, as well as a focused effort to create community
consensus on next steps and future needs. As for broader impacts, this workshop
will strengthen Hg measurement community cohesion, and enhance graduate, early-
career, and underrepresented researcher integration within the Hg measurement
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.