* 2303142
* Functional Metal-Ligand Assemblies: Structural Switching and Biomimetic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Richard Hooley, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 540,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Richard J. Hooley of the
University of California–Riverside is developing new chemical structures that
can mimic the behavior of large biomolecules such as enzymes. Enzymes can
selectively perform many different chemical reactions in the biological systems,
with reaction specificity being defined by the disposition of functional groups
about the "active site” binding pocket. Artificial chemical catalysts have many
uses in molecular synthesis, but a defined binding pocket is one aspect of
biological catalysis that small molecules do not possess. In this research
project, the Hooley team aims to develop self-assembly approaches to create new
chemical structures that act in a manner similar to enzymes and to explore the
potential applications of these structures in catalysis. In addition, by
incorporating flexible motifs into the superstructure, the catalysis can, in
principle, be controlled by external agents, allowing for the development of
“switchable” biomimetic catalysis. This project will provide interdisciplinary
research training to graduate students and undergraduates in areas that bridge
chemistry, biology, and materials science.

One approach to creating large, complex molecules in a rapid manner is self-
assembly, whereby individual pieces are reversibly arranged to make
superstructures that contains a spacious binding pocket which allows other
molecules to enter. Self-assembled cage complexes have a wide array of
applications, but their use as biomimetic catalysts is limited by the lack of
activating groups in their “active site” cavities. The Hooley research group
seeks to remedy this by creating synthetic receptors via metal-ligand based
self-assembly that display reactive functional groups to their cavity interiors.
These functionalized receptors can then be used as enzyme-mimicking catalysts
that promote a variety of complex, multi-step reactions. This project focuses on
two broad sub-areas, based on the different strategies to incorporate reactive
functions to the receptors: 1) Investigate broad-scope biomimetic catalysis with
self-assembled cages containing rigidly positioned functional groups; 2)
Investigate switchable molecular recognition and catalysis using cage hosts with
flexible, rotating functions. In the first Area, new receptors will be
synthesized that have a range of internal reactive groups and can function in
different media for enhanced catalytic activity. They will be used in broad
scope biomimetic catalysis, focusing on complex, multistep reactions. In the
second Area, functionalized cages with spacious cavities and functional groups
that can rotate freely about an axis will be targeted, and used for triggered
reactivity controlled by external effectors, for selective molecular
recognition, and for asymmetric catalysis. An important objective in this area
is to ensure that the cage catalysts are stable to a variety of reaction
conditions, and can be applied across a range of different environments,
including in aqueous solution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.