* 2303389
* SBIR Phase I:  Machine Learning Actors to Improve Connectedness across Remote Teams
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Orkin, CENTRAL CASTING AI INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop machine learning-powered actors
(ML actors) that facilitate social encounters between friends, strangers,
classmates, and coworkers in user-generated spaces across the Metaverse. The
shift towards virtual work, learning, and socialization has been accompanied by
significant societal disruption. Over the past few years, people across the
United States reported increasing levels of loneliness and isolation. Building
off research that shows games are a powerful tool for team building, and non-
player characters have a significant impact on building empathy, this project
uses ML actors as the building blocks of free-to-play, multiplayer, cooperative
games designed to bring remote workers together socially.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to address
the challenge of making ML actors viable for user-generated worlds. In order to
be effective in the Metaverse, ML actors will need to navigate unfamiliar
settings, player dialogue, and behaviors that are hard to predict. Characters
will need to be trained on vast quantities of data with some human supervision.
This project seeks to prove that ML actors can be trained from large amounts of
data by users of no technical background and those actors can then be deployed
in a virtual environment in which they are responsive to their environment and
player choices. This project has three main steps: 1) learning a large
multimodal hierarchical task network from thousands of movie scripts and game
logs, 2) connecting that model to a character in a 3D environment, and 3)
testing a game with remote teams to gauge efficacy and enjoyability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.