* 2303522
* Collaborative Research: TRTech-PGR: Optimization of Virus-based Delivery of Guide RNAs for Heritable Editing in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Savithramma Dinesh-Kumar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 322,020.00

The advent of CRISPR/Cas has enabled the ability to precisely edit genes at an
unprecedented scale. A current major bottleneck in realizing the full potential
of gene editing is lack of robust methods for the delivery of gene editing
components into plants. The most widely used method for the delivery of gene
editing components into plant cells is through transformation. However, many
major crops are recalcitrant to transformation and production of transgenic
plants is time consuming and labor-intensive. Since transformation of maize is
still limited to specialized laboratories, it is a major impediment in
application of CRISPR/Cas for functional genomic studies. Here, we will generate
resources and develop tools that will ease application of gene editing
technology in maize. Given maize is the world’s most produced crop, yields more
calories per acre than almost any other crop, the tools developed under this
project will have broader impact on studies involving maize and other important
monocot crops. All biological materials and the methods generated under this
project will be made available to the scientific community. The project will
also provide hands-on research training to underrepresented minority
undergraduate students and high school students.

Developing newer, more efficient gene editing methods in plants is critical to
performing gene function studies. The advent and deployment of CRISPR/Cas-based
technology has allowed for the generation of mutant genotypes with highly
specific mutations. So far, most methods for highly efficient, CRISPR-based gene
editing rely on traditional transgenic approaches to deliver the Cas nucleases
and single guide RNA (sgRNA) components. Although few maize inbred lines can be
transformed, transformation is a major bottleneck in maize functional genomic
studies. Furthermore, traditional inbred lines have longer generation times and
require a significant amount of growth space. To overcome these bottlenecks,
this project will generate B104 maize lines that express high levels of Cas9
nuclease under the control of a constitutive ubiquitin promoter. Viral vectors
for delivery of sgRNAs into these Cas9 expressing maize lines will be engineered
and optimized for induction of somatic and heritable editing. To accelerate gene
function studies in maize, Fast Flowering Mini Maize (FFMM) lines expressing
high levels of Cas9 under the control of the constitutive ubiquitin and meiosis-
specific promoters will be generated. These lines and optimized viral vectors to
deliver sgRNAs will be tested for induction of somatic and heritable editing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.