* 2303087
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Mechanisms Underlying Perceptual Learning of Accented Speech
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2024,08/31/2026
* Yevgeniy Melguy, Melguy, Yevgeniy
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics programs. The
goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to
be an important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Melissa
Baese-Berk at the University of Chicago, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating perceptual learning of accented
speech. Listeners often have trouble understanding an unfamiliar accent or
dialect, but comprehension can rapidly improve as they become more familiar with
a given speaker. However, research shows that such learning is possible and
feasible, it is unknown exactly which strategies listeners rely on in order to
improve their comprehension. This project uses artificial accent learning tools
to investigate how listeners learn to adapt to accented speech, and how in turn
this knowledge may be used to benefit listeners in novel listening contexts.
Through this study, we hope to shed light on how listeners can successfully
adapt to the diversity of speech contexts that we encounter in the real world,
rather than expecting all speakers to sound the same. Normalizing speech
variability in this way can have important societal ramifications for speakers
who come from diverse linguistic backgrounds.

Despite several decades of research on perceptual learning for speech, the
mechanisms that underlie listener adaptation to accented speech are still poorly
understood. Existing research has largely addressed this question using one of
two approaches. The first has focused on natural accents, whereas the second has
used artificial accents, created by manipulating individual target sounds in
otherwise natively-accented speech. Both approaches have issues. The first is
much more representative of the real world-task listeners face, but offers
limited insight into the mechanisms of perceptual learning, because natural
accents differ on many different dimensions. By contrast, the second approach
gives a clearer idea of how accent exposure changes perception of specific sound
categories but represents a less ecologically-valid scenario. This project would
attempt to bridge these parallel literatures, using well-established research
methods (e.g., lexically-guided recalibration) to investigate the mechanisms at
work in listener adaptation to non-natively accented speech. In particular, we
hope to shed light on the role of high-variability training protocols and cross-
speaker variability in achieving robust accent learning that can generalize
across related listening contexts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.