* 2303322
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing next generation agriculture in Southern Georgia (GA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Karen Burg, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on agriculture in
Southern Georgia. With a $74 billion annual impact in Georgia, agriculture is
key to improving community prosperity and quality of life in the region. This
Development Award is focused on robust, adaptive rural innovation that will
leverage Georgia's two land grant universities (University of Georgia (UGA) and
Fort Valley State University) and community assets to build an Integrative
Agriculture (IA) infrastructure "in place." IA means farming systems with
environmental, economic, social, and intergenerational sustainability. "In
place" means teaming with local communities to build capital where people live:
a 20-county region in South Georgia with diverse population of ~650,000
residents. The effort will create long-term resiliency in the region through the
Development Award's six interlocking "gears"-economic development, community,
innovation-in-place, workforce development, use-inspired research, and quality
of life. This vision will be realized through trusted community networks of
local government, schools, community colleges, industry and nonprofit partners.

Georgia's small specialty crop farms face unique challenges in technology,
labor, farmer diversity, decision-making, and resources. Through use-inspired
R&D, farmers will leverage this effort to develop a new IA ecosystem. Projects
will translate cutting-edge research in precision agriculture, value-added
agricultural manufacturing, renewable energy, sustainable and resilient
infrastructure, and e-mobility. UGA's Cooperative Extension, a trusted community
partner deeply embedded in all 20 counties, will ensure that the effort is
driven by and responsive to community needs. Two nonprofits with expertise in
rural economic development, the Center on Rural Innovation and VentureWell, will
partner with extension agents, and ultimately communities, to strengthen and
diversify community economies with translation of the team's use-inspired
research. The Development Award will also enable the team to cultivate local
entrepreneurialism and foster an innovation culture to bring forth product
concepts to meet the local needs of the communities. This innovation-in-place
approach can mitigate rural depopulation caused by increased automation. The
team's workforce development programs, co-created with and delivered though the
Technical College System of Georgia, with US Department of Agriculture insights,
will provide the skilled workforce and innovators required for the new
ecosystem, while concomitantly leading to measurable improvements in quality of
life. The team's Council for Innovative Inclusion will work closely with
community leadership to engage the underserved in the innovation ecosystem. By
the end of the planning period, the team's strategy of deep community engagement
and innovation-in-place will have developed the relationships, empathy, and
knowledge needed to fuel a successful NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.