* 2303189
* Taming the randomness of random lasers with reconfigurable active particle assemblies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhiwen Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

This proposed research program aims to develop a novel random laser system with
enhanced lasing performance using reconfigurable particle assemblies. A random
laser relies on light scattering in an amplifying optical medium to generate
lasing emission. Compared to traditional lasers, the random laser has unique
features such as low cost in device fabrication and low spatial coherence for
speckle-free imaging. However, currently the random laser is still hindered by
limited means to “tame the randomness” in its lasing properties (e.g.,
uncontrolled emission direction, polarization, modal profile etc.), limiting its
impact on photonic applications. The goal of the proposed research is to
overcome these limitations by developing a reconfigurable random lasing platform
with dynamically tunable gain and scattering landscapes for controlling the
lasing characteristics, such as threshold, output power, emission directionality
and polarization.

The proposed method leverages reconfigurable, electric field directed particle
assembly to control particle locations and orientations. Spatiotemporal
programming of the electric field (e.g., tuning the field gradient, shape, and
frequency) coupled with the versatile choice of particle functionalities (e.g.,
gain, scattering, anisotropy), provides unprecedented capability to control the
collective lasing response of particle populations. Three Research Objectives
are proposed: (1) Understand and control random lasing in assemblies of
scattering particles suspended in dye solution, including control of emission
directionality and polarization; (2) Understand and control random lasing in
assemblies where both gain and scattering are provided by particles, including
one type of particles serving both roles (e.g., ZnO) or different particles
combined to serve as gain/scattering and scattering-only components (e.g.,
ZnO+TiO2); (3) Demonstrate feedback controlled, smart random lasing that can
learn to achieve desired lasing properties. The research program will provide
cross-disciplinary, team-based training for student researchers to help prepare
them as future leaders. It will be integrated with a sustainability-focused
Green Lab effort and education activities aimed at training future scientists
and engineers. The education plan will support increased diversities and provide
opportunities for underrepresented groups as well as K-12 students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.