* 2303839
* Constraining ocean-mantle dynamics by improving shear-wave splitting with ocean bottom seismometers
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Joseph Byrnes, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2026
* USD 290,762.00

Shear-wave splitting is a tool that provides information about how the mantle
flows. However, this technique is difficult for data collected on the seafloor
which is nearly 70% of the Earth’s surface. This project implements a new
approach for oceanic datasets. Hypotheses will be tested about what drives
mantle flow and how magmas reach volcanoes. An undergraduate student will help
with data analysis and the method will be released for wide use.

Observations of shear-wave splitting (SWS) provide a first-order constraint on
the geodynamics of the lithosphere-asthenosphere system. This project will
investigate three science questions. 1) Do the motions of the plates on the
Earth’s surface or internal convective forces drive flow in the oceanic
asthenosphere? 2) Do mantle plumes drive a radial pattern of flow beneath
tectonic plates, or are plumes captured by forces in the lithosphere-
asthenosphere system? 3) Does the melt generated beneath mid-ocean ridges get
segregated by shear into bands, or does the melt not interact with the
background strain field? Addressing these questions at present is made difficult
by the challenges involved in making SWS observations with ocean-bottom
seismometers. A method is proposed to address two key challenges faced by
traditional methods in oceanic environments – complex depth-varying anisotropy
and low signal-to-noise ratios. Preliminary results at both the NoMelt site and
Galapagos Archipelago show major improvements relative to more traditional
approaches. The methodology will be converted to the Julia programming language
for use by the community. The methodology implemented by this proposal increases
the return from ocean-bottom seismometer experiments - both domestic and
international - by increasing the number of datasets that return good SWS
results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.