* 2303502
* Intra-Annual Radiocarbon (14C) Offsets, Chronology and Paleoclimate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Southon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,986.00

This project specifically aims to test whether small growing-season-related
Carbon-14 offsets exist for two Mediterranean-type areas comprised of the East
Mediterranean-Middle East (EMME) and the Southwest United States (SW USA), as
well as one humid sub-tropical area Southeast United States (SE USA), and, if
identified, quantify their scale and paleoclimate relevance.

Carbon-14 is relevant to many temporally-dependent investigations in
paleoclimate and related fields, as well as a key tracer for a number of carbon-
cycle models central to paleoclimate research. Recent studies have revealed a
distinct seasonal cycle in atmospheric Carbon-14. With high-precision
measurement it seems plausible that plants growing at substantially different
times of the year may reflect different portions of this seasonal Carbon-14
cycle.

This research has the potential to advance knowledge in the fields of
paleoclimate, paleoecology, and archaeology. Precise age-depth modelling is
critical to establishing the timing of past events, and the research will
attempt to improve radiocarbon age calibration by investigating the potential
impacts of seasonal phenological differences in annual radiocarbon uptake by
plants and how those biases may impact calibration based on widely used but
spatially-biased northern hemisphere calibration curve.

Until recently, analytical precision precluded exploring such differences since
they were below measurement detection but advances in analytical measurements
now make this inquiry possible. Although small, these analytical differences
could have significant effects on carbon-related dating, especially at times of
reversals and plateaus in the Carbon-14 calibration curve.

The potential Broader Impacts include involving undergraduates in
dendrochronology research at both Cornell University and the University of
Georgia while also supporting an early career scientist at Georgia. The project
would also support a PhD student who will develop outreach materials for the
public. Research results will be distributed during International Archaeology
Day and outreach to middle school students through the Expanding Your Horizons
(EYH) program in Ithaca, New York.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.