* 2303860
* Conference: Foundations of Process/Product Analytics and Machine learning (FOPAM 2023)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 52,000.00

The conference on Foundations of Process/Product Analytics and Machine learning
(FOPAM 2023) follows on the success of FOPAM 2019 and aims to bring together an
international group of industrial and academic participants to discuss the
status and future directions in chemical process data analytics and machine
learning. NSF funding will support travel expenses for under-represented groups,
early career faculty, postdocs, and Ph.D. students who otherwise would find it
difficult to secure sufficient funds to attend the conference. The conference
organizersâ€™ aim is to influence how they will shape the future of data science
for the process industries. Group interactions will be promoted via invited
talks, discussions, poster sessions, and other unstructured activities in the
afternoons. The conference starts with a plenary and welcome reception on the
evening of July 31, 2023. The mornings and evenings of the next three days of
the conference will be single-track oral sessions of invited speakers providing
their perspectives on subtopics within the field of data analytics and machine
learning, supplemented by question-and-answer periods and panel discussions. Two
poster sessions will be included in the conference schedule, and the conference
will be preceded by one and one-half days of optional workshops.

The Chemical Process Industries (CPI) have seen unprecedented increases in the
quantity and variety of data available for making decisions, increasing product
quality, and gaining process and supply chain efficiencies. There are many
unsolved theoretical and practical problems to address as the historically
separate fields of machine learning, process design, computational chemical
product development, process operation optimization, and supply-chain analysis
converge. One major outcome of the Foundations of Process/Product Analytics and
Machine learning (FOPAM 2023) conference will be to identify technology gaps in
data analytics and machine learning relevant to the CPI. Researchers from each
field will learn from each other and new directions will be set through
discussions following oral and poster presentations, aided by conference
rapporteurs. Position papers will set directions for research in process systems
engineering and related areas for years to come. The conference will bring
together industry and university researchers and application engineers in
process data analytics and machine learning to assess what has been accomplished
in the past five years and to examine where the field is heading. The following
topics will be explored: 1) emerging methods in machine learning and data
science; 2) industrial data-science applications; 3) machine learning for
process and product computational chemistry; 4) data science for process design,
optimization, and control; and 5) past and future of process analytics and
machine learning, including education and workforce development. The funds
requested from the National Science Foundation will be used to support 25
participants. Half of the funding will be used to support under-represented
groups in science and engineering and the other half will be used to support
early career researchers, which will be a combination of faculty members,
postdocs, and graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.