* 2303171
* RAPID: Multiwavelength Imaging and Spectroscopy of the Corona During the 2023 April 20 Total Solar Eclipse
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Adalbert Ding, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,523.00

Solar eclipses provide a rare opportunity to learn about the solar corona. This
outer layer of the Sun is a mystery – it is millions of degrees and much hotter
than the photosphere below it. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will
observe the 2023 April 20 total solar eclipse over Exmouth in Western Australia.
The observations will observe coronal structures and will be compared with the
High Altitude Observatory’s Upgraded Coronal Multi-Channel Polarimeter data and
to in situ measurements from NASA’s Parker Solar Probe and Solar Orbiter. Team
members will be actively engaged in outreach and graduate students will be
trained in this research area.

Total solar eclipses enable an uninterrupted spatial coverage of coronal
structures from the solar surface out to several solar radii with coronal
emission in the near ultraviolet, visible and near infrared, composed of
radiatively excited emission lines, as well as continuum scattering by electrons
and dust. Spectral line and continuum emission can yield the electron and ion
temperature, density, ionic abundance, non-thermal motions and outflows of
different coronal plasma constituents, hence valuable insights into the dynamics
and thermodynamics of different manifestations of coronal heating processes.
Ubiquitous sources of Fe 10+ emission at ∼ 1.2 MK throughout the corona are
found to be invariably linked to 300 to 700 km/s in situ solar wind streams in
observations spanning three solar cycles. These multiwavelength observations
also unveil the role of prominence dynamics in driving plasma instabilities and
CMEs, as well as releasing cool material embedded within CME fronts as they
expand, in tandem, into interplanetary space. The proposed imaging and
spectroscopic instrumentation for the 2023 April 20 total solar eclipse will
enable the characterization of the thermodynamic properties of different ionic
and neutral species during the rising activity phase of solar cycle 25.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.