* 2303578
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Households' Immediate Protective Actions and Trade-Off Processes Between Property Security and Life Safety in Response to 2022 Hurricane Ian
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Xilei Zhao, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 60,007.00

In recent years, increased climate change together with rising populations in
coastal communities has exposed residents to escalating risks of destructive
extreme weather events such as hurricanes. These threats are increasing the
urgency of conducting studies on coastal households’ risk perceptions and
behavioral responses that could improve policies to protect lives and property.
Despite decades of progress, hurricane evacuation studies still lack an adequate
understanding of households’ decisions about the trade-offs between property
protection and life safety among alternative protective actions. Hurricane Ian
was a Category 4 storm with a last-minute intensification and track-change that
affected a wide range of communities with diverse socio-demographic
characteristics. This hurricane presents a unique opportunity to study how
households dealt with conflicting objectives in their protective action decision
making and why they delayed evacuating or even refused to leave. This Grant for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project enhances scientific knowledge of
households’ emergency responses to hurricane threats by extending the Protective
Action Decision Model (PADM) and gathering critical data in two coastal counties
and one inland county in Florida. The outcomes promote teaching, training, and
learning; increase the participation of underrepresented groups; and
significantly improve emergency management and community resilience across the
US coastal areas.

This project addresses four current limitations in the evacuation literature: 1)
risk communication challenges amid rapid changes in hurricane characteristics;
2) the low accuracy in predicting protective action decisions based on linear
statistical approaches; 3) an inadequate understanding of households’ decisions
in the context of buildings’ vulnerabilities to extreme environmental conditions
(e.g., the actual strength of houses against hurricane-force wind speeds); and
4) ignoring tradeoffs among protective action alternatives during the evacuation
decision-making process. To tackle these research challenges, this project
gathers ephemeral data on housing damage and empirical data regarding
households’ experiences and perceptions. The five tasks include 1) field
investigation; 2) household survey; 3) comparison of respondents’ perceptions
against risk levels as evaluated by experts; 4) comparison of conventional
linear regression analyses and machine-learning-enhanced logistic regression
models; and 5) development of a trade-off model of decision making among
multiple protective actions. This project advances the state of knowledge about
households’ protective action decision making and tradeoffs among protective
action PA alternatives in response to a hurricane emergency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.