* 2303530
* DeepGreen: A Deep Learning Based Tree-Ring Width Data Model for Paleoclimatic Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Evans, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 494,591.00

Using detection and attribution analyses of past climate variability and change
at multidecadal timescale over the last millennium is a means by which climate
projections for coming decades and centuries can be contextualized to inform
climate policy and build resilient societies. This project aims to investigate
what influential factors cause the climate to vary on decadal timescales, why
and how? The research will leverage existing Tree-ring data which are highly
replicated, precisely dated, and available at global scale. As such, they
constitute a major source of observations for assimilation in climate models.
However, there are challenges for using tree rings as model data including (1)
the seasonal nature of the response; (2) distinction of biological vs. climatic
signals; and threshold responses in forests as climate sensors. In this project,
the researchers propose to use deep machine learning to develop, validate and
interpret new data models for tree rings (specifically, the width of tree rings)
by assembling sufficiently large datasets for machine learning. This new
methodological framework to interpret and assimilate tree-ring records in
paleoclimate models has the potential for improving the reconstruction of
climate fields over the common era which in turn could accelerate the detection
and attribution of climate variability and change on timescales of years to
decades. The project will build capacity for science by providing supervised
research, education outreach and mentoring activities for a postdoctoral
research scientist, and by supporting a significant undergraduate research
experience. In partnership with NSF project (â€œProviding Early Access to Research
& Learning in geoscienceS: PEARLS), this project will support efforts to
diversify the geosciences. One open virtual workshop will be organized to train
and mentor early career researchers with the aim to establish deep learning
framework for data modeling in paleoclimatology.

This project will use deep learning-based approach (DeepGreen) to develop,
validate and interpret new data models for tree-ring width (TRW). The
researchers will assemble sufficiently large datasets for machine learning by
clustering TRW series with similar response characteristics into aggregates.
Using pseudoproxy experiments, a minimum dataset size requirements and
algorithms suitable for TRW modeling will be identified. Data models from the
real-world TRW network will then be developed and their skill evaluated relative
to that of existing linear statistical and nonlinear and multivariate process-
based TRW models. By deriving and validating data models for tree-ring width
from deep learning exercises, the research seeks to: (1) further understand the
environmental information contained in extant TRW data; (2) identify structural
and observational uncertainties in deepGreen and process or mimic models; (3)
complement existing modeling efforts targeting the information content and
observational uncertainty in extant TRW data; (4) support efforts to identify
data models by machine learning for other paleoclimatic observations. Beyond the
scope of the work, deepGreen data models may be used within existing data
assimilation frameworks, to develop and evaluate new paleoclimate
reconstructions. Analysis of the results may accelerate the detection and
attribution of climate variability and change on timescales of years and
decades.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.