* 2303328
* POSE: Phase II:  An Open Source Hyperspectral Imaging Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,499,998.00

Traditional photography produces images for human perception with a simple
representation of color. Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) expands imaging beyond
reproduction for human perception to precise spectral radiance recording ranging
from the ultraviolet to the infrared wavelengths. The enhanced discernment
enabled by HSI is used to benefit an abundance of applications across biology,
medicine, pharmaceuticals, materials, cultural heritage preservation, and space
operations. However, the application of HSI in the past has been inhibited by
dispersed intellectual property, siloed and immature software tools and data,
steep learning curves, and lack of industry standards. This project is releasing
the potential of HSI by developing an open-source HSI ecosystem (HSI-OSE) with
contributions from HSI instrument manufactures, academic researchers, software
providers, and general users. The projectâ€™s novelties are a sustainable
organizational structure for the HSI-OSE established around a tool and data hub
that enables continuous, open, and asynchronous contributions from registered
users in the community. The project's impacts are accelerating progress in
application areas such as natural resource monitoring, climate change
assessment, artifact authentication, cancer diagnostics, pathogen detection, and
quality control in pharmaceuticals and seeds.

The HSI-OSE advances knowledge in the field of hyperspectral imaging by
promoting synergy among the community of manufacturers, researchers, and users
with tools and data sharing, as well as feature requests. With a central hub for
HSI data resources, it enables further applications of the technology through
machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). Large amounts of data
are generated in each HSI recording session depicting the attributes,
properties, or characteristics of the imaging subject. Sophisticated software
tools are required to process and interpret these data. This project creates a
comprehensive HSI data resource and develops the protocols and standards for
software development to enable data sharing across many machine ML/AI
applications. The well-documented open-source software tools and hardware
designs from the HSI-OSE also facilitate the entry of new adopters of the HSI
technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.