* 2303792
* SBIR Phase I:  Epigenetic Remodeling of Natural Killer (NK) Cells for Blood Cancer Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Shiri Levy, HISTONE THERAPEUTICS CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 273,388.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to produce better alternatives to cancer
treatment. The new solution will take advantage of the body’s natural anticancer
defense system, an immune cell called a natural killer cell or NK cell. NK cells
are able to recognize almost any cancerous cell in the body and can target both
solid tumors and blood cancers. This gives NK cells a broad appeal for the
treatment of many types of cancer. The team proposes a broad-spectrum cancer
treatment by modifying NK cells to be more reactive to cancerous cells in the
body. These modified NK cells could potentially be combined with current
therapies to enhance their effectiveness, without increasing side-effects in
patients. This project has the potential to benefit millions of people,
especially in the United States where it is estimated that 40% of individuals
will be diagnosed with cancer at some point in their life.

This project will use a patented epigenetic modifier to enhance the tumor
killing abilities of NK cells. Many immune cell-based therapies rely on altering
the genetic code of the cell that will be used to treat disease. However, there
are associated risks in altering the genetic code and often the cell therapy may
only work on a very specific subtype of cancer. Epigenetic modifiers do not
change the underlying DNA sequence but can effectively alter gene expression.
Furthermore, NK cells can target a broad-spectrum of cancers but in many cancer
patients their tumor killing ability is often suppressed. The research goal is
to use the patented epigenetic modifier to increase expression of key NK cells
genes that will make them more sensitive to detecting and killing cancer cells.
After targeting key genes, NK cells will be assessed for increased tumor killing
ability and for how long this ability persists. More specifically, this project
seeks to demonstrate that NK cells taken from a healthy donor can be
epigenetically altered to enhance their natural function of killing tumor cells.
This solution will lay the groundwork to develop a NK cell therapy where NK
cells isolated from healthy donors are epigenetically modified to enhance their
activity, then delivered to cancer patients to hunt and kill their cancer cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.