* 2303869
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: End-to-End Modeling of the Kilonova Zoo
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sanjana Curtis, Curtis, Sanjana
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Sanjana Curtis is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at UC Berkeley. Curtis will conduct
simulations of kilonovae, which are electromagnetic transients related to the
synthesis of heavy elements like gold. Results from this project will build a
strong theoretical understanding of kilonovae and their progenitors, as well as
provide light curve templates for future multi-messenger surveys. For the
outreach component of the project, Curtis will make educational videos on two
topics: 1) the astrophysical origin stories of the elements of the periodic
table, and 2) conversations with scientists about a day in their life.

Curtis will carry out three-dimensional, end-to-end simulations of kilonovae
produced by merging compact binaries, bridging the gap that extends from the end
of merger simulations to the kilonova phase. She will investigate outflows from
both binary neutron star and black hole - neutron star mergers to create 'the
kilonova zoo' -- a database of kilonova light curves and spectra spanning the
landscape of progenitor properties. Comparison of these models with past and
future kilonova observations will allow us to tie kilonovae to their
progenitors, constrain the properties and composition of merger outflows, infer
total ejecta masses, and reveal whether neutron star mergers are the only site
of the rapid neutron-capture process. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.