* 2303562
* Collaborative Research: Core Support for Future Earth Capacity and Engagement in International Global Change Research
* GEO,RISE
* 10/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Erica Key, FUTURE EARTH
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2024
* USD 652,363.00

This project supports Future Earth to provide capacity building and engagement
activities for US scientists working in global change research. Future Earth
harnesses the insights and capacity of the global scientific community to
address global problems and ensures that the results of this work extend beyond
academic communities and impact broader decision processes. Future Earth efforts
are based on the recognition that modern sustainability challenges require
coordinated research efforts bringing together the world's best researchers in
the natural, social, behavioral, and engineering sciences, and connecting these
researchers with the needs and capacities embedded within a wide range of
stakeholder institutions and communities. Future Earth’s global initiatives,
include a flagship capacity building program (Earth Leadership Program), far
reaching communications products (Anthropocene Magazine), and strong
collaborative data-platforms.

By elevating the spread and impact of scientific results and connecting these
results with constituencies in business, government, and civil society, Future
Earth’s work supports better decision making around the world. This work also
connects US researchers with a vast and rapidly growing network of leading
international scholars in global change research and provides direct access to
new knowledge and initiatives. Much of this work is supported through strategic
communications that extends the reach of sustainability science published around
the world, and delivers the very best global science in the right format, and at
the correct time, to shape global outcomes. This project will include the
publication of the award-winning Anthropocene Magazine which consistently brings
the very best sustainability science to the broadest possible audience around
the world, and the establishment of the Sustainability Research and Innovation
Congress - the first global convening supporting global connections between
sustainability science and innovation communities around the world on an annual
basis. Finally, Future Earth will continue leading the Earth Leadership Program,
which builds on the 20 years of success of the Leopold Leadership Program, and
focuses on training diverse cohorts of high-impact mid-career scientists to
reach beyond their disciplinary expertise to become sustainability science
leaders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.