* 2303612
* POSE: Phase II:  Expanding the data.table ecosystem for efficient big data manipulation in R
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Marco Gerosa, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 731,881.00

Professor Toby Hocking from Northern Arizona University is supported by an award
from the Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) program in the
Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP). More data is
being systematically gathered and recorded than at any previous time in human
history, and efficient software packages are required to store and analyze these
data using limited computational resources. A leading, state-of-the-art example
is data.table, which is free/open-source software for in-memory data
manipulation/analysis, implemented as an R package with C code that is highly
efficient in terms of both computation time and memory usage. Although
data.table has a substantial number of users (including thousands of other R
packages which import functionality from data.table), the growth of data.table
is limited by (1) its flat/informal leadership structure with only one author at
the top who can approve new code contributions, (2) lack of
documentation/translations and community standards for promoting
diversity/inclusion, and (3) lack of infrastructure for systematic software
testing. This project will expand the open-source ecosystem of users,
contributors, and developers of data.table, by addressing these issues. In
particular, this project will create (1) a written governance document with a
new hierarchical leadership structure, (2) new documentation materials for
onboarding new users/contributors, including translations and community
standards to encourage diversity/inclusion, and (3) new testing software and
infrastructure. Furthermore, the project includes plans to systematically
evaluate the broader impacts of this effort on the data.table ecosystem by
measuring changes to important metrics (number of unique contributors, diversity
of contributors, number of dependent packages, etc). The result of this project
will be a self-sustaining open-source ecosystem for data.table, which will allow
it to grow into a more powerful data analysis tool that will be used by more
people, and more diverse people, in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.