* 2303409
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Glacier resilience during the Holocene and late Pleistocene in northern California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Richard Heermance, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 12/31/2026
* USD 187,835.00

Glaciers are important water resources for downstream communities and are
sensitive recorders of climate change. The reconstructed position of glaciers
through the last ice age has been used to infer past climate changes in the
western U.S. However, previous research has focused along the continental
interior (e.g., the Rocky Mountains) or the Sierra Nevada. This project
investigates climate changes over the past 20,000 years in the Trinity Alps
region of the Klamath Mountains, northern California by reconstructing past
glacier changes. The study provides the first quantitative data on glaciation
from the Pacific-proximal Klamath Mountains, a location that may be out-of-phase
climatically with interior continental ranges. The research is producing new
reconstructions of past climate for northern California and fills a spatial gap
in the glacial history along the western United States. The project highlights
the impact of climate change on glaciers in northern California, with societal
impacts for water resources in California and globally. Additional project goals
include acting as a catalyst to inspire and recruit geoscience undergraduate
majors and develop pathways for careers as geological and environmental
scientists. All project institutions are Minority-Serving or Hispanic-Serving
Institutions; the project provides 32 students an opportunity for a one-week
field trip focusing on the Central Valley Water Project and water resources in
California. By bringing together diverse students from the northernmost and
southernmost parts of the state, the aim of this field trip is to stimulate the
studentsâ€™ interest in geoscience, expand their perspectives, and foster
collaboration within these future leaders. Additionally, thirteen undergraduate
and three graduate students are supported to conduct research and present their
findings at conferences.

This project uses a multi-disciplinary approach to identify past climate changes
in the Trinity Alps of northern California and to evaluate the mechanisms for
these changes by integrating geomorphic mapping, 10Be surface exposure dating,
lake sediment coring, dendrochronology/dendroclimatology and numerical modeling
of glaciers and climate changes. Until their recent demise, glaciers in the
Trinity Alps were some of the lowest-elevation glaciers in the continental
United States. These glaciers are closer to the moisture source of the Pacific
Ocean than the better-studied glaciers in the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevada.
Thus, glaciers in the Trinity Alps may have responded differently to climate
changes over the past 20,000 years than the drier regions in the continental
United States. The mechanisms for these past climate changes are being evaluated
by comparing the climate reconstructions from this project to output from
paleoclimate global climate models from PMIP4/CMIP6 and previously published
paleoclimate records. By using methods from multiple disciplines, this project
provides a new glacial and climate history for northern California and evaluates
of the mechanisms associated with these changes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.