* 2303301
* Common Era Reconstructions of African Dust Transport to the Western North Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Davin Wallace, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 306,686.00

This project aims to combine results and analyses from previous published
research with new analytical measurements using Thorium isotopes to develop a
record of dust deposition in the Western Atlantic (Bermuda and Bahamas) over the
past 1,500 years to investigate relationships between dust and past climate.

While dust aerosol is a critical component in the climate system and can force
changes in surface temperatures through radiative effects, it can also respond
to movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). Such climate-dust
interconnectivity and its effects on past or future climates, particularly in
the North Atlantic, requires knowledge on the relative changes in atmospheric
dust at the North African source as well as the regional extent of the dust
transport.

The research will address three key questions: 1) did North African dust
activity significantly impact North Atlantic Sea surface temperatures; 2) did
North African dust activity suppress basin-wide hurricane frequency; and 3) is
African dust emission and transport over the Atlantic consistently linked with
ITCZ movement or other climate indices?

The potential Broader Impacts include a better understanding of the climate
system, support for a graduate student, development of a network of colleagues
in the Gulf Coast region, and a three-day High School Teacher Workshop for
teachers from rural, inland areas of Mississippi and Alabama. In coordination
with USMâ€™s Marine Education Center, the researchers will engage teachers from
underserved areas to learn how to implement ocean and climate research
(including the impacts of African dust) into their teaching. This will involve
teaching seminars, development of Science on a Sphere content, visits to
research labs and a coastal Mississippi field trip. The Workshop activities will
also include a follow-up to maintain connections with the High School teachers
including an assessment of the workshop and the effectiveness of classroom
implementation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.