* 2303700
* POSE: Phase II: An Open Source Ecosystem for Collaborative Rapid Design of Edge AI Hardware Accelerators for Integrated Data Analysis and Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sule Ozev, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,494,103.00

This project develops an ecosystem for hls4ml, which is a tool for designing
machine learning inference in hardware. Machine learning models written in
popular languages (e.g. PyTorch, Keras) are translated by hls4ml into specialty
descriptions utilized by digital circuit designers. Hand crafting these system
definitions is a process with a high barrier to entry, likely to result in poor
quality results, for domain experts (e.g., scientists) without hardware design
expertise. This project will innovate and deploy infrastructures and management
solutions for support of the developers and users, leading to an extensive,
connected, and well-supported ML hardware design automation community bridging
hardware experts and domain experts.

The project will develop a set of components comprising a support infrastructure
for hls4ml. These components include training for users, automated testing and
validation procedures for new components contributed to the tool, security
validation of developers, creation of review and vetting procedures for quality
control of the tool set, and a system for users and developers to report and
request features. The ecosystem resulting from this project will manage access
to a catalog of pre-designed and validated software packages and Intellectual
Property hardware blocks, which can be used for both educational purposes and to
build custom machine learning computational systems. The ecosystem will enable
application and domain experts from a wide range of disciplines and affiliations
(science, health, mobile, academic institutions, government laboratories,
industry) to successfully utilize automated design flows to create customized
machine learning hardware. This will enhance the productivity and overall
ability of the underlying science discovery and technology development efforts,
where these systems are deployed. The synergy catalyzed between domain experts
and hardware experts will help these communities create powerful co-design
methodologies and train the new generation of experts who will be proficient in
applying them as part of the future workforce in data-driven disciplines. This
collaborative project brings together investigators from Northwestern
University, University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign and Chicago), and Arizona
State University. The project’s products and activities will be made available
through https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/ . The project team plans to
maintain the project repositories and website for a minimum of 3 years past the
completion of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.