* 2303802
* SBIR Phase II:  Microbe-based scaffold for the generation of structured cell-based meat
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Michelle Lu, NOVEL FARMS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,967.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to combat the profound negative impacts of the animal farming
industry through the development of new technologies to advance cultivated meat
production. Approximately 30% of the Earth’s surface, 70% of all arable land,
and 29% of the global freshwater supply is dedicated to animal farming.
Livestock is responsible for 18% of global greenhouse gas emissions and is one
of the largest threats to earth’s biodiversity. A significant fraction (70%) of
all antibiotics used in the United States are used on farm animals and this is a
primary cause of the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, leaving the
United States with an economic burden of $55 billion and a healthcare system
overwhelmed with 2,000,000 infections, 250,000 hospitalizations, and at least
23,000 deaths per year. An emerging industry poised to combat the negative
impacts of animal farming is the cultivated meat industry, which is estimated to
decrease energy use by 7-45%, greenhouse gases by 78-96%, land use by 99%, water
use by 82-96%, and could eliminate the need for antibiotics use in meat
production. The project aims to further develop a novel technology that will
allow for the economically feasible production of cultivated meat.

The proposed project aims to solve one of the major barriers impeding the
economic feasibility of cultivated meat – cell culture media cost. Cultivated
meat must be priced competitively with conventional meat if it is to be a viable
alternative to meat produced via industrial farming. Thus, as with animal feed,
cell culture media must be as inexpensive as grass or government-subsidized corn
to allow for the production of cultivated meat at a comparable profit margin.
The goal of this project focuses on reducing media costs by eliminating
expensive media components through further development of proprietary
scaffolding technology and reducing the overall volume of media required to
generate cultivated meat through the adaptation of ultra-efficient, high-density
bioreactors. To do this, the scaffolding technology generated during the Phase I
effort will be further developed to incorporate growth factors, the most
expensive elements of cell culture media, thereby reducing the overall cost of
media. Then, the scaffolds will be adapted for use in high-density, perfusion-
based bioreactors that use a fraction of the media as conventional stirred-tank
bioreactors, thereby reducing the overall consumption of media. Together, these
two strategies will lower the overall cost of cultivated meat production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.