* 2303732
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Advancing and Maintaining Equity in STEM (AMES)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sherri Morris, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2026
* USD 993,878.00

The Advancing and Maintaining Equity in STEM (AMES) ADVANCE Adaptation project
at Bradley University (BU) will implement interventions to improve campus
climate and develop policies and procedures that can be used across Bradley
University and in other predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to
recruit and retain science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
faculty from all backgrounds. To address campus climate, the AMES project will
implement two initiatives; 1) an Advocates & Allies program (developed by North
Dakota State University) to address implicit bias, improve understanding of
systemic and interpersonal forms of discrimination, and build advocacy and
intervention skills among faculty, and 2) a Diversity, Equity, and Solidarity
(IDEAS) Program to increase awareness of and appreciation for broadening
participation and fairness in STEM through regular and highly visible campus
events and communications.

The AMES project is designed to shift the BU campus climate toward a culture of
fairness, mutual respect, and non-discrimination. The project also seeks to
address the systemic barriers that contribute to the lack of participation in
academic careers and hinder success for all STEM faculty. To address systemic
structural issues, the project aims to 1) engage faculty in the revision of
annual review processes and tenure, promotion, and retention policies, 2) create
and implement a dashboard to better track faculty data along multiple dimensions
and build accountability for institutional change, and 3) develop and pilot
ADVANCE-informed Chair Training (ACT) to provide STEM chairs with training in
areas that impact hiring, workload, retention, and promotion. The AMES project
outcomes including tools, and curricular materials will be disseminated to
regional and national audiences through publications, conference presentations,
and its publicly accessible website.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic
institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies,
processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE
"Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-
based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as
well as non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.