* 2303908
* Collaborative Proposal: RoL: The Scale of Resistance: Landscape to Microbiome-level Processes Regulating Acquired Disease Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Carlos Becker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 116,658.00

Understanding how species cope with disease in an era of global change is of
fundamental importance to the field of ecology and to the stability of wildlife
populations. Anthropogenic deforestation is frequently associated with increases
in wildlife disease. These patterns are expected to stem from both landscape-
scale processes, such as changes in animal movement and disease transmission,
and fine-scale processes, such as changes in the community of microbes that
inhabit animal tissues (collectively termed the microbiome), but the interplay
between these multi-scale processes is unresolved. This project investigates the
relationship between deforestation and the microbiome to explain patterns of
disease emergence across a range of disturbed environments, using amphibians of
Brazil’s Atlantic Forest as a model system. Work here stands apart from previous
studies by integrating landscape-scale and microbe-scale processes into a
unified framework that will advance microbial, disease, and global change
ecology. This project implements a diversity recruitment program for graduate
students with support from the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
Program at the University of Alabama and other funding sources at the University
of Massachusetts-Boston. In partnership with the Alabama Museum of Natural
History, portable mini exhibits and school activities w will be manufactured and
implemented to narrow the K-12 science education gap in one of the most
underserved areas in the nation. It is predicted that these exhibits will reach
66,000 students annually in five county school districts in Alabama.

The diverse assemblages of microbes that inhabit vertebrate hosts, collectively
termed the microbiome, are vital to animal health. However, links between the
host microbiome and emerging wildlife diseases are rarely considered within a
landscape ecology framework. Repeated exposure to pathogens may alter community
dynamics within the host microbiome and can promote competitive microbial
interactions and host responses that may enrich the microbiome with anti-
pathogen members. This form of acquired pathogen resistance, termed microbiome
memory, may facilitate host recovery and prime the host after subsequent
pathogen exposures. Anthropogenic habitat fragmentation notoriously restricts
host movement at the landscape scale, which may alter rates of pathogen exposure
that are critical for establishing microbiome memory prior to seasonal increases
in pathogen pressure. This project will investigate interactive effects of
anthropogenic habitat disturbance and host microbiome dynamics as a mechanism to
explain observed increases in disease risk in fragmented landscapes, using
amphibians of Brazil’s Atlantic Forest as a model system. The selection acting
on amphibian skin microbiomes in a survey of three amphibian species with
seasonal pathogen dynamics across a gradient of landscape fragmentation will be
examined. Also, field experiments will be conducted using microbiome
manipulation, host translocation, and radio telemetry to test for mechanisms
linking habitat fragmentation, disease, and the host microbiome independently
from other components of host immunity. This work will generate a robust dataset
integrating landscape ecology with a metacommunity theory of adaptive
microbiomes, with novel implications for host resistance to disease and the
maintenance and stability of biological diversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.