* 2303157
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Invariant Sets for Provably Safe Autonomy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Claus Danielson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 310,929.00

This grant will support the development of novel computational tools and new
knowledge that can be used to safely automate complex processes directly from
data. While data-driven methods, including machine learning and AI, have
advanced numerous fields in recent years, their impact has been less pronounced
in the control of complex dynamical systems, especially safety-critical ones.
The research funded by this grant will provide rigorous data-driven guarantees
on safety and performance, progressing the science of autonomy and advancing
national prosperity by increasing the safety of automated systems. However, this
requires new knowledge and computational tools to overcome the inherent
uncertainty of a data-driven paradigm, where we only have finite data to
characterize an arbitrarily complicated, nonlinear system. This novel paradigm
is attractive for non-traditional applications of automation and control without
first-principle models or applications whose dynamics are too expensive or time-
consuming to identify using traditional system identification. In particular,
the research will be applied to data-driven automation of ultrasounds.
Automating ultrasounds will free up highly trained medical professionals to
engage in other areas of patient care, improving medical care in rural areas,
underdeveloped nations, and military-bases, where highly trained technicians are
scarce, benefiting the U.S. economy and society. This project supports research
that is motivated by the question: What is the quantity and quality of data
required to guarantee safety and performance in a data-driven paradigm? Research
will also incorporate diverse and inclusive STEM workforce development through
mentoring and recruiting underrepresented groups and implementation of a multi-
mentor model to enhance belonging. The research supported by this grant will
address fundamental questions whose answers will enable direct data-driven
synthesis of positive, control, and contractive invariant sets. The primary
novelty of this research is the development of techniques for synthesizing sets
that are provably invariant. The benefit of this approach is data-driven
guarantees of constraint satisfaction. This research is potentially
transformative since it will allow the analysis and synthesis of constraint
enforcing controller directly from data. Likewise, it will enable the extension
of nominal model-based designs to larger operating domains where the modeling
assumptions are invalid while providing rigorous, data-driven assurances of
safety, robustness, and performance. This paradigm is attractive for non-
traditional applications of control without first-principle models or
applications whose dynamics are too expensive or time-consuming to identify
using traditional system identification. Proposed research is motivated by
harnessing the data revolution to provide control theoretic guarantees for data-
driven control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.