* 2303140
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Capturing the Elgin-Lugoff earthquake swarm with a dense nodal array
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2024
* Daniel Frost, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2024
* USD 7,390.00

This RAPID project involves a seismic deployment of 86 Smartsolo 5Hz nodes to
the epicenter region of the ongoing Elgin-Lugoff earthquake swarm sequence in
South Carolina. This sequence started with a magnitude (M) 3.3 on December 27,
2021, in a region with relatively low background seismicity. This sequence
appears to occur in several episodes, sometimes initiated by M 3+ events, and
has up to months of gaps in between. While they occurred along the ancient
Eastern Piedmont Fault System, a close examination of the earthquakes reveals
that most of the events occurred in between the fault system. At this point, it
is still not clear what is the driving force for this earthquake swarm and how
long it will last.

This deployment is timely, because this sequence is still ongoing, with no signs
of ending soon. In addition, only one station was deployed within a few
kilometers of the swarm. Such station distribution is not sufficient enough to
provide a detailed high-resolution detection/relocation of microseismicity
during an earthquake swarm, which are needed for better deciphering the spatio-
temporal evolutions of the swarm sequence and their physical mechanisms. In
addition, the seismic data collected in this deployment will be used to
construct a velocity model of the local subsurface structure. Accurate seismic
models are crucial particularly for developing ground motion models for seismic
hazard assessment and delineating fault locations. Up to 15
undergraduate/graduate students from both Georgia Tech and University of South
Carolina will be involved in the nodal deployment. Data will be made available
through the IRIS Data Management Center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.