* 2303759
* SBIR Phase I: CHARACTERIZATION OF FUSION GAIN FACTOR Q FOR ORBITRON MICRO FUSION REACTOR
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Robin Langtry, AVALANCHE ENERGY DESIGNS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,890.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) project is to develop a small plasma confinement
device called an orbitron, which could have applications to allow low cost,
highly mobile fusion sources. Markets with the largest opportunity to benefit
from small, carbon-free, micro-fusion reactors are the “hard-to-decarbonize”
industries like long haul trucking, maritime shipping, aviation, distributed
energy, and also space power and propulsion. The development of a small clean
energy fusion reactor would be a transformative technology for society. The
proposed micro-fusion device may enable continuous clean energy production from
readily available elements, without the use of long-term radioactive elements.
This microfusion device is also expected to be orders of magnitude cheaper than
larger scale fusion reactors, and will allow for iterative design and testing
for optimization.

This SBIR Phase I project will result in the ability to achieve predictions of
the fusion gain factor (Q) for orbitron-based micro-fusion reactors. Orbitron
science combines aspects of electrostatic ion traps, like an Orbitrap, with high
voltage microwave-type electron confinement in “crossed-fields” like a
Magnetron. The resulting plasma regime is novel and exhibits very high ion and
electron energies, moderate densities, and long particle confinement times.
Optimized fusion gain factor modelling will be achieved via systematic anchoring
and validation of Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code via experimental measurements.
Discrete experiments with small orbitron fusion reactors will be used to assess
the various plasma loss mechanisms. These mechanisms include ionization between
fuel ions and neutral background atoms, particle scattering collisions to the
device walls and Bremsstrahlung X-ray radiation losses. Once these mechanisms
are correlated with the PIC code, detailed assessments of the simulated fusion
plasma will be made to determine the potential Q of a future small-scale fusion
reactor for energy production. This gain in understanding will enable
development of solutions to mitigate loss mechanisms in future prototypes to
maximize Q for small net energy fusion devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.