* 2303149
* Beyond Mean Climate: Quantifying Climate Variability and Extremes under Varying Boundary Conditions
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tyler Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,237,840.00

The Earth’s climate can be defined broadly by two concepts, average values and
variability around those averages; for example the average temperature of a
location over some interval and how much the temperature varies from that
average on any given day, or month, or year, or decade. This variability is
important to human societies, driving things like extreme heat waves or
droughts. Over Earth’s long history, the average climate has changed in profound
ways. For example, 20,000 years ago, the Earth on average was about 5 degrees
Celsius colder, and large glaciers covered parts of continents that are ice free
today. We know that the average climate has changed because we have evidence
from natural archives, such as that found in the chemistry of ice that remains
frozen at the poles. But how has the variability changed? Does the variability
change with the same pattern as the average? How often do extreme events - such
as extremely hot or cold temperatures - occur at different times in the past?
Records of the year–to-year or decade-to-decade variability, say from 20,000
years ago, are exceptionally rare. We will use climate records from very high-
resolution measurements of ancient polar ice in Greenland and Antarctica,
obtained through a process known as ‘ice coring’, to study the inherent
variability in Earth’s climate and how it changes over long periods of time,
extending backwards in time up to 100,000 years before present. These aspects of
climate, the variability and extremes, in addition to the average climate, can
provide new contexts that help us better understand our changing planet.

The relationship between the mean climate and its internal variability is a
fundamental aspect of climate dynamics. Understanding the dependence of internal
variability on the mean state is key to understanding the detectability of
forced changes in climate and, critically, the change in likelihood of extreme
events. Information about internal climate variability throughout Earth’s
history, as the mean climate has undergone large changes, such as during the
Last Glacial Maximum about 20,000 years ago, is exceedingly rare. Most
paleoclimate archives lack the detail or continuity to reliably resolve annual,
interannual, and decadal timescales for tens of thousands of years. We will use
a suite of five extremely high-resolution ice core records of water isotopes, as
well as impurities like dust, to statistically catalog variability and extremes
in polar climate and its relationship to the background mean state. We will
examine these relationships over periods of stable mean climate, long term
changes in global mean climate, as well as abrupt climate change, and provide an
unprecedented analysis of high-frequency, high-latitude climate variability. The
analysis will span the last glacial-interglacial cycle, extending backwards in
time up to a 100,000 years into the past. High-frequency climate variability has
been impactful to humans and societies throughout history. Annual, interannual,
decadal, and centennial scale variability has driven changes in habitability
leading to the blossoming and collapse of past civilizations. Extreme climate
events in particular affect modern quality of life, national security, food and
water availability, and ecosystem services (among other concerns). The proposed
research on climate variability and extremes of the past, and the relationship
to average climate, can provide new contexts that help us better understand our
changing planet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.