* 2303043
* Collaborative Research: Learning Software Engineering by Contributing to Real Projects With Chatbot Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Anita Sarma, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 288,000.00

Open Source Software (OSS) is an economic driving force providing software
systems used through the entire development stack, from operating system kernels
to sophisticated end-user applications. It is also an important platform for
education. A large number of young developers join open source projects to
improve their programming and other software engineering skills. It is not
surprising, therefore, that many software engineering educators want to use OSS
projects as a training ground for students to gain experience with real world
software development problems. These experiences carry the added benefit that
students contribute to the evolution of projects relevant to society and their
own interests. Successful participation in open source projects also increases
students' chances for professional success. However, students onboarding to OSS
face many difficulties. Project documentation is often lacking, and core
developers have little time to effectively mentor students, since they often are
volunteers contributing during their spare time. To better support students in
their journey toward contributing to open source software, this project proposes
to design, develop, and evaluate a conversational agent (chatbot).

This project investigates how a conversational agent can be designed as an
effective teaching aid for OSS contribution by understanding the needs and
expectations of students and instructors, investigating how students verbalize
their expectations and dialog with the agent, and how to design such an agent.
To achieve these goals, the project employs a multi-method approach, including
participatory design, prototyping, and technological evaluation. The project
also investigates how effective a chatbot is in helping students learn how to
contribute to an open source project in lab and classroom settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.