* 2303690
* POSE: Phase II:  Open-Source Ecosystem to enable Open Scholarship
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Nicole Pfeiffer, Center for Open Science
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,498,214.00

Open science, also called open research or open scholarship, is a movement that
advances the free and open sharing of research. The goal of open science is to
make the research process open for review by everyone with the goal of improving
the quality of scientific results and usefulness of scientific discoveries.
Tools are needed to encourage and support researchers to work together, share
data and analyses, and discover and reuse research. The Center for Open Science
(COS) has built and maintains the Open Science Framework (OSF), which is a free,
open-source platform that provides these tools. Researchers use this platform to
manage and conduct their research while following open science practices. The
involvement of research communities in the co-development of the tools that
support them in practicing open science is important to secure robust and long-
standing scientific knowledge. This NSF POSE Phase II award creates a
distributed Open Source Ecosystem (OSE) around the OSF: the Open Scholarship
OSE. This project permits the expansion of community-driven open scholarship by
(1) creating a governance structure that guides the trajectory of the Open
Scholarship OSE by developing a community of user-contributors to the ecosystem,
(2) connecting new digital storage locations, tools, and other services,
expanding the range of applications of and disciplines using the OSF, and (3)
developing improved workflows that enable open scholarship across a wider range
of research goals, methods, processes, and outputs. The Open Scholarship OSE
develops communication pathways for researchers to become part of the
development process and to implement open scholarship practices while making the
barriers to participation as low as possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.