* 2303225
* Collaborative Research: The Relationship between the Trade Wind Inversion Layer and the Seasonal Development of the Southeast Pacific Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alex Gonzalez, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2026
* USD 650,456.00

For most of the year there is a strong rainfall contrast across the equator in
the eastern Pacific, with heavy convective precipitation in the intertropical
convergence zone (ITCZ) north of the equator but only cloud cover and drizzle to
the south. Several factors contribute to the rainfall contrast: in the ITCZ
surface wind convergence provides uplift, low atmospheric stability promotes
convective clouds, and high sea surface temperatures (SSTs) supply moisture
through evaporation, while opposite conditions hold to the south. But starting
around February a second ITCZ develops south of the equator and from February to
April the eastern Pacific features a double ITCZ, with convective rainfall
around 5 degrees north and south of the equator. The appearance of this
secondary ITCZ in the Southern Hemisphere thus provides an opportunity to
understand ITCZ genesis, in particular the dynamic and thermodynamic mechanisms
that produce the transition from unfavorable to favorable conditions for deep
convection.

Research conducted here examines the genesis of the secondary ITCZ in the
southeast Pacific with a particular focus on the trade wind inversion (TWI), a
shallow layer which separates the moist atmospheric boundary layer from the
warmer and drier free troposphere above it. The high stability of the TWI
directly inhibits the convection necessary for ITCZ formation and instead
promotes the stratocumulus (Sc) cloud deck which shades the southeast Pacific,
producing cold SSTs which further discourage convection. Cold SSTs also inhibit
ITCZ formation by discouraging boundary layer wind convergence, as boundary
layer winds generally blow from colder to warmer SST. The project considers the
factors which reduce the stability of the TWI in over the southeast Pacific,
looking in particular at the transport of boundary layer moist static energy
from the Northern Hemisphere ITCZ, as well as the possible reduction of stratus
cloud cover due to reduced stability, which could lead to warmer SSTs. Further
work uses analysis of momentum budgets to understand the change from surface
wind divergence to convergence, one idea being that downward momentum transport
across the TWI plays an important role. The work is conducted through analysis
of observational datasets and climate model simulations, as well as specialized
simulations performed for the project using the Community Atmosphere Model, the
atmospheric component model of the Community Earth System Model (CESM).

The work has educational broader impacts through the support and training of a
graduate student. In addition, the project supports undergraduate students who
conduct research during the summers, in part through the NSF-supported Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at Colorado State University and the
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS) Program
run by the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. Research results are
of interest for climate model development as most climate and earth system
models suffer from a double ITCZ bias, in which a Southern Hemisphere ITCZ
persists for most of the year over much of the Pacific ocean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.