* 2303651
* POSE: Phase II:  Growing GRASS OSE for Worldwide Access to Multidisciplinary Geospatial Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* C Michael Barton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,987.00

Software that helps create insights from location-based information (geospatial
data) is essential for addressing problems in many fields of national and
societal importance, including public health, natural resources, urban planning,
and disaster recovery. This project aims to expand and support the community of
people developing and using a freely available geospatial software platform
called GRASS GIS. For decades, GRASS GIS has allowed researchers around the
world to find new solutions to pressing problems, and build on each other's
work, by creating and modifying geospatial workflows for a wide range of
analyses. The demand for GRASS GIS is increasing and therefore a coordinated
effort is needed to grow the number of researchers and other software users at
universities, government agencies, and businesses who can help maintain, and
improve access to, GRASS GIS. This coordinated effort will make GRASS GIS more
sustainable for supporting research with open-source software-by modernizing and
expanding software distribution, simplifying how GRASS GIS can be used with
other open-source software, improving quality assurance and software security,
and accelerating the pace of important updates.

The goal of this project is to modernize software infrastructure and
strategically grow the GRASS community to achieve a technologically and socially
sustainable open-source ecosystem that provides scientists a foundation for
novel, interdisciplinary research that will be accessible, reproducible, and
ready for further innovations. The project aims to facilitate the adoption of
GRASS GIS as a key geoprocessing engine by a growing number of researchers and
geospatial practitioners in academia, governments, and industry. To achieve a
technologically sustainable ecosystem with broader access to GRASS algorithms
and models, the project will modernize and expand software distribution,
increase security and quality assurance, and simplify maintenance of GRASS
integrations with other software (such as R and QGIS). Streamlined contributor
onboarding procedures and both remote and in-person training, mentoring, and
promotion activities will encourage researchers to contribute new geospatial
algorithms and models. Onboarding and teaching materials that are integrated in
automated testing will significantly lower the costs to the developer community
for maintaining this sophisticated software environment. The project aims to
grow the community of GRASS users, contributors, and developers worldwide
through engagement activities such as cross-project meetups, developer summits,
community sprints, online and in-person training and one-on-one contributor
mentoring. International involvement and diversity in project governance will be
addressed by working with the GRASS Project Steering Committee to establish
focused work groups that will implement policies ensuring an inclusive
environment and high-quality contributions. Expanding the number and diversity
of contributors from academia and research, non-profits, and industry will
facilitate development of new geoprocessing engine features and ensure long-term
maintenance of contributed research models. It will also enable faster
development of geoprocessing tools to address major societal challenges linked
to a location and place.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.