* 2303844
* Conference: Gordon Research Conference in Predictive Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Shannon LaDeau, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Ecologists seek to understand the distribution and abundance of living
organisms. However, translating ecological theory to effective resource
management requires quantitative tools and practices including ecological
models. This need for a more quantitative approach has led to an emerging but
diffuse discipline: Predictive Ecology. Predictive ecology places prediction and
forecasting at the center of both theoretical and applied ecology. Managing
ecological systems at scales that are relevant to human wellbeing is a
predominant goal in ecosystem ecology. There is a need to coordinate among
scientists working with high frequency and large scale data to better model
large-scale ecosystem change. This project supports diverse researchers to
attend a Gordon Research Conference in Predictive Ecology held in June 2023. At
the conference, a strong and broad foundation for predictive ecology over the
next decade is developed. The activities at the conference and the supported
individuals will advance a set of methods for the next generation of ecologists
and ecosystem scientists.

The proposed program of 30 confirmed speakers is a diverse group of scientists
including ecosystem scientists, ecologists, epidemiologists, economists,
computer scientists, and data scientists. The short-term impact of the
conference is to develop a road map and a set of best practices for predictive
ecology. The conference brings together a wide variety of researchers to ensure
that ecological models are integrated into social, environmental and resource
management policy and decision-making. This conference develops the field of
predictive ecology by developing a network of predictive ecology researchers and
a clear framework defining best practices for predictive ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.