* 2303254
* Collaborative Research: A 50,000-year continuous record of the Indian Summer Monsoon from Loktak Lake, NE India
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 461,546.00

Recent floods in Pakistan and climate migrants from Myanmar and Bangladesh
exemplify the enormous societal consequences of abrupt and large magnitude
change in the strength of the Indian Summer Monsoon (ISM). However, we do not
fully understand the relative importance of different factors on gradual and
abrupt ISM change at different timescales (1000s to <100 years). This project
will generate long (>50,000 years) lake sediment records from a site that has an
unusually high rate of sediment accumulation and is sensitive to changes in the
ISM, enabling high resolution reconstructions of past lake levels and
environmental changes. This analysis of the paleo lake system will provide
important perspective on present and projected changes in the ISM, allowing the
following hypotheses to be tested: 1) greenhouse gas concentrations are more
important in strengthening the ISM than solar energy, 2) a weakening of deep
Atlantic Ocean circulation weakens the ISM, and 3) changes in the frequency and
intensity of Pacific and Indian Ocean circulation patterns cause warming in the
Bay of Bengal, weakening the ISM. The expected intellectual outcome of this
project is an improved understanding of the ISM response to future increased
greenhouse gases and associated global changes. Established partnerships with
Manipur University, located proximal to the lake, will be strengthened through
reciprocal public and stakeholder engagement workshops and enhance community
understanding of the project findings. Loktak Lake is large, shallow, and has a
fast, continuous sedimentation rate of ~6 cm/century, making it a sensitive
recorder of regional changes in precipitation-evaporation balance at sub-century
scales. Preliminary work from Loktak Lake indicates large magnitude lake level
variations across several global climate states (greenhouse gas concentrations
and summer insolation) with attendant changes in organic and inorganic
geochemical signals. To test the aforementioned hypotheses, sediment cores will
be collected and analyzed for sedimentology, geochemistry (ICP-OES), scanning
X-ray fluorescence (XRF), hydrogen (δ2H) and carbon (δ13C) isotopes of long- and
medium-chain waxes, carbon and nitrogen (δ15N) isotopes of organic matter,
palynology, diatoms, and biomarkers for aquatic activity and terrestrial
ecosystem changes. Proxy interpretation will be aided by analysis of isotope-
enabled climate model simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.