* 2303074
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Reveal, Amplify, and Implement Strategies for Equity (RAISE)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Starlett Sinclair, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 297,013.00

The Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU) will undertake an institutional self-
assessment to identify potential organizational inequities (unjust or unfair)
policies and practices that result in differential professional outcomes for
some STEM faculty. The ADVANCE Catalyst project will result in a five-year STEM
faculty equity plan tailored to the FGCU context and institutional data that
will guide institutional actions to address any issues identified during the
grant. FGCU is a relatively new institution compared to other ADVANCE
institutions having been established in 1997.

The institutional self-assessment and five-year strategic plan will set a
foundation to improve equity for STEM faculty at the institution. This work will
benefit STEM disciplines as well as non-STEM disciplines due to the
interconnected nature of institutional policy. Results of the Catalyst project
will be regularly communicated with the FGCU community and involves an advisory
board of key upper administrators. The project outcomes will be shared with the
ADVANCE community and others through a website, presentations, and peer-reviewed
publications.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional assessments and the development of five-year
faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit, institution of higher
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.