* 2303148
* CSEDI: Integrated seismic, geodynamic, and mineral physics studies of scatterers and other multi-scale structures in Earth’s lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2026
* USD 207,069.00

The behavior of materials in the Earth’s mantle constrains the flows that drive
plate tectonics. Voluminous volcanic eruptions driven by deep mantle sources are
thought to have caused global environmental changes. Dramatic compositional and
thermal changes occur at the core-mantle boundary (CMB), about 3000 km below the
Earth’s surface. These changes exert a primary influence on the cooling of the
planet. They also influence the core dynamics, the Earth’s magnetic field, and
mantle thermal convection. Yet, understanding the dynamics of the deep Earth is
not trivial. Indeed, multidisciplinary efforts and state-of-the art techniques
are required to tackle the complexity of the Earth system. Here, the researchers
investigate enigmatic features observed at the core-mantle boundary. To unveil
their origin, the team combines expertise in seismology, geodynamics, and
experimental mineral physics. The researchers carry out experiments at the
extreme pressures prevailing in the mantle. They measure the properties of
materials anticipated to exist in of oceanic crustal material sinking to the CMB
using powerful x-rays and infrared light at national synchrotron facilities.
Taking advantage of recent advances in computational facilities, they simulate
the interaction of candidate oceanic crustal materials with deep-mantle
materials brought together by tectonic forces acting throughout Earth’s history
to produce complex structures in the deep mantle. The results of the models will
be compared with seismic observations of the Earth’s interior, testing our
understanding of the dynamics of the deep Earth. The project provides support
for the training of graduate students at the California Institute of Technology
and fosters international collaboration with Australia.

Seismologists have revealed that the mantle side of the CMB is extraordinarily
heterogeneous, with km-scale fine structure that could harbor distinct chemical
reservoirs. Thermal and chemical heterogeneity, solid-solid phase transitions,
elastic anisotropy, variable viscosity, and melting are probably all required to
explain the observed complexity. With expertise in seismology, geodynamics and
experimental mineral physics, the team connects the atomic scale to the tectonic
scale as linked to the temporal dimension through dynamics. This is accomplished
through the measurement of the thermoelastic properties of deep Earth phases as
compared to seismically observed structures predicted by mantle dynamics arising
from reconstructions of Earth’s plate tectonic history. The researchers will
conduct a systematic study of the Pacific large low seismic velocity province
(LLSVP) and proximal surroundings. They use whole seismograms compared against
synthetics generated from enhanced tomographic models and thermo-chemical
convection models. The models integrate plate tectonic reconstructions
constrained by observations and account for materials’ physical properties,
including elastic tensors and rheological properties. The experiments assess the
sources of the seismic signatures of candidate deep hydrous phases in subducted
slab. They include: (1) shear-wave speed measurements using inelastic x-ray
scattering techniques; and (2) thermal equation of state and stability
constraints using x-ray diffraction and synchrotron infrared spectroscopy at
lower mantle conditions. The study addresses fundamental questions, such as: can
the presence of subducted slabs deform LLSVPs into seismically resolvable 3-D
shapes with distinctive anisotropy and affect D" topography? If hydrous phases
can be transported into the lowermost mantle, are they seismically detectable
and do they play a role in the stability of a thermo-chemical pile? This work
will be accomplished through the training of three graduate students in cutting-
edge techniques, and the collaborative project will enhance partnerships with
Australian National University. Outreach activities through the Earthquake
Fellows Program will include high school students from backgrounds
underrepresented in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.