* 2303468
* Collaborative Research: Millennial-Length Histories of Northeastern Pacific Climate Variability from Bivalve Mollusks and Trees
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Diana Thatcher, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 144,969.00

The general goal of this project is to produce a continuous, annually resolved,
and millennial-length marine climate history of the northeast Pacific Ocean
region using a combination of data from paleoclimate proxies involving growth
increments of the marine bivalve Pacific geoduck (Panopea generosa), tree-ring
chronologies, and tropical coral growth-increment records.

Climate variability in the region plays a fundamental role in the socioeconomic
and environmental dynamics of western North America with clearly established
implications for fisheries production, forest growth, wildfire, drought, and
snowpack. Over the past decade, the region has experienced repeated and extreme
heatwaves that profoundly impacted marine ecosystems and adjacent terrestrial
systems. Yet, considerable uncertainty exists as to northeastern Pacific climate
variability prior to the 1900s and the extent to which current climate is
atypical.

Foremost, this research aims to reconstruct northeast Pacific Ocean sea-surface
temperatures as a significant forcing mechanism of climate and climate
variability in Earth’s climate system but which is relatively poorly constrained
by instrumental observations, paleoclimate data, and general climate circulation
models.

This project seeks to address lingering questions regarding poor agreement among
earlier tree-ring reconstructions and the possibility of time variant linkages
across marine and terrestrial systems. Moreover, long-term relationships between
the extratropical and tropical Pacific region will be assessed by integrating
coral records and existing reconstructions of the El Niño Southern Oscillation.
Northeastern Pacific paleoclimate reconstructions may yield unique benchmarks
for comparison among paleoclimate records, modern observations, and model
datasets of hemispheric climate from interannual to centennial timescales.

The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include development of a potential high-
impact climate proxy, support for a doctoral student, development of a
dendrochronology course-based undergraduate research experiences (CURE) for
undergraduate students, installation of exhibits into the lobbies of the tree-
ring-research dept and in Biosphere2, training of docents, and building a
Youtube channel of videos regarding quantitative paleoclimate techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.