* 2303937
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-powered platform for evaluating and developing cultural competence and diversity, equity and inclusion awareness
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Dwayne Cormier, CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,880.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project focusses on developing culturally-competent, humanlike,m and
empathetic artificial intelligence (AI) agents for use within the pre-
kindergarten (pre-K)-graduate school educational context. In the broadest sense,
cultural competence refers to an organization's or individual's capacity and
effectiveness in engaging with individuals from cultural backgrounds different
from their own. The proposed innovation seeks to create a new market for social
science-inspired AI agents, with significant roles for two Historically Black
College or Universities (HBCUs) in the software development. The project’s
impact on social advancement is crucial as diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) training is a high strategic priority for many organizations but often not
part of the work environment. The success of the training program can lead to
more equitable and inclusive workplaces, educational environments, and
institutions, ultimately contributing to a more equitable and inclusive society.
The project aims to increase user satisfaction and trust in AI technology,
driving innovation and generating significant revenue streams by creating US
jobs, annual revenue, and exports.

The traditional routes for developing cultural competence through human-led
interventions can disrupt the work environment, be difficult to measure without
human bias, and may lead to discord within the work environment. This SBIR Phase
I project aims to develop culturally competent and empathetic Artificial
intelligence (AI) agents to codify and label users' subjective responses to
complex diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) issues while maintaining high
social trustworthiness. Through the use of research-based social science
frameworks, the project will develop bias-free and DEI-aware AI agents to assess
and codify cultural competence among organizational stakeholders. Key objectives
include sourcing large scale human-generated data to train AI agents to identify
users' subjective responses to complex DEI observations and prompting via
evocative vignettes or open-ended survey questions. Phase I aims to transform a
proof-of-concept into a scalable platform with sophisticated AI capabilities for
the educational marketplace, leading to more inclusive workplaces and a deeper
understanding of pre-Kindergarten-20 environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.