* 2303858
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: Little Galaxies, Big Impact: New Insights through Highly-Resolved Simulations of Early Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kaley Brauer, Brauer, Kaley
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 06/30/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Kaley Brauer is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Dr. Brauer will conduct research to study
how stars formed in the earliest galaxies. To do this, she will produce
cosmological simulations of dwarf galaxies with individual stars, detailed
chemical yields, and highly-resolved metal mixing. Stars from the smallest
galaxies, called “ultra-faint dwarf" galaxies, are relics from the era of the
first stars and galaxies, preserving clean signatures of early chemical
enrichment. They are also poorly-understood ingredients in the formation history
of the Milky Way. To improve accessibility to astronomy and space science, Dr.
Brauer will write and illustrate a series of astronomy children’s books and
freely distribute them to Boston-area schools through interactive visits to
second-grade science classrooms. She will also organize and run a free weekend-
long summer camp to inspire and introduce middle-school-aged young women to
space science.

This work will provide the theoretical support necessary to reveal insights
about early galaxy formation (differences in hierarchical formation) and
chemical enrichment (differences in nucleosynthetic yields) that are contained
within the full distribution of chemical abundance patterns. She will quantify
the origin of observed chemical abundance scatter as well as how metals mix in
the interstellar medium of early galaxies and how this varies with different
elements and different nucleosynthetic channels. Additionally, Dr. Brauer will
quantify the low-mass end of the Milky Way assembly history by comparing
simulated abundance distributions to observations of the Milky Way stellar halo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.