* 2303084
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Coarsening Kinetics of Supported Metal Nanoparticles Using Time-resolved Electron Microscopy, Data Analytics and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Eric Stach, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2026
* USD 527,186.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Catalysis is the process used to efficiently convert one chemical to another,
and is the basis of the chemical and petrochemical industries. Catalysis is
estimated to contribute approximately 35% of the global gross domestic product.
Heterogeneous catalysis is a sub-class of catalysis, and is a process by which
very small metallic nanoparticles (of only a couple of nanometers in size) that
are supported on non-reactive substrates are used for chemical conversions.
Because these particles are microscopic, nearly all their atoms are on the
nanoparticle's surface. Surface atoms have a higher energy than atoms that are
present in the nanoparticle bulk because they are not fully bonded. This lack of
full bond is essential as it allows them to act as catalysts, but it also leads
to problems. Because catalysis occurs in highly reactive environments (including
high temperatures and aggressive environments), the atoms at the surface can be
driven off of the nanoparticle. These atoms can migrate around and can lead to
arrangements that reduce their ability to be effective at further catalysis.
This project uses real-time, high-resolution imaging to see these processes
directly and tightly couple these observations with computer simulations to
determine the fundamental physical mechanisms that degrade catalytic
performance. The work is being performed primarily by graduate students at the
University of Pennsylvania and Northwestern University. This project
incorporates undergraduate students at both institutions in the research
efforts, as well as students from minority-serving institutions such as the
University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez. The research outcomes provide scientists
with the needed understanding to help stabilize heterogeneous catalysts during
reactions, potentially leading to substantial savings in both cost and energy
usage.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

One of the most critical applications of metal nanoparticles is in the field of
heterogeneous catalysis, where their small size leads to a prevalence of under-
coordinated surface sites that facilitate the conversion of reactants to
products. However, a high concentration of under-coordinated surface sites
increases the total surface energy, which drives particle evolution via
coarsening, coalescence, and evaporation. These processes eventually lead to a
decrease in overall catalytic activity. While these phenomena are understood
generally, existing theoretical descriptions are mean-field and are under
debate. This project uses high-throughput, quantitative image analysis to
analyze in-situ transmission electron microscopy data at the University of
Pennsylvania. This data is tightly linked to large-scale simulations at
Northwestern University. Through the resulting iteration between the ‘ground
truth’ of experimental observations and simulations, this research is
determining 1) how rough surfaces affect the dynamics of contact lines and thus
nanoparticle evolution, 2) how particle size and placement affect nanoparticle
growth, and 3) the role of surface energy anisotropy. In addition to providing
an improved fundamental understanding of these processes, these studies suggest
new routes to mitigate unwanted coarsening in technologically relevant systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.