* 2303862
* Structural Studies of Proteins by Paramagnetic Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Christopher Jaroniec, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 932,130.00

Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a spectroscopic technique, which
enables atomistic studies of structure, dynamics, and interactions to be
performed for proteins and nucleic acids in the context of large complexes and
assemblies. Such systems, which include membrane-associated proteins, oligomeric
molecular machines, amyloids, and chromatin, play important roles in fundamental
biological processes and mechanisms. In this project, the PI is developing and
applying new solid-state NMR methods for the determination of protein structures
and interactions, with focus on measurements of long-range structural restraints
to overcome some of the major challenges associated with conventional solid-
state NMR approaches. The research aims of the project are integrated with
education and outreach activities involving diverse groups of graduate,
undergraduate and high-school students. These activities, which include
intensive, full-time summer research internship programs for undergraduate and
local high-school students organized annually in the PI's laboratory, aim to
directly impact students in the earliest stages of their educational experience
by introducing them to cutting edge interdisciplinary research at the interface
of chemistry, biology, and physics. The feature of the solid-state NMR
methodology in this project lies in its use of covalently attached paramagnetic
tags, which enable electron-nucleus distance restraints up to ~20 Ã… to be
simultaneously accessed for multiple protein sites. Specifically, the project
aims to advance this paramagnetic solid-state NMR methodology for protein
structure refinement in systems of increasing complexity including amyloid
fibrils and oligomeric protein complexes, probing functionally-important
interactions between dynamically disordered and structured protein domains in
large biomacromolecular assemblies, and exploring measurements of structural
restraints in proteins by coupling paramagnetic solid-state NMR with low-
temperature dynamic nuclear polarization, a general tool for dramatically
enhancing the sensitivity of solid-state NMR spectra. This project is supported
by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.