* 2303038
* Collaborative Research: NSF-CSIRO: RESILIENCE: Graph Representation Learning for Fair Teaming in Crisis Response
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ying Ding, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,862.00

The recent COVID-19 pandemic has revealed the fragility of humankind. In our
highly connected world, infectious disease can swiftly transform into worldwide
epidemics. A plague can rewrite history and science can limit the damage. The
significance of teamwork in science has been extensively studied in the science
of science literature using transdisciplinary studies to analyze the mechanisms
underlying broad scientific activities. How can scientific communities rapidly
form teams to best respond to pandemic crises? Artificial intelligence (AI)
models have been proposed to recommend scientific collaboration, especially for
those with complementary knowledge or skills. But issues related to fairness in
teaming, especially how to balance group fairness and individual fairness remain
challenging. Thus, developing fair AI models for recommending teams is critical
for an equal and inclusive working environment. Such a need could be pivotal in
the next pandemic crisis. This project will develop a decision support system to
strengthen the US-Australia public health response to infectious disease
outbreak. The system will help to rapidly form global scientific teams with fair
teaming solutions for infectious disease control, diagnosis, and treatment. The
project will include participation of underrepresented groups (Indigenous
Australians and Hispanic Americans) and will provide fair teaming solutions in
broad working and recruiting scenarios.

This project aims to understand how scientific communities have responded to
historical pandemic crises and how to best respond in the future to provide fair
teaming solutions for new infectious disease crises. The project will develop a
set of graph representation learning methods for fair teaming recommendation in
crisis response through: 1) biomedical knowledge graph construction and
learning, with novel models for emerging bio-entity extraction, relationship
discovery, and fair graph representation learning for sensitive demographical
attributes; 2) the recognition of fairness and the determinant of team success,
with a subgraph contrastive learning-based prediction model for identifying core
team units and considering trade-offs between fairness and team performance; and
3) learning to recommend fairly, with a measurement of graph-based maximum mean
discrepancy, a meta learning method for fair graph representation learning, and
a reinforcement learning-based search method for fair teaming recommendation.
The project will support cross-disciplinary curriculum development by
effectively bridging gaps in responsible AI and team science, fair project
management, and risk management in science.

This is a joint project between researchers from the United States and Australia
and funded by the Collaboration Opportunities in Responsible and Equitable AI
under the U.S. NSF and the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.