* 2303485
* Collaborative Research: Using a Combined Basin Analysis, Isotopic, and Modeling Approach to Reconstruct the LGM through Early Holocene Hydroclimate for Glacial Lake Mojave.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Angela Daneshmand, Santiago Canyon College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 68,162.00

Water is California’s (CA) most critical and unpredictable resource. As a
predominantly agricultural economy, CA’s socioeconomic success and
sustainability are closely tied to water availability. And as the United States'
largest state economy, the health of CA is important to the health of the United
States. To understand modern and future water availability, scientists look to
the past to inform the future – a field of study called paleoclimatology. Arid
environments like the Mojave Desert are especially sensitive to water
availability. As a result, arid environments are excellent sites for studying
past changes in the water cycle. This project will focus on Silver Lake (CA) and
combine geological, hydrological, and modeling methods to examine the amplitude,
magnitude, and frequency of changes in water availability across one of the most
geologically recent and climatically dynamic periods in Earth’s history – the
period from the Last Glacial Maximum (ca. 24,000 years before present) to the
early Holocene (8,000 years before present). Most importantly, our novel and
transdisciplinary methods will allow us to quantify past changes in water
availability and assess the climatic drivers that cause these changes. Cal-State
Fullerton and Santiago Canyon College (both Hispanic Serving Institutions) will
partner with Brown University (a major research-active university) to create a
diverse educational and research experience for a total of 15 funded students
and 1 post-doc. This multi-institutional collaboration provides a clear pathway
for 2-year college students to transfer into 4-year universities and establishes
a positive science identity and a sense of belonging in underrepresented groups.

This research will use a combined basin analysis (i.e.,core-to-shore), isotopic,
and modeling approach to reconstruct a quantitative record of minimum lake
depth, minimum lake volume, and the requisite hydroclimatic conditions during
the Late Glacial to Early Holocene necessary to fill the Silver Lake Basin, the
ostensible terminal basin of Glacial Lake Mojave. Existing and new beach or
near-shore geomorphic sites will be identified and characterized using UAV-
based, Structure-from-Motion photogrammetry. These shore data, and their
respective ages, will be coupled with dated and analyzed sediment cores to
quantify changes in minimum lake depth, and thus lake volume, from 24-8 ka.
Coupled with these geological data, the project team will apply oxygen isotopic
constrained, non-steady state hydrologic models of the lake system to quantify
the requisite conditions necessary to fill and sustain Silver Lake during the
Late Glacial to Early Holocene. Finally, the results from this work will be
compared to a variety of climatic forcings to evaluate the primary drivers of
hydroclimatic change in the southern Great Basin. This award is co-funded by the
Division of Earth Sciences and Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences by
way of the Paleo Perspectives on Present and Projected Climate program, and
increases research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety
of institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.