* 2303564
* POSE: Phase II:  An Open-Source Ecosystem for Scenic
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Sanjit Seshia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

The world is being transformed by the increasing use of autonomy, powered by
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML), across applications of
great societal importance, including in transportation, energy, healthcare, and
finance. Concurrently, there is increasing concern about the brittleness of AI
and ML components and their susceptibility to failures that can compromise
overall system safety. To address these concerns, the team of researchers have
developed Scenic, an open-source language and toolkit supporting a systematic
methodology for the design, verification, and deployment of AI systems. Scenic
has been successfully demonstrated in multiple industrial-scale applications,
including autonomous driving and avionics, and the open-source developer and
user base is starting to grow. This project is developing a robust and
sustainable open-source ecosystem (OSE) for Scenic. The project’s novelties
include (i) developing a range of new applications and demonstrations of Scenic,
(ii) developing a governance structure for the Scenic OSE, and (iii) creating
sustainable Scenic OSE infrastructure. The project impacts the design of high-
assurance AI systems by furthering the adoption of formal methods for the design
of AI systems across industry, academia, and government. In addition to outreach
to industry and government, the researchers are using Scenic and the Scenic OSE
in educational outreach activities to undergraduate and high-school students.
The project approach includes the following key components. First, the existing
user base and collaborations in the domain of autonomous vehicles is being
strengthened and extended. Second, end-user discovery is being performed to
develop new high-impact applications of Scenic in virtual and augmented reality,
healthcare, home and industrial robotics, multi-agent dynamic games, and other
areas, along with corresponding networks of users and collaborators. Third, a
governance structure for Scenic is being created comprising a steering
committee, core team, and multiple working groups that engage with users,
collaborators and stakeholders. Fourth, a sustainable Scenic OSE infrastructure
is being developed by drawing on best practices for code quality and security,
testing and verification, licensing, community interactions, maintenance and
documentation, dissemination, etc. The team is also engaging in dissemination
and outreach activities, conducting workshops, bootcamps, and tutorials, and
producing documentation and other materials to support the Scenic OSE.
Altogether, this NSF POSE project is working to establish Scenic as a strong
open-source foundation enabling dependable societal-scale applications through
high-assurance AI-enabled cyber-physical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.