* 2303019
* An AI Tutoring System for Pollinator Conservation Community Science Training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Nikhil Krishnaswamy, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 849,890.00

Increased access to mobile phones and other internet capable devices has created
new opportunities for adult learner audiences to engage in community science
programs, which rely on volunteers to provide a large amount of data for
analysis. But the lack of scalability of volunteer training is a limitation on
community science programs. Volunteers may come to the activity with varying
degrees of expertise and different personal goals with respect to the activity.
This project seeks to apply explainable artificial intelligence to the challenge
of personalizing training for adult citizen scientists. The approach will be
developed in the context of the Native Bee Watch (NBW) biodiversity monitoring
project that began in 2016 at Colorado State University. NBW trains volunteers
to identify and monitor native bees and other pollinators, and educates
volunteers about principles and practices from entomology and other fields of
ecology and biology. This project will (1) create an online learning environment
that will provide adaptive feedback to volunteers to support their self-directed
learning, (2) perform controlled user studies to refine the performance of the
system, and (3) perform a longitudinal study on the effectiveness of the system
for helping volunteers. As a result of helping the volunteers acquire skills and
STEM knowledge, the volunteers should, in turn, produce higher-quality
observations that can improve the scientific analyses based on the data, and be
more likely to continue contributing over time.

The project's research questions explore how to structure curricula that can
support learners with a wide variety of prior expertise, how to develop
algorithms that can estimate the current expertise of a learner while minimizing
intrusive assessment tests, how to extend explainable AI to provide feedback
tailored to individual learners, how to provide customized suggestions to help
learners make better use of the tutoring system to manage and support their
learning and citizen science participation, and how the learner expertise
estimates can be used to identify areas where the tutoring system may be in need
of improved accuracy. Data will be collected via surveys, interviews,
observations, focus groups, usage metrics, and performance data. Analyses
include thematic analysis of qualitative data and descriptive and comparative
statistics. The intellectual merit of the project lies in the exploration of
both the pedagogical and algorithmic aspects of supporting adult informal
science learning - adults are an under-studied population in informal learning,
requiring different approaches to learner modeling and the provision of
different kinds of automated feedback than is common in traditional classroom-
based intelligent tutoring systems. Because the system is designed to embrace
self-driven informal learning, it contains several novel approaches: it will
model learners' use of software features to help them manage their mastery of
using the software to attain their own (possibly idiosyncratic) learning
objectives; and it will be transparent about how its estimate of the learner's
skill level was reached and provide learners with the opportunity to better
calibrate the estimate - a novel form of dialogue-based evaluation that both
respects the agency of the informal learner and improves the system's
functionality (both its estimates of learner skill, and the accuracy of the
vision model). With respect to broader impacts, while some elements of the
developed system will be highly specific to the current domain (pollinator
identification), by creating a scalable training system, the user base of the
NBW community science project can be radically extended, expanding both the
number of adult learners acquiring STEM skills and the amount of quality data
being gathered across a wider geographic region. The general approach can in
turn be adapted to new citizen science programs, providing a template for how
such programs can refactor the fundamental way the program interacts with
volunteers, potentially changing the landscape for informal adult science
education. Results from this work will be disseminated to a range of educational
research, citizen science practitioner, and artificial intelligence venues,
enhancing the literatures in all areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.