* 2303851
* Real-World Applications of the Antiaromaticity Concept: Assemblies, Synthetic Strategies, and Functional Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Judy I-Chia Wu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 539,999.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Judy Wu and her team at the University of
Houston will carry out computational quantum chemistry research to explore,
test, and validate molecular level design principles for functional carbon-rich
materials, such as light-responsive polymers, nanotubes, and organic
electronics. The expected outcomes include the development of practical
guidelines that will complement current experimental interests and efforts, 1)
to prepare smart polymers that can change shape or chemical properties when
irradiated by light, 2) to grow carbon nanotubes with tailored dimensions and
properties for energy storage and battery applications, 3) to design organic
molecules with superior charge transport properties for transistors and bendable
electronic devices, and overall, to speed up the discovery of functional
molecules and materials by providing new and useful computational insight. Dr.
Wu also co-leads and coordinates a monthly Theoretical Physical Organic
Chemistry (TPOC) meeting. These meetings make high-quality scientific
discussions accessible to graduate students and postdocs that are
underrepresented in traditional in-person conferences, due to limitations in
funding, resource, geographic location, or family conditions. These meetings
also provide a safe place for students and postdocs in computational organic
chemistry groups around the world to share their research with each other and to
establish friendships that are beneficial for their career development.

Specifically, the proposed research will stimulate chemist to reconsider
practical applications of the concept of antiaromaticity in many areas of
chemical research. Aim 1 investigates the potential of excited-state double
proton transfer as a design strategy for photo-responsive hydrogen bonding
motifs. Aim 2 set out to test the possibility of a metal-free, stepwise [4+2]
cycloaddition, photochemical pathway for growing single-chirality nanotubes. Aim
3 seeks to establish a structure-property relationship to explain the effects of
heteroatom doping and π-ring fusion on the electronic properties of polycyclic
antiaromatic hydrocarbons. The proposed research will examine the possible role
of antiaromaticity for designing light-responsive supramolecular systems, for
developing synthetic strategies to access useful carbon-rich materials, and for
tuning the optoelectronic properties of expanded π-conjugated materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.