* 2303548
* Collaborative Research: A revised Plio-Pleistocene view of the effect of climate on North Pacific oxygenation from foraminifera-bound nitrogen isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 444,995.00

Like most life on land, life in the ocean such as zooplankton, fish, and marine
mammals require oxygen to break down their food and generate energy. However, in
three different regions of the ocean, there are depths (from roughly 200 to 500
m) where the oxygen has been exhausted due to bacteria. These are known as the
oxygen-deficient zones (ODZs), with the largest of these occurring in the
eastern tropical North Pacific. The ODZs restrict the habitats and movements of
ocean life, including fisheries on which humans rely. They also affect the
availability and cycling of important nutrients in the ocean. The impact on
these nutrients can affect the ocean’s biological productivity and the
prevalence of different types of phytoplankton. Finally, the ODZs may affect the
ocean’s exchange of greenhouse gases (both carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide)
with the atmosphere. These gases can alter Earth’s climate. Studies have
suggested that the ODZs have expanded over the last century, possibly due to
ongoing global warming. However, climate model predictions of the ODZ extent in
the future yield an uncertain picture. Reconstructing ODZ changes in the past
will clarify the main controls on ODZ extent, improving the ability to predict
future changes. In this project, the chemical composition of nitrogen trapped in
the wall of fossil plankton will be measured in a deep-sea sediment core to
reconstruct past changes in the ODZ of the eastern tropical North Pacific. The
data will be compared with climate and ocean properties in the past, indicating
which of these properties most strongly controls the ODZs. At Princeton, the
team pursuing this research will lead a workshop on climate and the ocean for
middle and high school STEM teachers. This will be one of multiple opportunities
to communicate the results to the public. The research team at University of
Massachusetts Boston will support paid research opportunities for undergraduate
students. University of Massachusetts Boston is a minority-serving institution
with a high proportion of both first-generation and Pell grant recipient
students. These students will learn and apply cutting-edge geochemical analysis
techniques in close collaboration with the research team at Princeton
University.

The ocean’s ODZs and their changes over time deserve our attention in multiple
capacities: as monitors of ocean and atmospheric circulation; as hotspots of
biogeochemical fluxes; as major ocean sub-environments and constraints on ocean
species; and as reflections of the ocean’s biological carbon pump. Sedimentary
nitrogen (N) isotopes have been used to reconstruct past changes in the ODZs
through their sensitivity to water column denitrification, which increases the
15N/14N (δ15N) of the nitrate supplied to surface waters. The δ15N of bulk
sedimentary N (δ15Nbulk) has been applied extensively in this effort, leading to
the general conclusion that the Pleistocene ice ages have been associated with
ODZ contraction. However, δ15Nbulk may be overprinted by variations in seafloor
diagenesis and exogenous N inputs. To avoid these potential biases, it is now
possible to measure the δ15N of the small quantity of organic matter bound
within and protected by planktonic foraminifera shells (foraminifera-bound δ15N,
or FB-δ15N). Recent FB-δ15N data from the eastern equatorial Pacific and new
pilot data from the eastern tropical North Pacific (ETNP) argue against previous
δ15Nbulk-based inferences of a strong ice age/interglacial contrast in ODZ
extent. To test prior inferences and provide new insight into past variations in
ETNP denitrification and ODZ extent, a FB-δ15N record will be generated at Ocean
Drilling Program Site 1241 in the ETNP. Four time-windows of 300-500 kyr will be
analyzed over the last 3.3 Ma, each at suborbital (~3 kyr) resolution. The
reconstruction of the history of the ETNP ODZ will add a key biogeochemical
component to the paleoclimate data sets from this key region, yielding insights
into (1) the controls on tropical Pacific upper ocean circulation, which include
the wind and temperature fields, (2) the biogeochemical responses to climate-
driven changes in these physical parameters, and (3) the consequences for the
biological conditions of the ocean and the distribution of biologically-stored
excess CO2 in the ocean interior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.