* 2303695
* POSE: PHASE II:  Open VT -  A Standardized Ecosystem for Virtual Tissue Simulation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* David Wild, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,999.00

Virtual Tissues (VTs) are powerful computer simulations of cell behaviors within
tissues and organs. They are a valuable resource and tool for researchers to
delve into the mechanisms driving both normal and diseased tissue behaviors.
Although VTs do not replace traditional wetlab experiments, they significantly
contribute to the exploration and interpretation of existing data. They enable
researchers to conduct "virtual" experiments, offering guidance for additional
laboratory and clinical investigations. The combination of VTs with experiments
leads to a deeper comprehension of complex biological phenomena and bolsters the
progress of scientific understanding. VTs play a crucial role in drug and
therapy research, as well as in the creation of Medical Digital Twins for
Personalized Medicine. Currently, there is a lack of infrastructure for
collaborative and progressive VT development. This limits their widespread
adoption in biology and medicine. To address this limitation, this project aims
to establish an active open-source community providing resources and tools—an
ecosystem—that fosters collaboration among researchers from diverse backgrounds.
By facilitating the sharing and application of biomedical data and models, this
project can transform VT development, accelerating biological and medical
research and technological applications. Enhanced sharing and distribution of
VTs will positively impact STEM education because VTs present an excellent
opportunity to accelerate learning of fundamental biological and medical
principles in an accessible, appealing, and comprehensible manner. By
incorporating VTs into educational curricula, the project can expand the reach
of STEM education and inspire future generations of scientists and researchers.
This work both expedites scientific discovery and understanding of complex
biological systems and also advances American biotechnology and medicine.

This project will create OpenVT, an open-source, community-driven collection of
resources, standards and tools for expanding the use and adoption of
multicellular virtual-tissue (VT) computer simulations of normal and diseased
biological tissues. The OpenVT ecosystem will initially unify and expand two
existing widely used open-source platforms for building and running VT models,
CompuCell3D, and PhysiCell. OpenVT will enable sharable, cross-platform modeling
tools and shareable model specifications. OpenVT aims to accelerate the
understanding of complex biological mechanisms related to tissue development,
homeostasis, and disease. The project will focus on agent-based modeling (ABM)
approaches, where tissues and organs are constructed using discrete cells,
coupled with subcellular network models of signaling, gene regulation and
metabolism and partial differential equations that simulate the extracellular
movement of oxygen, growth substrates, signaling factors, and therapeutic
compounds. Specific aims include: development of shared standards for
specification of VT models between CompuCell3D and PhysiCell, creation of cell-
type description libraries, standardization of initial conditions, and
description of model outputs. These standards will then be used to define the
needed APIs that allow the interconnection and reuse of models and software
components across the two platforms, while also providing a concrete technical
roadmap to support the integration of additional open source ABM VT frameworks
in the future. This approach allows for the integration of subcellular, cell-
level, and tissue-level phenomena, providing explanatory power and enabling
high-precision virtual experiments. The project will support the integration of
other VT frameworks and the creation of educational and distribution facilities
to enable their widespread adoption and extension of OpenVT. The OpenVT
ecosystem aligns with successful community-driven initiatives in scientific
software development, such as the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML)
project. It aims to foster collaboration, establish standards for model inputs
and outputs, and provide user support and training. By transitioning to an open-
source ecosystem, the project aims to reduce duplication of effort, promote
software and modle sharing, and democratize access to modeling capabilities.
Project outcomes will be available at OpenVT.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.