* 2303927
* Collaborative Research: Multimodal Mapping of Gene Isoforms by Electromicrofluidic Manipulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shih-Kang Fan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Cells produce different versions of genes from the same genetic material. This
ability is crucial for the functioning of organisms in various situations.
However, current methods for studying different gene versions are limited and
cannot precisely analyze their expression within the organism. Additionally,
studying different protein versions is challenging because existing tools may
not distinguish between them. While there are techniques available to measure
the abundance of gene versions, they require isolating and separating cells,
which results in the loss of important information about cell interactions and
the environment. In this project, the investigators aim to develop a new
technology called electromicrofluidics (EMF), which combines electricity,
engineered gels, and cell culture on a microchip to automatically study gene
versions at the single-cell level. This technology will provide insights into
how these different gene versions function in complex biological processes
involving multiple cells, such as development, growth, and repair. In addition
to creating a novel biosensing approach, the research will be integrated across
several educational fronts, including graduate program development, active
learning through student-designed projects, social media dissemination,
undergraduate and minority research opportunities,and outreach programs.

The research aims to establish an EMF based biosensing platform for
comprehensive gene expression profiling. This platform incorporates
electroalignment-enhanced anisotropic gel polymerization and in situ
immunolabeling and amplification to enable simultaneous analysis of multiple
gene expression modes. The investigators will explore different gel layer
configurations suitable for studying protein isoforms and (ribonucleic acid) RNA
splicing variants. This approach allows for accurate profiling while minimizing
sample loss and contamination during transfer. By implementing electroalignment-
enhanced anisotropic gel polymerization, the lateral diffusion of molecules is
constrained, resulting in improved spatial resolution and sensitivity. This
enhancement facilitates in situ single-cell analysis, enabling the study of
spatial coordination and cell heterogeneity. Furthermore, the use of EMF
technology automates the assay procedures, enhancing reproducibility and
facilitating wider adoption of the platform. Initially, 3D gel assays will be
developed to analyze protein isoforms and RNA splice variants. Subsequently,
these assays will be integrated into a versatile platform capable of
simultaneously detecting multiple protein isoforms and RNA splicing variants.
The project will focus on mapping the Neurogenic locus notch homolog protein
(NOTCH) family members in migrating cell monolayers to evaluate their regulatory
functions in collective cell migration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.