* 2303294
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Holocene glacier lengths through time to address climate model-data disagreements
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nathaniel Lifton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2026
* USD 216,566.00

The ongoing retreat of glaciers worldwide provides a striking visual consequence
of modern climate change. How glaciers responded to past climate changes forms
the conceptual basis for evaluating their future behavior, which in turn
provides critical information for people who depend on the water supply from
glaciers for irrigation, consumption, and energy usage. This research is
generating new geologic data that document glacier and climate changes in the
past ~12,000 across North and South America. The project is evaluating the new
geologic data using novel statistical, glaciological, and climatological models
to determine why glaciers in the study region may have responded differently to
past climate shifts. Outcomes of this work provide valuable information for
understanding past glacier changes which will lead to a better ability to assess
future changes of those same glaciers. This project provides scientific training
and mentoring for multiple undergraduate and graduate students. International
collaborations are also being strengthened through university partnerships.
Public outreach occurring as part of this project includes curriculum building
with K-12 partners, participation in statewide science festivals, and
undergraduate mentoring that is engaging with underrepresented students
recruited through college level programs.

Global mean temperatures from the early to late Holocene have warmed by ~0.5°C
based on a recent model-data assimilation. Glaciers are sensitive recorders of
such climate change; however, glaciers across North America and at several
locations in the Tropics expanded from the early to late Holocene, at odds with
this latest climate reconstruction. This research is examining Holocene alpine
glacier conditions at six locations extending from Alaska to southern Patagonia
to address this apparent discrepancy. Through a combination of bedrock exposure
dating and statistical/glaciological modeling, the project is relating the
chronology of glacier length changes to past climate conditions to address
unresolved questions regarding global, hemispheric, and regional climate
changes. The objectives of this research are threefold: 1) constraining glacier
length changes with paired 14C/10Be exposure ages at six locations that span a
large latitudinal range from North to South America; 2) determining glacier
length through time at these six locations by applying a Monte Carlo forward
model guided by Bayesian inferences from these newly collected data; and 3)
using a glaciological model forced by existing climate simulations and paleo-
proxy climate reconstructions to determine plausible climate scenarios that
explain the glacier length histories from the data and forward model output.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.