* 2303115
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Security and Robustness for Intermittent Computing Using Cross-Layer Post-CMOS Approaches
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nader Sehatbakhsh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 225,761.00

This research project is at the forefront of addressing security vulnerabilities
in resource-limited, normally-off energy harvesting devices widely utilized
across various Internet of Things (IoT) applications. Ranging from wearable
devices to remote sensing and industrial systems, the potential impact of
securing these devices is significant. The project's novelties are its focus on
discovering the inherent vulnerabilities of these devices, including physical
attacks, unanticipated power outages and failures, and other unique threats, and
proposing effective solutions for them. Exploiting these vulnerabilities could
lead to irreparable damage to property and lives, considering the extensive
network of connected devices. The project's broader significance and importance
lie in the critical need for comprehensive, lightweight defense strategies, as
the existing ones either exhibit high overheads or are incomplete, rendering
them unfit for resource-constrained nodes.

The technical approach of this research revolves around the development of
Secure Intermittent-Robust Computation (SIRC) for these computing nodes. This is
achieved by capitalizing on emerging non-volatile (NV), spin-based devices to
construct lightweight reconfigurable logic. The assurance of intermittent-robust
computation during various attacks is facilitated by storing intermediate
circuit values in NV devices. Concurrently, the research employs innovative
circuit-architecture-algorithm techniques, promising notable advances in the
domain of IoT security. This research effectively bridges the gap between the
ever-present security threats and the limitations of current defense schemes,
marking a significant stride toward the resilient future of IoT applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.