* 2303044
* NSF Center for the Mechanical Control of Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2028
* USD 4,000,000.00

The NSF Center for the Mechanical Control of Chemistry (CMCC) is an integrative
research and training environment that brings together chemists, physicists, and
engineers around the common goal of establishing a fundamental understanding of
mechanochemistry – the use of mechanical force to drive chemical reactions.
Mechanochemistry offers a powerful and versatile means for chemical synthesis,
opening the door to new reactions and new materials that cannot be made using
traditional synthetic methods. While the effects of light, heat, and electric
charge for driving chemical reactions are well understood, the use of mechanical
force as a controlling synthetic element is far less developed. To unveil the
full potential of mechanochemistry, the CMCC aims to bridge key knowledge gaps
between the fields of chemistry and mechanics which have limited the broad
application of mechanochemistry as a core synthetic methodology. As
mechanochemical reactions can often be carried out with little or no solvent,
and at lower temperatures than traditional synthetic approaches, the translation
of knowledge in the CMCC from molecular-scale understanding, to large scale
syntheses, has the potential for major technological and economic benefits
globally, affording more sustainable approaches to the synthesis of chemicals
and materials.

The CMCC is a coordinated effort among academic, industrial, and national lab
partners who are seeking to advance fundamental science which will drive
applications in the field of mechanochemistry. Through the development of an
Integrated Toolset Program (ITP), the CMCC will advance both experimental and
computational tools, establishing fundamental relationships between key reaction
parameters and applied forces/stresses. This research aims to develop new
chemical reactions and models for predictable mechanochemical syntheses in terms
of reaction rates, product yields, and selectivity. These new tools will be
applied to advance our understanding of mechanochemical processes for chemical
systems ranging from fundamental organic and organometallic reactions (Thrust 1)
to solid-state materials, e.g. layered lanthanides, perovskites and metal
halides (Thrust 2). The interplay of synergistic activation mechanisms of force
with light, heat, and charge is expected to expand understanding of this
powerful approach to chemical synthesis. Working with industrial partners, the
CMCC seeks to translate this new understanding of force-dependent selectivity
and reactivity into new reactor designs, with integrated force control for
scale-up. Synergistic research carried out by members of the CMCC has the
potential to yield disruptive technologies for the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries. To support this sea change, the CMCC will recruit and educate a
diverse mechanochemistry workforce. CMCC trainees will be immersed in an
inclusive and interdisciplinary environment, benefitting from new curricular
developments, exposure to innovation and industrial collaborations, and
engagement through extensive informal science communication efforts designed to
connect with K-12 and public audiences. This will establish the CMCC as a
premier global hub for mechanochemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.