* 2303911
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: From Dense Clusters to OB Associations: Tracing the Impact of Dynamics on Multiplicity beyond 10 AU in the Orion Complex
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew De Furio, De Furio, Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Matthew De Furio is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the University of Texas at
Austin. De Furio will observe hundreds of stars within four different star-
forming regions (from low-density unbound to high-density bound regions) to
identify binary and higher order multiple systems. Results from this work will
inform our understanding of the star formation process and explore effects from
the stellar birth environment. De Furio will also design and implement an
educational program devoted to children and adults with intellectual
disabilities using common university resources like telescopes and planetariums.

This work will characterize the multiplicity within two low-density OB
associations, one high-density bound cluster, and one very young embedded region
for primary stars with masses > 0.3 MâŠ™ using ground and space based imaging
informed by the Gaia observatory. With the ability to detect companions beyond
10 au, this project will: 1) probe the impact of dynamics on the formation and
retention of multiple systems, 2) explore which types of star-forming regions
contribute significantly to the Galactic field population, and 3) place
fundamental constraints on our understanding of multiple star formation theory
as a function of primary mass and orbital separation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.