* 2303803
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: A precise measurement of intermediate-mass black hole demographics with the Rubin Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Colin Burke, Burke, Colin Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Colin Burke is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry out
a program of research and education at Yale University. Burke will study and
execute new techniques for identifying intermediate-mass black holes — the
missing link between stellar mass and supermassive black holes — from accretion
signatures in large optical surveys. Results from the study will inform our
understanding of the formation and evolution of supermassive black holes that
can be found in every massive galaxy in the nearby Universe. Burke will conduct
outreach activities to introduce new data science in astronomy programming to
underrepresented high school students interested in a career in science.

This program will develop and apply Bayesian modeling techniques to study the
population of intermediate-mass black holes using survey data such as the Vera
C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time. Multiple complementary
modeling approaches and datasets will be used to accomplish the proposed goals.
Using these data and methods, Burke will place new constraints on the number
densities and properties of intermediate-mass black holes and use them as
laboratories for studying the physics of black hole accretion on human
timescales. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe
Big Idea. This research award is partially funded by a generous gift from
Charles Simonyi to the NSF Astronomy division. The project includes significant
contributions to Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.