* 2303582
* POSE: Phase II:  Cultivating Modeling Literacy and Practice through a NetLogo Open Source Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,990.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance.
Computational agent-based modeling is a widely used tool in the natural and
social sciences. Agent-based models capture the properties of a complex system
by modeling the behavior of its parts as many interacting computational agents
or entities. Due to its accessibility and explanatory power, agent-based
modeling has become a central methodology for investigating a wide range of
phenomena including biological ecosystems, molecular and chemical interactions,
economic systems, and spread of contagious disease. Over the past two decades,
the NetLogo team at Northwestern University has developed a large open-source
codebase consisting of the NetLogo agent-based modeling (ABM) environment and
many associated products. NetLogo has become the leading ABM platform, with
hundreds of thousands of users including both researchers and K-16 educators.
Researchers in the natural sciences, social sciences, and policy have published
thousands of scientific articles using NetLogo. Educators use NetLogo to engage
students in learning about complex systems through inquiry-based modeling
activities.

This project will transform the existing open-source product family of NetLogo
into a sustainable open-source ecosystem (OSE) that supports a modeling
community to both create and remix publicly available models and contribute to
the modeling tools themselves. Many individuals have volunteered to contribute
software extensions, scientific models, curricular units, textbooks,
translations and documentation, as well as to the core NetLogo code. To ensure
NetLogo’s future and to achieve lasting societal impact will require expanding
beyond the current mode of NetLogo development centered around a single academic
lab. This project will create and pursue plans for establishing a managing
organization to grow the OSE, including plans for organizational structure and
governance, community outreach, community contribution tools and processes, and
financial sustainability. The OSE managing organization will maintain and create
the infrastructure and processes that the varied NetLogo communities need to
sustain and grow their involvement in NetLogo modeling, and assures them of its
continued existence. Researchers, policymakers, teachers, and students will
benefit from vetted models, tools for creating models, and a community to share
and discuss models in a sustainable ecosystem. In the longer-term, the project’s
impacts will include increasing modeling practice in research, policy and
education, supporting a modeling-literate society better prepared to solve
humanity’s complex problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.