* 2303614
* SBIR Phase I:  Coated metal foils for high energy density, low-cost, lithium-ion batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Brian Hardin, ALUMINIO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,723.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will focus on researching and developing aluminum--
based current collectors to replace copper foils in lithium-ion batteries.
Copper foils are the third largest cost ($6.50/kWh) and third heaviest component
(~0.5 kg/kWh) in lithium-ion batteries. Copper is heavily used in the clean
technology space and there is expected to be a 3-5 million ton gap between the
supply and demand for copper by 2030. Copper foil demand for electric vehicles
is expected to exceed 1.5 million tons annually by 2030. This project will
explore the use of specialized aluminum foils to eliminate copper in lithium-ion
batteries. The specialty aluminum foil will be three times lighter than copper
and could eliminate in excess of 50 pounds of battery pack weight in a typical
electric vehicle.

The intellectual merit of this project is to demonstrate that specialized
aluminum foils can achieve the requisite materials properties for battery
applications. There are three criteria that must be met: 1) the specialty
aluminum foil must have similar electrochemical surface properties as copper; 2)
the anode material must adhere strongly; and 3) the specialty foil must be able
to be ultrasonically welded to metal tabs. Currently, pure aluminum foils are
used as current collectors on the cathode side but cannot be used on the anode
side because lithium alloys with aluminum at low potentials. Developing
specialized aluminum foils that have unique surface properties is key to
replacing copper in batteries. Aluminum is lighter, cheaper, and more abundant
than copper. Specialty aluminum foils that achieve unique surface properties
have a wide array of applications including metallization layers on solar cells.
Full demonstration of specialized aluminum foils in batteries could also open up
new research directions with the potential to improve the critical materials
used in clean energy and related applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.