* 2304417
* STTR Phase I:  Novel State of Health Measurements Through Advanced Lithium-ion Battery Modeling for Secure and Scalable 2nd-Life Battery Deployment
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Anurag Srivastava, PARTHIAN BATTERY SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,951.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the accelerated adoption of electrification
and other next-generation technologies, like renewable energy. This project
proposes a technology to effectively manage end-of-life lithium-ion batteries
through reuse. Enabling these batteries to be safely incorporated into a
circular/reuse economy is essential for society to meet the goals of
sustainability and net-zero carbon emissions. Extracting further value from
post-consumer batteries through reuse provides an economic incentive for
original equipment manufacturers to responsibly decommission up to 100% of their
retired battery units, thereby foregoing the need to dispose of the battery and
manufacture a new one in its place. The proposed technology’s ability to create
a practical and safe battery reuse market will not only create a net-negative
carbon footprint for the batteries but will also alleviate the stresses
currently faced within the lithium (Li)-ion supply chain and bring forward Li-
ion technology at more affordable prices. Additionally, the detailed state of
health analysis performed by the technology will allow for more informed
decision-making in regard to second-life battery allocation, enabling energy
storage project managers to lower upfront investment on energy storage, without
sacrificing on safety and performance.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel approach to attain rapid
and accurate state of health determinations for second-life lithium-ion
batteries. The bespoke technology will utilize novel battery modeling and data
analytics to establish an understanding of battery health beyond capacity
degradation. The technology’s ability to capture the ensemble effect of numerous
battery degradation mechanisms is a significant and needed advance over the
incumbent state of the art in battery health analysis. As increased rates of
degradation in specific cell parameters would lead to unique performance and
operating limitations within the battery, it is imperative to take these
parameters into consideration with a state of health assessment, or there is a
risk of fatal operating event occurrences such as thermal runaway. This
project’s objectives include the development of the rigorous electrochemical
model to model the highly complex capacity fading mechanisms within Li-ion
batteries, and the development of an algorithm-based state of health estimator
that will utilize real-time data and project remaining useful life estimates for
second use applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.