* 2304400
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a Chip Technology for Cheaper and Easier Photonic Device Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Juniyali Nauriyal, PHOTONECT INTERCONNECT SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the advancement of manufacturing technologies
for industries such as telecommunications, data communications, sensors. and
defense. Most of the internet relies on data centers to process data, and this
processing is accomplished via a device called an optical transceiver. These
transceivers house an optical fiber, which is as thin as a single strand of
human hair, attached to a chip device to transfer information to/from the data
centers. The optical fiber is so small that it is very difficult to precisely
connect the fiber to the chip, often resulting in performance losses. With
>100,000 transceivers per data center and >2,700 data centers in the United
States, it is important to have good fiber connection for reduced power
consumption and increased performance. Technology companies are also looking for
chips with multiple fibers, making the need for better fiber placement even
greater. In this project, the company focuses a new technology that makes fiber
placement on a chip faster, more accurate, and cheaper. This new technology uses
a special component that enables fiber placement with precision while improving
the device performance 4 times.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses major
pain points for optical transceiver companies: cost and time to package an
optical fiber to a silicon photonic chip. The proposed product consists of a
fusion splicing machine and a novel silicon dioxide mode converter. The mode
converter localizes heat from the laser, enabling fusion while simultaneously
decreasing the loss level. This technology packages silicon photonic devices
without compromising performance. It significantly improves packaging speed from
10 minutes to 2 minutes, increases power efficiency by 4X, and provides a 50%
savings. The company has demonstrated coupling losses lower than the industry
standard of 3 dB on specialty chips. The research objectives involve improving
coupling losses to around 1 dB, demonstrating splicing with foundry chips, and
improving the strength of the fusion splice for improved reliability. The
completion of these objectives will result in extremely low loss photonic
packaging applicable for use with foundry chips, increasing the
commercialization potential of the technology. This technology will enable
customers to package single or multi-fiber devices with high efficiency, low
cost, and at high volumes, ultimately increasing production capacity across many
industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.