* 2304753
* SaTC-EDU: Improving computer forensic curricula through hands-on hardware and software training and practical experience processing evidence from active criminal cases
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Younghee Park, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 07/31/2026
* USD 498,507.00

Society’s reliance on technology and digital spaces has led to a rapid growth in
cyber-based criminal activities that threaten national security. This generated
a critical need for developing educational practices that prepare the current
and future workforce to investigate cyber threats and process digital evidence.
Strategies to achieve effective balance of theoretical and practical education
are yet to be fully determined. To address the need for effective and balanced
educational practices, this project will introduce active-learning pedagogy into
an existing computer forensics curriculum. Its effect will then be measured
based on student success and development of industry-relevant skills.
Measurement will be accomplished in three ways. First, through evaluating the
appropriate balance, and ordering, of forensic, computer science, and criminal
justice courses needed to develop a strong theoretical understanding. Second,
through introducing classroom training with hardware and software currently used
within the discipline, to develop strong practical skills for entry-level
positions. Third, through providing hands-on internships that require processing
of digital evidence from active criminal investigations to provide work
experience and job training. As San Jose State University is both a Hispanic-
Serving Institution and an Asian American and Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution, a focus will be placed on how these curricular changes contribute
to the diversification of the cybersecurity workforce. Computer forensic (CF)
investigators require a unique education balancing forensics, computer science,
and criminal justice. This includes not only a theoretical foundation, but also
practical experience processing digital evidence. To meet these needs, education
will incorporate training on the technologies and current best practices used
within the discipline through hands-on experiences with the latest trends in
sources (devices) of digital evidence. Existing learning environments will be
modified in three different ways and evaluated to measure the impacts on student
success and workplace preparedness, especially among underrepresented groups.
First, by identifying how students’ navigational path (e.g., order of courses,
pre-existing knowledge) within the interdisciplinary coursework impacts the
successful completion of the program, and how modifications to these pathways
can increase student success. Second, by introducing active-learning pedagogy
into the classroom and training on hardware and software currently used by CF
practitioners. Third, by developing a laboratory infrastructure for students to
complete internships where they can conduct digital evidence investigations on
active criminal cases. The effectiveness of these modifications will be measured
through interviews with CF practitioners on the skill sets required for the
discipline, surveys of student navigation and activities, surveys of laboratory
intern experiences, and surveys of graduates' abilities to successfully
transition into careers within the discipline. Results will be disseminated
through online open-source educational materials, presentations to criminal
justice agencies and higher education institutions, and peer-reviewed
publications. Dissemination of results will aid the development of effective CF
curriculum at other institutions. This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.