* 2304513
* I-Corps:  Personalized Human Brain Phantom for Neuromodulation Procedure Research and Training
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Ravi Hadimani, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of anatomically realistic brain phantoms of humans and rats for
neuromodulation training and research such as transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS). Currently, there are new TMS coils and devices in development for the
treatment of disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), autism,
stroke rehabilitation, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson's disease, and
epilepsy. Locating the exact area of the brain that needs to be stimulated or
determining the strength of the stimulation in different regions of the brain
may be achieved through anatomically accurate brain phantoms. However,
currently, there are no accurate brain phantoms that can be used for training
and research in neuromodulation. The proposed technology may enable higher
efficacy of neuromodulation treatments by improving the precise targeting of the
TMS coil and provide a way to train researchers in magnetic neuromodulation. In
addition, the proposed phantoms also may be modified to be used in focused
ultrasound stimulation and concussion research.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a realistic anatomical
model, or phantom, of humans and rats for neuromodulation training and research.
The proposed technology mimics the electrical conductivity of different brain
regions. The proposed phantoms may enable clinicians and researchers in the
field of neuromodulation to conduct safety tests and verify whether a critical
part of the brain has received the required stimulation field strength in a
brain stimulation treatment procedure. In addition, the proposed technology also
may enable better visualization of magnetic and electric field distribution in
the brain. The phantoms are produced using 3-D printed shells for each tissue
layer of the brain. Brain tissues are divided mainly into the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), white matter (WM), grey matter (GM), ventricles, and cerebellum.
These layers are made into shells, and following 3-D printing, they are filled
with a conductive material prepared using a soft polymer that is mixed with
varying concentrations of electrically conductive multi-walled carbon nanotubes.
The nanotubes impart electrical conductivity to different regions of the brain
phantom. The phantom is then examined under different transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) parameters and compared with finite element analysis (FEM)
modeling of induced electric and magnetic fields in the brain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.