* 2304873
* Graphene/Polymer-based Fluorescent Nanozymes for Sensitive Detection of Metabolic Biotargets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julia Xiaojun Zhao, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Chemical Structures, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
â€“ B (CSDM-B) program in the Chemistry Division, and the Biosensing Program in
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET), Professors Julia Zhao and Diane Darland and their respective research
groups at the University of North Dakota are devising a new approach to
nanomaterial-based sensors, known as nanozymes, for the detection and
quantitation of key metabolic biomolecules, such as glucose. They seek to create
sensors usable in a range of environments and characterized by high sensitivity,
easy synthesis, and good biocompatibility. In conjunction with this work, Drs.
Zhao and Darland are reaching out to engage tribal high schools and colleges as
well as other universities in the North Dakota University System, to encourage
students from groups underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) to consider science as a career option. Additional efforts are
underway to develop hands-on advanced science lessons to help middle- and/or
high-school students connect concepts from atoms to ecosystems with
nanomaterials and cells.

Under this award, the collaborative Zhao/Darland team at the University of North
Dakota will work to develop graphene- and polymer-based fluorescent nanozymes
for sensitive detection of metabolic biomolecules. The nanozymes co-catalyze
targeted biomolecular reactions while providing an intense fluorescence signal
proportional to the analyte concentration. Targeted attributes include high
stability in various operational environments, high detection sensitivity, easy
synthesis, good biocompatibility, and applicability for detection of critical
cellular energetic targets. In the course of these studies, the team seeks a
better understanding of the geometric, compositional, dimensional, and
electrochemical characteristics of graphene- and polymer-based nanozymes.
Nanozymes will be tested for toxicity and used for biotarget detection and cell
imaging. Cells that display high metabolic activity and that are vulnerable to
metabolic distress will be used for testing the nanozymes under normal and
distressed metabolic conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.