* 2304615
* SBIR Phase II:  High Power Microwave Robot for Industrial Extra-Terrestrial Resource Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mohsen Yazdani, OFF-WORLD, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,117.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to improve space exploration over the next two decades. New space
missions are being planned and executed at an increasing rate by countries and
companies around the world. A novel space ecosystem is developing, especially
with respect to the Moon. Over 30 lunar missions are planned for the next 10
years. The focus of this technology is to develop an antenna capable of
projecting microwave beams into lunar rock with pinpoint accuracy. This
innovation will have the commercial impact of enhancing digging and tunneling on
the lunar surface creating landing pads, living quarters, and producing water
and fuel with over 40% greater efficiency than other methods. Furthermore, this
technology holds promise for improving mining on Earth too. As society
transitions from a fossil fuel to an electric infrastructure, the demand for
critical battery minerals is projected to increase 6 times by 2040. The
innovation can streamline the processing of minerals by 50%, helping to meet
this increasing demand that conventional approaches cannot meet. In summary,
this project is about transforming lunar exploration and Earth mining, and
enabling space exploration and the transition from fossil fuels.

This SBIR Phase II project develops and validates the critical hardware
subcomponents of the microwave antenna system, which are characterized by a
compact array of high-power elements operating in phase. The distinctiveness of
the design is its ability to increase the intensity of the microwave beam at a
significant distance in front of the antenna. The beam weakens rock by directly
injecting heat deep into it, which will simplify mineral extraction by making
rock processing faster and more energy efficient. The antenna hardware itself is
exposed to significantly lower electromagnetic stresses, allowing it to operate
in extreme environments. Key Phase II project tasks are verifying the
manufacturability of the antenna array; confirming its capabilities using
testing on beam-forming, low-power reflection; and testing the capability to
focus and steer a beam with high precision. Detailed electromagnetic
measurements will fully characterize the antenna and confirm its high power and
low power performance in the areas of the near-field radiation pattern, cross
and co-polarization, reflected power, beam forming capability, antenna
efficiency, and its ability to generate a high electric field density within a
desired and steerable focal point.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.