* 2304884
* Covalent Polymer Mechanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2027
* USD 800,000.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Craig at Duke
University is learning how to dictate the rates and outcomes of chemical
reactions that are accelerated by an applied mechanical force. Organic polymeric
materials, or plastics, break down due to the mechanical forces they experience
during their use cycles. The mechanical degradation of polymers limits their use
in lightweight structural materials, consumer products, and biomedical
applications. Reactions that are sensitive to a coupled force therefore impact
multiple aspects of materials design, including the macroscopic failure and
mechanical limitations of current polymeric materials. In addition, mechanically
responsive functional groups might serve as the critical elements in new stress-
responsive and self-healing polymeric materials. Professor Craigâ€™s studies will
provide insight into how the macroscopic mechanical forces experienced by
polymers during use can be effectively channeled into desired chemical
responses, providing a foundation for new classes of polymers. Broader impacts
of the project include: (1) developing active learning modules and associated
laboratory experiences in introductory chemistry and through coupled
undergraduate and high school research experiences; (2) broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups by engaging and recruiting young
scientists early in their scientific careers, before the onset of
disproportionate attrition from the sciences; (3) disseminating the results of
the research broadly; and, (4) addressing fundamental questions of molecular
behavior in a manner that will have an impact on a broad range of fields
including polymer chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and self-healing and
stress-responsive materials.

The overarching technical objective is to lay a quantitative foundation for
mechanochemical kinetics by employing state-of-the-art physical measurements and
developing new methods for quantitation. The research plan includes the direct,
experimental characterization and quantification of the effect of mechanical
forces on covalent reactions triggered along overstretched polymer backbones.
Because mechanical force, unlike conventional forms of energy input such as heat
or light, is directional, the coupling between mechanical force and reactivity
is expected to provide insights into the structure of transition states and the
shapes of reaction potential energy surfaces. Despite its importance, however,
quantitative measures of the effect of force on chemical reactions are rare. The
proposed work will further develop a novel approach to quantifying
mechanochemical reactivity: pulling on single molecules of muti-mechanophore,
non-scissile polymers with an atomic force microscope. Models for the observed
mechanochemical activity should permit a quantitative assessment of reactivity,
and of the influence of external factors such as the surrounding environment and
light-induced changes upon molecular structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.