* 2304910
* Maximizing the Harvesting of Photogenerated Electron-Hole Pairs in Hybrid Plasmonic Nanosystems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Prashant Jain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2026
* USD 441,678.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Prashant Jain of the University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign is developing materials, principles, and strategies
for capturing visible light from solar radiation and deploying it in a directed
and energy-efficient manner to form high-value chemical bonds. A particular
target is the chemical bond between nitrogen and carbon atoms found in many
high-value chemicals. Such light harvesting is currently achievable by
nanometer-scale particles of coinage metals; however, the conversion of light to
chemical energy is inefficient and uncontrolled. Professor Jain is addressing
this challenge by using oxide minerals engineered on the nanometer scale to
absorb visible light and produce energetic charges that survive long enough to
be used productively for chemical energy generation. Furthermore, he is pairing
these light-absorbing materials with chemical agents that direct and promote the
flow of charge. If successful, the research will lead to technologies for
manufacturing energetic reagents, fuels, and fine chemicals using renewable
power and producing no carbon emissions. In public outreach activities,
Professor Jain is also promoting sustainable technologies and practices through
solar energy- and electricity-powered removal of nitrate pollutants from water
sources near agriculture-dominated communities. The graduate students engaged in
this project are gaining valuable experience in a wide range of chemical
syntheses, spectroscopic and chemical kinetic analyses, and catalysis. This
project is also providing opportunities for undergraduate researchers interested
in sustainable technologies.

Plasmonic nanostructures allow the harvesting of light in the form of energetic
charge carriers, which can in turn be deployed to accelerate or drive chemical
reactions. However, harvesting of light and light-to-chemical energy conversion
via this scheme remains well below the thermodynamic efficiency limit. Professor
Jain is applying a newer class of plasmonic materials and hybridization
strategies for maximizing the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs
and utilizing them more efficiently and selectively for reactions such as
nitrogen–carbon bond formation. Specifically, Professor Jain is employing
plasmonic metal oxide nanostructures, which are anticipated to exhibit slower
carrier relaxation and recombination. The other strategies involve the
hybridization of plasmonic metal oxide nanostructures with polar surfaces,
water-oxidation promoters, and homogeneous catalysts. The work is expected to
elucidate physicochemical and materials design factors that govern carrier
separation and extraction and illustrate chemical architectures and schemes that
are ideally suited for the directed and efficient flow of carriers on the
nanoscale. These concepts coupled with the use of non-metallic plasmonic oxide
nanostructures have the potential to expand the scope and reach of plasmonic
chemistry for achieving energy-relevant chemical transformations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.