* 2304297
* SBIR Phase II:  Assessing comorbidities in epilepsy using eye movement recordings
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Rachel Kuperman, EYSZ, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 997,668.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the treatment and cognitive
function of epilepsy patients by using eye-tracking measurements to detect
neurocognitive symptoms associated with epilepsy as well as the side effects of
anti-epilepsy drugs. Epilepsy results in an estimated $28 billion in direct
costs annually in the United States, in addition to hurting the quality of life
of patients and their caregivers. Eye tracking technology, paired with cognition
monitoring modules, will have a positive economic and societal impact. For
example, some patients with epilepsy may be able to return to work sooner and
the burden on caregivers to monitor seizures and side effects may be reduced.
Earlier identification of comorbidities can enable simple interventions, such as
additional support in classrooms, to improve long term outcomes. In addition,
the technology will help clinicians diagnose and refer drug-resistant patients
to specialized epilepsy centers much sooner than the current average of 18
years. Finally, the solution will improve side effect monitoring in clinical
trials for new antiepileptic drugs and help optimize dose recommendations. These
advances will, in turn, accelerate the development of new anti-epileptic
therapies.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to improve
the lives of epilepsy patients by using passive observation of eye movements in
a naturalistic setting to objectively and reliably identify seizures and monitor
neurocognitive symptoms and drug side effects. The proposed solution will use a
wearable device to collect eye movement data over time and this data will be
analyzed to quantify changes associated with impairments in cognitive functions
such as attention and reading speed. This data then will be used to develop a
personalized therapy response profile to assist clinicians in managing epilepsy.
The goal of this project is to collect non-seizure, spontaneous eye movement
data and develop algorithms that provide insight into clinical features,
including the improvement or worsening of symptoms and possible antiepileptic
drug side effects. The outcome of this research will enable a fully powered,
pivotal study to be designed and carried out to compare passive eye tracking
data to the gold standard neuropsychiatric assessments for the treatment of
na√Øve absence epilepsy patients over time and as medication adjustments are
made.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.