* 2304856
* Problems in low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Joshua Greene, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2026
* USD 291,239.00

Topology refers broadly to the study of shapes, and low-dimensional topology
refers specifically to the study of shapes in dimensions one through four. These
dimensions are special from an anthropic perspective, since they model our
everyday perception of the physical world. They are also special from a
mathematical perspective, since the phenomena they exhibit, and the collection
of techniques used to study them are rather different from those in higher
dimensions. The research component of the project explores a collection of
important problems from across low-dimensional topology. A concrete example is a
famous old problem which asks whether every continuous closed curve in the plane
contains the vertices of a square. A unifying thread through the research is the
use of modern methods from nearby fields, such as combinatorics (the mathematics
of discrete structures) and symplectic geometry (the geometry of classical
mechanics). Alongside the research, the PI proposes education and training
initiatives reaching audiences from high schoolers to professional
mathematicians. The PI will continue his active involvement with mathematics
enrichment at the high school level through the Hampshire College Summer Studies
in Mathematics and through Mathematical Staircase, Inc. The PI is in the process
of editing a book based on a popular graduate summer school in low-dimensional
topology that he ran. Moreover, the PI currently advises three PhD students. The
award provides graduate student support and travel support for students and
postdoctoral researchers.

The PI proposes to study a collection of problems in low-dimensional topology,
in continuation of an established program. The main themes are peg problems,
using symplectic methods; exceptional Dehn surgery, using graphs of surface
intersections; rational homology cobordism, using Floer homology and lattices;
and ribbon concordance, using classical topological methods. Combinatorial and
symplectic methods have long influenced the field. Amongst the various
techniques that come to bear on low-dimensional topology are Floer homology,
graphs of surface intersections, and lattice-theoretic methods. Each technique
has led to sensational progress on the main problems in low-dimensional
topology, and they lend very different perspectives on the subject. This project
will more closely bind these techniques and low-dimensional topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.