* 2304470
* SBIR Phase I: Software-Defined Networking and Resource Virtualization in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) Satellite Constellations
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Nicholas Nordlund, UNINET LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,944.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the extension of state-of-the-art terrestrial
5G technologies to non-terrestrial satellite networks. Non-terrestrial networks
(NTNs) are the ideal hosts for many commercial applications involving
monitoring, reconnaissance, and remote sensing such as agricultural planting,
remote factory operations, and industrial automation. These applications will
demand significant computation and bandwidth resources from NTNs. Virtualization
technologies like software-defined networking (SDN) and network slicing are key
enablers for similar applications in terrestrial networks, but satellite
networks pose a unique set of challenges to existing 5G technologies. NTNs have
complex and highly dynamic topologies caused by both the predictable movement of
satellites as well as unpredictable weather events interfering with satellite-
to-ground links. Extending 5G algorithms to NTNs enables new applications and
unlocks additional network capacity without launching any new satellites. 5G
virtualization also simplifies access to satellite constellations. Customers can
interact with multiple satellite networks via the same virtual network
interface, eliminating the need to learn different interfaces for different
constellations. This Phase I project will explore more efficient networking
solutions that satellite network operators can use to supply the growing demand
for satellite internet.

This SBIR Phase I project explores methods of extending SDN and virtual network
slicing technologies into space given the challenges posed by NTN topologies.
First, it proposes a "NextG" framework for non-terrestrial SDN using existing 5G
technologies whose core orchestrator can create end-to-end slices for seamless
communication over terrestrial and NTN. In SDN, one or multiple software
entities called controllers are responsible for the control of the network. The
number and locations of controllers in the network and how often these
controllers communicate can be selected to balance latency in the NTN and the
overhead costs from sending synchronization messages. This project explores the
use of deep reinforcement learning algorithms to learn optimal controller
placement and synchronization strategies. Second, network slices are independent
virtual networks that share a common infrastructure of network resources.
Offline algorithms are used to allocate network resources to slices based on the
requests of the virtual network operator. Subsequently, online algorithms
dynamically reprovision network resources in real-time depending on the slices'
actual resource usages. The team will investigate integer programming techniques
for virtual network embedding that scale to larger NTN topologies and deep
reinforcement learning agents for online resource scaling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.