* 2304981
* Complex Geometric Properties of Period Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Colleen Robles, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Algebraic geometry studies geometric properties of sets that arise as solutions
to systems of polynomial equations. Many familiar sets arise in this way,
including lines and planes, and circles and spheres/soap bubbles. Algebraic
geometry also has many applications outside of mathemayics, including
statistics, robotics, error-correcting codes, phylogenetics, game theory and
integer programming. “Moduli problems” is a sub-branch of algebraic geometry
that studies these sets in families. For example, one might consider all the
lines passing through a fixed point. These families, and the related questions,
can be quite complicated. An important tool in their study is the “period map”,
a function that is associated with the family. The period map allows one to
bring to bear techniques from other areas of mathematics, including complex
geometry (where the defining functions are not polynomials, as in algebraic
geometry, but holomorphic functions) and representation theory (a sophisticated
extension of linear algebra). This award supports both: (i) research into
properties of period maps that are motived by applications to moduli problems,
and (ii) the training of graduate students and early career postdoctoral
researchers. The PI’s work includes active mentorship of both undergraduate and
graduate students through multiple departmental and university programs.

Half of the projects aim to construct completions of period maps, motivated by
anticipated applications to compactifications of moduli spaces. This includes an
Ohsawa-Takegoshi type extension problem that will complete a program to
generalize the Satake-Baily-Borel compactification; an investigation of this
construction for a specific family of Calabi-Yau varieties; and the construction
of a Kato-Usui type completions for various period maps, including that
associated to a specific family of Calabi-Yau 3-folds. The other projects
continue a program initiated by the PI to study period maps (and variations of
Hodge structure) by their characteristic forms (which are infinitesimal,
complex-geometric invariants associated with a period maps). This program is
inspired by a close analogy with the very successful Hwang-Mok program to study
Fano manifolds via their varieties of minimal rational tangents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.