* 2304394
* SBIR Phase I:  Beyond thin-film optics: Resonant grating-based optical component technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kyu Lee, TIWAZ TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,883.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to simplify and significantly reduce the cost of optical
component fabrication. Optical components, with well-known examples being
mirrors, polarizers, and lenses, are essential building blocks in a host of
civilian and military systems including imaging, telecommunications, and laser
systems. Current optical component technology is a multi-billion-dollar industry
and is based on multiple layers of films deposited in vacuum chambers. The
proposed innovation realizes a new optical component class with the
functionality of multi-film assemblies generated in a single layer with
attendant savings in time and cost. The project focuses on the long-wave
infrared spectral domain where traditional thin-film technology is impractical
due to the extreme film thicknesses needed. The long-wave domain covers a region
of atmospheric transparency essential for terrestrial imaging, medical and
industrial laser technologies, and night-vision systems.

This innovation focuses on optical component fabrication that is based on
gratings that are index-matched to a sublayer thereby avoiding localized,
particle-type resonances. This attribute imbues the components with tolerance to
parametric deviations essential for practical manufacturing. The new physics is
based on lateral leaky Bloch modes and attendant lattice resonance. It is
different from the interference-based physics of classic thin-film optics.
Therefore, a new dimension in functionality with high levels of spectral
diversity and control is brought into the optical component arena supporting
many societally valuable applications. In Phase I, relevant fabrication
processes will be developed to show the potential for scale-up to mass
production. The effort delivers three main high performance component types
(reflectors, filters, and polarizers) that meet stringent specifications in
terms of efficiency and bandwidth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.