* 2304168
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: AAPF: Development of an MKID High Resolution Multi-Object Spectrometer
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ronald Lopez, Lopez, Ronald A
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Ronald A. López is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at University of California, Santa
Barbara. López will apply new detector technology, MKIDs, to more conventional
spectroscopic instrument architectures to develop a novel way to conduct multi-
object high-resolution spectroscopy. The unique properties of these detectors
can be used in modern spectrographs to discover and characterize exoplanets
simultaneously, or take high-resolution spectra of star clusters without
compromising spectral resolution. López will also work with the Center for
Science and Engineering Partnership (CSEP) to develop and expand a new peer
mentoring program specifically tailored toward community college transfer
students.

Conventional high-resolution spectrographs are typically designed to take
spectra of single targets or very limited fields of view. On the other hand,
multi-object spectrographs generally need to make compromises between spectral
resolution, wavelength coverage, the number of targets, and instrument cost.
This project will use microwave kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs) to pave the
way towards developing a new class of high-resolution multi-object spectrographs
(HRMOS) without the need to compromise resolution or coverage. The inherent
energy resolution of the MKIDs can eliminate the requirement of a cross-
dispersing element in a high-resolution spectrograph, freeing up valuable
detector space that can be allocated to the spectra of multiple objects.
Building on this proposed project, a future fiber-fed MKID HRMOS will be able to
sample a comprehensive region around a star to detect and characterize exoplanet
atmospheres using the high-dispersion coronagraphy technique.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.