* 2304268
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Machine Learning System to Identify Streptococcal Pharyngitis with a Smartphone Image
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Therese Canares, CURIEDX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the lack of instant, remote medical
tests for telehealth. This project could develop an accurate machine learning-
based predictive model for strep throat. The business model delivers an
artificial intelligence (AI)-based clinical decision support system as a
Software as a Service subscription to urgent care telehealth services. The total
addressable market for all telehealth point of care tests (beyond strep throat)
in urgent care and primary care is $10.4 billion. This solution impacts
antibiotic overprescribing and economics of health services. Currently, 34% of
children and 75% of adults with pharyngitis receive unnecessary antibiotics, and
this is 10-21% worse with telehealth. A remote point of care prediction for
strep throat can potentially reduce the $22 million/year costs in unnecessary
antibiotics and reduce drivers for drug-resistant bacteria. When pharyngitis is
treated on telehealth it saves patients up to 1-3 hours per clinical visit and
saves health insurance companies up to $100-400 per visit, compared to an
emergency room or urgent care facility.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances the
field of machine learning by combining smartphone image analysis and deep
learning. These strategies are applied to a novel use case in digital health as
remote screening for clinical decision support. The technical challenge is the
development of a predictive model to achieve sensitivity and specificity
acceptable for clinical adoption, at a target of > 80% (similar to the rapid
antigen strep test). The strategy to meet this challenge is to increase the size
of the dataset and experiment with multiple prediction models until goal
performance is achieved. The project will also include designing an
authentication system that validates sufficient images as recorded by an
untrained patient and creating an intuitive user interface that enables
consistent recordings by patients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.