* 2304633
* Design and Synthesis of New Interlocked Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Stuart Rowan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2027
* USD 669,999.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Polymers program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR), Professor Stuart J. Rowan of the
University of Chicago is developing synthetic methodologies for the preparation
of poly[n]catenanes and poly[n]rotaxanes. Catenanes and rotaxanes consist of two
or more components that are interlocked together and held in place by the
mechanical bond. Catenanes are comprised of interlocked rings while rotaxanes
consist of a ring that is interlocked with a dumbbell (a thread-like molecule
with stoppers on either end large enough to prevent dethreading of the ring)
component. Macromolecular or polymeric versions of these species are
particularly intriguing as they offer new polymeric architectures in which the
relative motions of the different components allow access to new and unique
properties. While architectures such as poly[2]catenanes and main-chain
poly[n]rotaxanes have been prepared, synthetic methodologies to poly[n]catenanes
and doubly threaded slide ring gels have received much less attention. In such
architectures, the mechanical bond is part of the polymer backbone and allows
the macromolecules to expand/contract without significant activation energy. As
a result, such polymers can exhibit unusual viscoelastic properties. This
research will explore new synthetic protocols that will allow access to these
intriguing macromolecules. The proposed research will mix different disciplines
within the chemistry arena, from synthetic organic and metal coordination
chemistry to polymer science and characterization. This integrated research
approach will provide students at all levels with broad educational experiences
covering these topics. Additionally, the integrated high school and
undergraduate research and outreach activities will be designed to increase the
fraction of underrepresented minorities in science and engineering.
Specifically, the planned activities will involve high school students from
Chicagoâ€™s south side.

This research will focus on developing synthetic routes to new interlocked
polymers based on catenanes and rotaxanes. A strong emphasis will be placed on
synthetic methodologies that utilize metal-ligand coordination as the
thermodynamic driving force to preorganize the organic components, followed by a
covalent fixing either through ring-closing metathesis to access the
poly[n]catenanes, or high-yielding, catalyst-free click chemistries to access
the doubly-threaded slide ring gels. This project will also provide systematic
investigation on how the structure of the building components can be used to
impact product distribution, molecular weight, as well as the resulting
properties of these unique polymers. Results associated with this work have the
potential to advance polymer chemistry by addressing fundamental questions about
mechanical linkages in polymeric systems. Moreover, doubly-threaded slide ring
gels are expected to be of broad scientific interest as they serve both as
models of networks with trapped entanglements as well as potential sources of
materials with unusual mechanical and functional properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.