* 2304933
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing energy technologies in tribal communities (CA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Denis Turner, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TRIBAL CHAIRMENS ASSOCIATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2025
* USD 998,406.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on developing a
dynamic innovation ecosystem within the tribal communities of Southern
California. The Tribal Energy Innovation Accelerator (TEIA) project will
systematically drive the development of clean energy technologies, businesses,
and projects to accelerate the region's transformation into a sustainable and
resilient economy. The TEIA ecosystem will form around the collaborative
framework of the Southern California Tribal Chairman's Association (SCTCA),
which since 1971 has supported Tribes with a range of programs assisting efforts
to strengthen economic resilience. The TEIA region, spanning the lands of 25
SCTCA member Tribes, is poised for a transformative investment in clean energy
innovation and development, given access to appropriate funding and leadership.
SCTCA member Tribes bring a strong need and significant opportunity for clean
energy solutions, workforce development, and economic development. They also
offer unique potential to support rapid growth by hosting innovative clean
energy projects - including demonstration/pilot projects and manufacturing
facilities. TEIA partner organizations include SCTCA, Prosper Sustainably, Pala
Band of Mission Indians, Cleantech San Diego, University of California -
Riverside, University of California - San Diego, GRID Alternatives, and the
Microgrid Institute.

The Regional Innovation Engines Development Award will support activities
including refinement of strategies and plans, collaborative work to formalize
the TEIA organization; initial staffing; outreach, engagement, and collaboration
to solidify partnerships; and initiation of clean energy innovation and
development activities. The project will address critical gaps affecting Tribes'
access to innovative clean energy technologies and development opportunities by
providing dedicated central resources, including staff and partners with full
skills and knowledge to support R&D and development across the SCTCA region.
TEIA's collaborative processes will facilitate gathering ideas, knowledge,
methods, and expertise from core partners and collaborators in many different
disciplines, technical and non-technical. This collaborative work will yield
tangible translational outcomes, including innovative clean energy equipment
products, resilient clean energy-producing systems, Tribal entrepreneurial
businesses, and workforce development and job training services. TEIA will
provide clean energy technology job training, apprenticeships, and placement
assistance for candidates seeking positions in roles required for regional clean
energy innovation and development - prioritizing members of Tribes and other
historically excluded and disadvantaged communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.