* 2304952
* Iterative Macromolecular Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Rebekka Klausen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2026
* USD 510,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Rebekka Klausen of Johns Hopkins University is
developing a single synthetic platform that will access macromolecules that
cannot be made by direct polymerization of traditional feedstocks. Chemical
transformations will first be utilized to prepare polymers and copolymers
containing carbon-boron bond along the main backbone. The synthesized
macromolecules will then be diversified by converting these bonds to
corresponding alcohols, chlorides and simple alpha-olefins. The synthesis of
these historically inaccessible polymers is expected to uncover new structure-
function relationships and enable systematic evaluation of physical, mechanical,
and chemical properties of these systems. Additionally, since the prepared
polymers will contain polar and nonpolar functionalities, improved adhesion and
oxygen permeability is expected. Both properties are very important in several
applications or relevance to commercial plastics. The involvement in the Summer
Undergraduate Research Excellence (SURE) program between Johns Hopkins
University and Trinity Washington University, a minority-serving institution and
women’s college in Washington, DC, will enable training of minority and first-
generation undergraduate students in polymer science research. Additional
outreach and educational activities related to polymer science and
sustainability will be conducted at a college preparatory high school with a
diverse student body in Olney, Maryland.

This project will focus on the development of new polymer modification
chemistries using borane-substituted polyolefins as precursors to access
(co)polymers that are otherwise difficult to obtain. Specifically, the synthesis
of copolymers that are formally derived from allylic monomers such as allyl
chloride and allyl alcohol, as well as propene, will be conducted using Matteson
homologation followed by hydrogenative, oxidative, and/or chlorinative
deborylation. The insertion of a methylene or chloromethyl group into a
carbon–boron bond via Matteson homologation is a particularly compelling
application of organoborane chemistry because it can be applied iteratively and
stereospecifically, while yielding few byproducts. This research is targeting
(co)polymers of allyl alcohol, allyl chloride, and alpha-olefins; polymers that
are elusive and highly desired materials that cannot be accessed directly from
polymerization of allylic monomers due to competitive chain transfer, catalyst
poisoning, or mismatched reactivity ratios. Polymers synthesized as a result of
this work is anticipated to open up new chemical space for systematic structure-
property studies of relevance to the synthetic organic and polymer communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.