* 2304392
* Topics in Mathematical Biology and Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Siming He, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 94,323.00

This project focuses on several aspects of mathematical biology and fluid
mechanics. Many critical biological phenomena involve fluid-cell interaction or
fluid-like behaviors. For example, fertilization of marine animal eggs relies on
the transportation of the ambient fluid stream and sardines form large fluid-
like swarms to evade predators. The project's principal focus is to develop
novel mathematical tools to analyze the various fluid-related or fluid-like
effects in these biological phenomena. There are three main topics in this
project. The first topic concerns the interaction between the fluid flow and
biological phenomena, which is motivated by two experiments in marine animal
fertilization and cell embryology. In the first experiment researchers observed
optimal fluid speed to maximize the fertilization rate of abalone. The second
experiment confirms that the cellular flow helps organ formation at the early
stages of the embryos of Drosophila. Fluid mixing effect and fast-spreading
effect play important roles in the analysis. These two effects introduce another
'fast diffusion time scale' into the biological system and significantly change
the long-time behavior. The principal investigator (PI) plans to develop new
mathematical tools that capture the interplay between these fluid phenomena and
the biology involved. The project will provide research training experience for
undergraduate students.

A modified hypocoercivity functional, which was applied in the paper by J.
Bedrossian and the PI, and detailed spectral analysis, are crucial to derive the
'fast diffusion time scale' in the nonlinear setting. Applying these tools to
the biologically relevant models provides deeper understandings of the
experiments. The second topic covers the single and multi-species hydrodynamic
models of flocking behavior. In these models, the flock of agents converges to a
limiting structural state through sharing information among individuals.
However, if the agents only share information with their direct neighbors, the
flock's limiting behavior is highly nontrivial. The PI plans to develop new
tools and bring ideas from spectral graph theory and random graph theory to
analyze it. The third topic concerns the growth/blow-up mechanism in fluid
mechanics. The PI will study two non-local models related to the generation of
small-scale blowup in the fluid motivated by the singular Hou-Luo scenario for
the 3D-Euler equation. The tools developed here may turn out to be useful in
some biological models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.