* 2304776
* Conference: The Grading Conference  Higher Education STEM Focus
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Alison McCurdy, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,971.00

This project serves the national interest by helping faculty learn and adopt
grading practices that promote student learning, enhance student motivation,
increase equity, and enable more students to succeed in STEM. The Grading
Conference is an annual virtual conference that provides a much-needed resource
for instructors interested in improving their assessments. The purpose of the
conference is to support instructors as they strive to challenge traditional
grading practices that have been shown to hinder student learning and student
growth as scholars. As awareness of, and interest in, these practices grow, more
and more faculty need a supportive community to learn how to implement these
grading practices and do so in ways that enhance student learning and improve
student outcomes. Research has shown that one of the most effective methods for
implementing changes in faculty practice is to do so within the context of a
supportive community. A virtual conference will be held that will include a set
of speakers who will provide insights on alternative grading and address
questions and comments from participants. The project team will recruit faculty
participants in the STEM fields of mathematics, biology, physics, and chemistry
from a diverse set of institutions.

The Grading Conference will bring together new and experienced practitioners of
a variety of grading techniques (such as standards-based, specifications-based,
and "ungrading") as the flagship event of an ongoing community of practice. This
online synchronous conference allows faculty from across the country to come
together with the intent of disseminating best practices and current research
around grading and its connection to improving student learning. Three goals
guide the project. First is to support grading reform to enhance student
learning, motivation, equity, and success. Second is to build infrastructure to
provide continued professional learning around the role of grading in student
success. Third, and finally is to create a professional learning community that
will support practitioners as they work to change their grading policies. The
conference will be conducted over two days with two featured speakers presenting
each day. Additional sessions will include panels, research presentations, and
practitioner-oriented presentations. Small group sessions will be used to
promote networking of faculty in categories such as geographic region, STEM
discipline, interests in specific types of assessments, and level of experience.
All sessions will be recorded and made publicly available on the conference
website along with handouts and slides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.