* 2304414
* Conference: Stochastic Control for Financial Engineering: Methods and Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Emma Hubert, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The workshop "Stochastic Control for Financial Engineering: Methods and
Numerics" will be held at Princeton University from June 20-23, 2023. Through
presentations by leading experts in the field, this 4-day workshop will provide
a broad but thorough overview of recent technical advances in mathematical
topics around stochastic processes, control, and games, as well as many
different application areas of these theoretical approaches. Indeed, beyond the
historical focus on financial engineering, there are now many new fields of
application, including machine learning, fintech, economic, financial policy and
regulation, epidemic management, and even climate change. These applications are
undeniably at the heart of current social and economic challenges and studying
them in a quantitative way can contribute to informing public policy. The
objective of this workshop is therefore to strengthen the links between
mathematics, especially as it pertains to random processes and its applications
to the above-mentioned areas. We expect this meeting to help initiate new
interdisciplinary collaborations that will help tackle various issues currently
facing the world and anticipate future economical and societal challenges. The
award funds will help defray travel and local expenses of the participants,
emphasizing the support of a diverse group of junior researchers (Ph.D.
candidates, postdoctoral fellows and other early-career researchers). More
precisely, the award will allow to sponsor approximately 30 junior researchers,
including 10 for oral presentations and a dozen for poster sessions.

The theory of stochastic analysis and control is constantly developing, and
recent advances include, among others, rough paths theory, optimal transport,
stochastic partial differential equation and more. Considering the interactions
between economic and financial agents has also required the development of new
mathematical tools, and in particular the implementation of the mean field game
theory into the mathematical framework. As an illustration, one of the tools
associated with stochastic control, namely the Backward Stochastic Differential
Equations (BSDE) theory, has been strongly impacted by the development of
stochastic differential games, and we can particularly notice recent results on
second-order, mean field or McKean-Vlasov BSDEs. The field is obviously
positively impacted by the technological era in which we live, and recent
developments in machine learning allow for example to numerically solve many
stochastic control problems and games in a very efficient way. But it should be
noted that the reverse is also true: stochastic control methods and techniques
are key to the investigation and assessment of advanced numerical approaches
such as deep or Q–learning and neural networks. Hence, at the theoretical level,
the workshop will feature talks and discussions on stochastic PDEs and
(McKean–Vlasov, second-order) BSDEs, stochastic approaches to the master
equation and to deep learning, as well as pathwise stochastic analysis and
signature processes. Furthermore, as the mathematical theory of stochastic
control and games is, by nature, application-oriented, this workshop will also
have a strong focus on applications to finance (rough volatility models, but
also newer models for cryptocurrencies and robot advising) as well as social
policy issues such as systemic risk, epidemic management, among others. More
information can be found on the event website: https://scfe.princeton.edu/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.