* 2304423
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Detection of Confounds and Inappropriate Context to Promote Prosocial Learning and Cognition
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Michael Douma, OTHERWORDLY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,990.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the development of Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based
algorithms that generate content for word-meaning video games at an affordable
cost. Word-meaning games support literacy, fluency, critical thinking, and
cross-cultural understanding for players of all ages and backgrounds via
adaptive vocabulary scaling systems and accessibility options for players with
visual or motor difficulties. Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) literacy is supported by incorporating STEM content in a mix of
entertaining and serious content. These prosocial and cognitive impacts are
essential for personal and professional growth, cultural competence, and will be
measured by game learning researchers. The project will also contribute to the
field of natural language processing and machine learning through the addition
of new benchmarks to open-source resources. Success in reducing content creation
costs could lead to licensing content to other game publishers and the creation
of additional word-meaning games on the market, benefiting players. This project
is uniquely positioned to help retain game industry jobs in the U.S. and
contribute to the growth of the industry.

The technical innovation of the project is threefold: 1) development of
algorithms for unrelated word content generation, 2) development of
appropriateness and offensiveness filters for natural language content, and 3)
evaluation of a word-meaning gameâ€™s ability to improve cognitive function and
social awareness. This research and development has the potential to address a
gap in the field of natural language processing on unrelatedness. Part of this
effort contributes to open-source benchmarks for future research. Similarly,
social bias is a prevalent and well-known issue in machine learning models,
potentially offensive or inappropriate word combinations need to be detected and
avoided via newly developed algorithms that explicitly detect and avoid
publishing such content. To achieve both goals, a variety of machine learning
techniques, including those that leverage existing large natural language
models, will be employed and evaluated for accuracy. Using these algorithms as a
foundation for content creation, the word-meaning game will integrate the
generated content. The program will be evaluated with regard to its ability to
increase social awareness and confidence with an expanding vocabulary.
Specifically, the study will evaluate both brief gameplay and long-term gameplay
and measure efficacy with in-game metrics and surveys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.