* 2304922
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy of Single-Crystal Hydrogen Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shigeru Amemiya, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Shigeru Amemiya and his group at the University of
Pittsburgh are developing new electrochemical methods that allow for the
identification of reactive intermediates and likely reaction pathways for
hydrogen electrocatalysis. This project focuses on gaining an advanced
understanding of hydrogen electrocatalysis, which is crucial for the efficient
production and utilization of sustainable and clean hydrogen fuel and also for
many important fields of electrochemical science and technology. Reliable
identification of the molecular mechanism of hydrogen electrocatalysis is
urgently demanded not only to understand the superior electrocatalytic activity
of platinum-group metals but also to design alternative superior
electrocatalysts based on inexpensive and earth abundant elements. Students from
underrepresented groups will experience interdisciplinary training by
participating in the development of advanced electrochemical instruments for the
proposed research and in the implementation of the sophisticated computational
simulation of electrocatalysis for an undergraduate laboratory.

This project is focused on the quantitative study of both hydrogen evolution and
oxidation reactions for the resolution of the intermingled pathways of these
two-step two-electron reactions. New nanoelectrochemical methods being developed
in the Amemiya laboratory will provide an opportunity to measure the adsorption
energy of hydrogen atoms as well as establish the electrochemical identity of
surface intermediates. Specifically, Professor Amemiya and his research group
are developing and applying transient nanogap voltammetry based on scanning
electrochemical microscopy to separately determine the thermodynamic and kinetic
parameters of each electron transfer and adsorption step. Reliable reaction
parameters can be obtained by employing clean single crystal metals with a well
defined arrangement of surface atoms. A volcano plot will be established from
the experimentally determined parameters of each involved reaction at both
weakly and strongly adsorbing metals and will serve as a valuable guide for the
rational design of improved electrocatalysts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.