* 2304838
* Studies of Catch and Release Behavior of Polyelectrolyte Brushes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 551,638.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Polymers Program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR), Professor Christopher K. Ober of Cornell University
will prepare and study model polymer brushes with carefully tailored capture-
release properties. Polymer brushes are surface coatings made by growing
individual polymer macromolecules from a surface and possess properties that can
change over only a few nanometers from glass-like (a hard substrate) to tissue
like (a soft, wet surface). Brushes make ideal materials as sampling systems for
biological or environmental applications due to their large surface area. By
capturing a target molecule we will concentrate to detect even small amounts of
a chemical or biomolecule, and then once done, trigger release of the captured
targets to enable reuse of our device. The goal is to understand the capture-
release process to make resuable and more efficient sampling and detection
systems. Characterization of these brush surfaces will include study of the
capture-release mechanism as a function of brush architecture and binding site
location and spacing on these new brushes. In these studies scientists in
Germany and the United Kingdom will aid in characterizing the process and
structure of these active polymer brushes. This work will offer a substantial
training opportunity for students in Ithaca, New York that represents a cross-
pollination between polymer chemistry and materials science while enabling them
to take part in international collaborations and exchanges. Undergraduate
researchers will work with the exchange partners to make and to study these
materials. Outreach activities will include demonstrations designed for and made
to high school teachers in teacher workshops of the value of nanochemistry in
environmental and biological studies.

This research is focused on the preparation and study of capture-release coil
polymer brushes that have varying levels of binding sites with selected spacing
along the backbone and in different positions of the side. Controlled radical
polymerization will be used to create tailored narrow dispersity brushes in a
single strand or bottle brush architecture based on acrylamide and styrene-
maleimide polymers and peptoid precision synthesis will be employed to make
brush side arms that enable precise placement of active sites. Alternating
copolymerization will also space out binding sites and associated packing stress
along the backbone and spacers will separate those sites from the backbone, both
intended to maximize packing potential and control binding site distribution in
the brushes. Different brush designs will be tested for capture-release
applications through our Freiburg collaborators. Advanced characterization of
the brushes will be made using analytical methods ranging from neutron
reflectivity and GISAXS to fluorescence and QCM studies of brushes exposed to
different binding systems. The research has a potential to highly impact the
technological features such as selective binding, capture and release, grafted
brush stability, and antifouling applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.