* 2304959
* Collaborative Research: Water-responsive, Shape-shifting Supramolecular Protein Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xi Chen, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 173,091.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, the collaborative team consisting of Professors
Jin Montclare (New York University), Xi Chen (CUNY - Advanced Science Research
Center), and Raymond Tu (CUNY – City College) aim to create shape-shifting
protein assemblies capable of responding to changes in relative humidity. The
research is inspired by phenomena observed in nature such as how pinecones and
wheat are able to dispense their seeds. The team will develop protein polymers
that mimic those found in nature, explore their water-responsive motion, and
explore the mechanical power generated by the material. The work will
investigate: 1) the role of structure in such protein polymers; 2) the effects
of protein polymer composition on water-responsiveness; and 3) how the nature of
the molecular assembly leads to changes in their water-responsiveness. The
ultimate goal is to achieve an understanding that will allow the team to design
new water responsive protein polymers assemblies that can efficiently convert
motion into usable energy. This may lead to the development of high-power moving
components for widespread applications such as robotics, shape-morphing and
energy harvesting devices. This highly interdisciplinary research, involving
protein engineering, chemical engineering and materials science, will provide
training for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. In collaborative
outreach efforts, the team will hold an annual “Biomimetic Technology” event
that includes local New York City K-12 students and teachers to interact with
state-of-the-art science to promote interest in science and increase public
understanding of macromolecular science and engineering concepts.

Evaporation-induced shape change has proven to be an efficient mechanism for the
conversion of energy from water’s chemical potential to mechanical energy. Owing
to this property, water responsive (WR) materials can swell and shrink in
response to relative humidity (RH) changes, and recent studies have shown that
biological WR materials can generate significantly higher energy actuation than
all known muscles and actuators. Here, the team will focus on creating shape-
shifting protein engineered assemblies that fundamentally integrate nano-scaled
structural features that can hierarchically assemble and lead to macroscale
function of energy conversion from the chemical potential of water to mechanical
motion. The team will investigate how supramolecular self-assembly and phase
separation influence the WR properties of protein engineered block-
copolypeptides (BCPs). To achieve this the team aims to investigate: 1) the role
of structure in the engineered BCPs; 2) the effects of the surface blocks on BCP
water-responsiveness; and 3) the effect of supramolecular structure with water-
responsiveness. This fundamental understanding is expected to help the
researchers develop a set of parameters to inform the design of biological WR
actuators with high energy and power densities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.