* 2304299
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing equitable access to food and health techologies in the Delta (AR, LA, MS)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Joseph Thompson, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Goetzel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Engines Development Award will lay the groundwork for a future NSF
Engine in the lower Mississippi River Delta to develop a regional workforce of
diverse technicians, practitioners, researchers, and entrepreneurs; initiate the
creation of new companies and associated economic opportunities that emanate
from them; translate discoveries and new technologies developed in and across
academic environments and private sector initiatives to the market; and achieve
better and more equitable health and economic outcomes across a region with
disparities that are longstanding and disproportionately shared by low-income
communities and communities of color across the nation. Led by the Arkansas
Center for Health Improvement, this project includes diverse regional
stakeholders representing ten academic research institutions, seven for-profit
companies, various state government agencies, seventeen nonprofits, and two
minority-owned community development finance institutions. This planning effort
will build upon previous federal investments in the region in basic and applied
research in artificial intelligence, biotechnology, smart agriculture,
biomedical informatics, and data analytics. It will build strategic partnerships
across state lines co-creating a regional ecosystem that supports improved
health and economic outcomes for all residents, many of whom are on society's
geographic, political, and economic fringes.

The vision for the eventual NSF Engine is an innovative incubator of novel
solutions to achieve equitable health and economic outcomes for the residents of
the proposed region and beyond. Based upon the documented basic needs of the
regionâ€™s population for food and health care, combined with the challenges and
successful responses from the COVID-19 pandemic, the opportunity is ripe for
use-inspired research and development of innovative and entrepreneurial rural
solutions that will not only address the targeted region but also offer
potential solutions for other rural areas of the nation. The eventual Engine
will revolve around new delivery models for healthy food, technology-assisted
diagnosis, monitoring and prevention and treatment for chronic diseases, and
non-traditional diagnostic and pharmacologic therapeutics, focusing on
innovations, advancements, and infrastructures that improve health care for
under-served populations. Successful translation of these innovations into
practice will require workforce development and new financing models for
entrepreneurial success tailored for rural communities. Successful development
of the ecosystem will require focused efforts to overcome historical
marginalization and discrimination of certain communities and the development of
local intellectual assets for sustainable growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.