* 2304404
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-erodible Contraceptive-Releasing Implant
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Sirsendu Bhowmick, HERA HEALTH SOLUTIONS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to provide a highly effective and long-acting implantable
contraceptive for the 61 million American women in their childbearing years
(ages 15 to 44), 70% of whom are at risk for unintended pregnancies. Unintended
pregnancies accounted for half of the total pregnancies in 2022, and over 60% of
unplanned pregnancies end in abortion, with an estimated 45% of abortions being
unsafe, resulting in 5-13% of all maternal fatalities. Today, an estimated 7.5
million women aged 15–49 receive a treatment or hormonal drug via long-term
subcutaneous arm implants. Once they reach the end of their lifespan, these
implants must be removed, and complications can quickly arise. Not only are
these procedures expensive, but they leave behind heavy bruising and scarring
and some instances even require an operation for removal. The proposed product
is the world’s first biodegradable contraceptive-releasing implant. The
technology combines Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved material with a
generic drug already on the market. It uses novel manufacturing methods and
biodegradable materials, eliminating the need for implant removal and enabling
the proper timing and therapeutic dosage. This novel delivery drug technology
can be applied to different drug treatments in a sustainable and affordable
manner.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to advance
the future of long-acting reversible contraception by creating a biodegradable
arm implant that delivers a consistent hormone dose and does not have to be
surgically removed. The goal of this SBIR Phase I project is to characterize the
drug delivery scaffold and demonstrate its utility. This project will de-risk
the prototype to be used in Pre-Investigational New Drug Applications (IND)
studies required by the FDA. The Phase I strategy will be two-fold: (1) de-
risking operations by finalizing the prototype after evaluating the physical and
chemical properties and (2) test the long-acting contraception implant prototype
in a clinically relevant biological model to provide the necessary data for a
successful IND launch. Progress of this project will provide a solid foundation
for advancing the biodegradable contraception product toward commercial utility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.