* 2304100
* Network Connector: DEDICATE: Data Science Equity-Driven Inquiry to Create Accessible Project-based Training for Social Impact Education
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Marc Boumedine, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2028
* USD 622,841.00

The Network Connector: DEDICATE: Data Science Equity-Driven Inquiry to Create
Accessible Project-Based Training for Social Impact Education aims to solve some
of the challenges to broadening participation in STEM at a systems-level. To
this effect four problems were identified that are barriers to success. 1.
Instructor-designed “projects” not based in Project-Based Learning (PBL)
Research; 2. Silos of Projects across STEM and Non-STEM disciplines; 3. Lack of
Faculty-Centric Design; and 4. Lack of Systemic-Change Networks. DEDICATE aims
to address these four problems by 1. Leveraging the educational research behind
PBL techniques, specifically to design PBL modules that are culturally relevant
and can be used across disciplines to empower natural collaboration around real-
world challenges; 2. Bridging both Non-STEM and STEM disciplines into data
projects around problems of high social impact, specifically climate change
(geosciences), criminal justice, and food and water sciences; 3. Focus on
faculty capacity-building and support as the primary mechanism for systemic
change, as increasing faculty interest, ability, and confidence in delivering
data-centric content across disciplines translates into exponential growth in
the exposure of students to STEM and their preparation for STEM Education,
aligning with the INCLUDES Initiative Shared Measures effort; and by 4. Fully
supporting faculty networks with not only research-based PBL modules, but PBL
creation frameworks and assessment and grading tools aligned to ACM and other
national and international standards, supporting non-technical faculty in module
delivery, creating curated Social Impact PBL modules - co-designed with impact
area instructors from across the region, as well as providing training,
community forums, and working groups for network expansion and organization
around systemic advocacy topics. DEDICATE also plans to research key questions
related to systemic strategies for data-enabled Project-Based Learning that
address the critical broadening participation challenge in STEM of lack of
access to data knowledge and tools at not only historically underserved
institutions (HBCUs and HSIs) but also within interdisciplinary areas (Social
Impact Areas).

The DEDICATE network will establish itself as a connector in order to expand
through a targeted capacity-building and mini-grants program with an open call
for faculty teams to connect as either users or creators of data-enabled PBLs.
DEDICATE will build on the work of the South Big Data Innovation Hub and connect
to the INCLUDES National Data Science Alliances (NDSA) and the ASPIRE Alliance,
as well as other expansion partner networks, such as the HBCU Data Science
Consortium and the former NSF HSI-STEM Hub, to build the infrastructure
necessary to foster collaborations between alliance institutions. Four lead
institutions NC Central University-HBCU, University of the Virgin Islands-HBCU,
California State University, Fresno-HSI, and the Georgia Institute of Technology
will engage 30 faculty teams across the country to train over 3,000 students,
across the Southern census region of the U.S. and California which covers over
90 of the 101 HBCUs and 163 of the 451 HSIs. Additionally, DEDICATE will connect
to the larger INCLUDES ecosystem through efforts to share data, learning modules
and access throughout the INCLUDES network. By using data as a connector, the PI
Team aims to empower natural areas of collaboration and new pipelines for
faculty and student engagement in STEM education. The broader faculty network
thus created through this project has the potential to empower a sustained
advocacy network for systemic institutional change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.