* 2304809
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Assessing Archaeological Storm Damage from Hurricane Ian
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2027
* USD 11,747.00

Accelerating environmental change and attendant extreme weather events such as
hurricanes threaten archaeological sites, especially in coastal regions which
contain some of the most vulnerable forms of cultural heritage. As such, coastal
archaeological sites provide exemplary locations for (1) the rapid study of
storm impacts to archaeological site stability, preservation, and resilience
planning, and (2) understanding how site managers balance disaster response with
post-storm public education and outreach. In response to Hurricane Ian’s
landfall in southwest Florida in September 2022, this Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) enhances the understanding of how hurricanes impact the management and
preservation of publicly accessible coastal and island cultural heritage sites,
parks, and education centers. The investigators are working directly with local
site managers and stakeholders to characterize the extent of damage; document
proximate causes of damage including wind, storm surge, and erosion; and assess
possible further damage from restoration efforts. The project also generates
site vulnerability models to inform site stabilization efforts, resilience
management plans, and public education and outreach content about hurricane
impacts to archaeological cultural heritage sites and local communities.

The researchers are conducting a survey of storm damage inflicted by Hurricane
Ian at four well-preserved and publicly accessible coastal and island Calusa
archaeological cultural heritage sites in the Pine Island Sound and Estero Bay
region of southwest Florida. By the sixteenth century, this region was home to
the Calusa — one of the largest, most politically complex, non-agrarian
societies in North America. The project area is the epicenter of Calusa
archaeological research, student archaeological training, and public Indigenous
cultural heritage education and preservation. Working with local site managers,
cultural heritage community stakeholders, and graduate students, the
investigators are documenting initial site damage using written descriptions,
video, and digital imaging, conduct minimally invasive subsurface sampling of
damaged archaeological contexts likely to be further disturbed by site
restoration efforts, and produce site damage and vulnerability modeling to
inform managerial decision making in post-storm site stabilization and
preservation. Throughout this RAPID project, the investigators and local site
managers will work together to create educational content about hurricane damage
and archaeological cultural heritage site preservation within the context of
climate change impacts and extreme weather events, including publicly
accessible, mini-documentary style educational videos.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.