* 2304836
* RAPID: US-Korean collaboration to build a Ross-Amundsen Ice Core Array (RAICA) along the West Antarctic coastline
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Peter Neff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 162,982.00

The West Antarctic coastline is changing rapidly: it is thinning, losing mass,
and buttressing ice shelves that are critical for future stability of the ice
sheet are retreating. Despite observed change caused by ice-ocean-atmosphere
interactions perturbed by both internal and forced climate processes (e.g.,
tropical Pacific Ocean variability, ozone depletion, greenhouse gas warming),
there are few direct measurements along this coastline. Ice rises, which are
regions of grounded ice within ice shelves, are ideal ice-core sites. Ice rises
line this region, allowing for reconstruction of coastal climate and
environmental parameters dating back decades to millennia at annual resolution.
Retrieval of a 150-m-long ice core from an ice rise in this region will expand
our understanding of critical processes relevant to observed coastal change over
a timespan of several centuries. Shallower cores also collected on the ice rise,
flanking the central 150-m core, will validate the amount and spatial
variability of surface change across this ice rise, providing constraint for
airborne observations, satellite observations, climate models, and reanalysis
datasets. The project forms a new collaboration between a U.S. researcher and
the South Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), who will provide the bulk of
the logistics, including the use of their research vessel, RV ARAON. The project
will also train a graduate student.

This RAPID proposal relies on KOPRI logistics to accomplish the field aspects of
this project. The participants will deploy on the RV ARAON from December 2023 –
February 2024. The U.S.-South Korean team will drill one to two 150-m ice core
from the center of the peninsula, along the local ice divide. Further, to assess
surface-mass-balance (SMB) variability, the team will drill a series of 10- to
15-m ice cores on the flanks of the ice divide. Martin Peninsula, between the
Getz Ice Shelf and the Dotson Ice Shelf, has been chosen as the primary site
based on existing airborne snow radar data, and the high snow accumulation rate,
which preserves high-resolution paleoclimate information. The specific site will
be chosen based on both scientific value and logistical constraints associated
with the RV ARAON cruise. The ice-core data will be used to characterize climate
variability, extremes, and trends along the coastal West Antarctic Ice Sheet —
over recent decades and centuries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.