* 2304106
* INCLUDES DDLP: Creating Opportunities in the Mathematical Sciences through Equity and INclusion (COME-IN)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Scott Wolpert, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,948.00

To strengthen the economic and technological future of the U.S., there is a need
to increase the number of well-trained STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) students at universities and colleges. This must occur while
the number of college-aged students in the U.S. is decreasing. Thus, relying on
just serving the types of students who have majored in STEM fields in the past
is inadequate. Instead, there is a need to recruit and retain students who have
not typically studied STEM disciplines. This can be achieved through diversity,
inclusion, and broadening participation (DIB) efforts. Yet, colleges and
universities will never fully address DIB challenges unless they are addressed
in mathematics and statistics. Mathematics and statistics departments impact
essentially every STEM student who enters the university. Given the mathematical
sciences' departments unique role in educating essentially all students who
enter higher education, it is crucial for all STEM disciplines that the
mathematical sciences address DIB issues in STEM education. To do this, TPSE
Math (Transforming Post-Secondary Education Math) will pilot a two-year DIB
Math/Stat Leadership Institute to train mathematicians and statisticians as DIB
consultants and provide support to mathematics and statistics departments to
work on a DIB improvement project. The DIB Math/Stat Leadership Institute will
facilitate mathematics and statistics departments in higher education in
developing environments that are more diverse and inclusive while broadening
participation. This will impact a broad group of individuals connected with the
department including undergraduate students, graduate students, post-docs,
faculty, and staff, of different races, ethnicities, gender identities,
nationalities, and disability status. Also, this will involve a diverse set of
departments such as those at two-year, four-year principally undergraduate
institutions, and research-intensive institutions. Because of their enormous
service role, mathematics and statistics departments impact essentially every
STEM student who enters a college or university. To help these departments
successfully advance their efforts toward diversity, inclusion, and broadening
participation in STEM education, TPSE Math created a set of resources tailored
to the mathematical sciences, called the COME-IN tool. COME-IN was developed in
partnership with the AAAS SEA Change initiative. In this project, TPSE Math
plans a 2-year DIB Math/Stat Leadership Institute as a pilot to test the
viability of small departmental teams using the COME-IN DIB tools along with
math/stat DIB consultants as catalysts for transformational change in
mathematical sciences departments. This DIB Math/Stat Leadership Institute will
consist of four interrelated components: building a foundation to improve DIB
efforts in mathematical sciences departments, training DIB consultants,
establishing a community and network of institutions working in collaboration on
DIB improvements in the mathematical sciences communities, and evaluating these
efforts. TPSE Math will continue to partner with the AAAS SEA Change initiative
and partner with math/stat professional organizations such as the Mathematics
Association of America and the NSF INCLUDES National Network. The long-term
vision is to pilot, test, modify, and expand the DIB Math/Stat Leadership
Institute, which will establish the resulting program as a model for the
mathematical sciences communities to improve DIB efforts. This project is funded
by NSFâ€™s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (INCLUDES)
Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate collaborative infrastructure
building to advance and sustain systemic change to broaden participation in STEM
at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.