* 2304339
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving indoor agriculture grow light efficiency with adaptive light shaping
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Andrew Rape, LEAFICIENT INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,525.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in accelerating the transition to a more sustainable food
supply chain, which could democratize access to healthy foods and lessen food
insecurity. The US system for growing and distributing fresh food is inefficient
and insufficient in the context of climate change. Controlled environmental
agriculture (CEA) is seen as a potentially revolutionary way to supply food
demands with limited resources. Despite this promise, the high energy
requirements of creating lighting and cooling in enclosed environments to
support photosynthesis has caused CEA not to realize its promise. In the
project, a novel solution to improve energy efficiency in CEA farms is proposed
where advanced optics, machine learning, and computer vision are used to ensure
that all of the light that is emitted by synthetic light sources is optimally
used for plant photosynthesis and growth. The project offers a plausible way to
create reliably profitable operations for CEA producers which would lead to
enhanced access to fresh produce for consumers and decreased reliance on
conventional agriculture to meet the worldâ€™s food needs.

Within current commercial grow systems for controlled environment agriculture, a
substantial portion of the photons are wasted as they are not incident onto
photosynthetically active biomass and are absorbed by the surrounding grow rack
and media. This project will prototype and systematically test a light
production system that dynamically shapes light such that it is rendered only
onto the photosynthetic areas of the plant. To accomplish this, the project will
develop and evaluate (within three crop varieties) a closed-loop system to
autonomously detect the three-dimensional shape of the growing plant and
dynamically adjust the light intensity and projection area to optimize power
efficiency and biomass growth. Successful completion of the work in this project
will result in a novel technology that is systematically tested to yield similar
quality produce using a fraction of the energy consumption of current state-of-
the-art systems. Deployment of this technology would help to improve the unit
economics of controlled environment agriculture produce items and accelerate
adoption of controlled environment agriculture farming practices that
potentially consume less water, utilize land resources more efficiently, and
eliminate the need for chemical pesticide/herbicide treatments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.