* 2304063
* STTR Phase I:  A novel wall-mounted gait assist system to reduce the risk of injuries on stairs and level surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Bradley Burke, 2INNOVATE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a novel mechanical system which improves the
safety of the elderly and disabled while walking on level surfaces and stairs.
The novel, wall-mounted system will reduce the risks of injury by mechanically
supporting individuals during ambulation, rehabilitation, and eventual in-home
gait assistance. The system aims to reduce one of the top reasons for emergency
room (ER) visits (nearly 3,000 ER visits in the United States each year) by
preventing falls in the home. The solution may also be used in medical
facilities to safely ambulate convalescent or acute care patients, especially on
stairs. In addition to reducing direct patient injury risks, the technology
improves economic and productivity measures by reducing the number of
therapists/nurses, relatives, and support workers caring for people with
disabilities or those at risk of falls. This STTR Phase I project will
demonstrate a novel, mechanical, wall-mounted gait assist that can safely reduce
injuries and the risks of falling while walking across flat surfaces and stairs.
A harness with an elastic-like tether, mobile trolley, and mechanical braking
mechanism for maintaining patient safety will be completed. The individual is
connected to a trolley travelling along a wall-side rail providing the variable
forces needed to support a patient’s weight in order to minimize risks of
injury. In the event of a fall, the trolley’s brake automatically activates,
absorbing the shock with a vest/tether to prevent the user from falling to the
floor. Following design engineering and prototype completion, a pilot proof of
concept study will be conducted during Phase I to demonstrate the potential for
patient use in safely walking without falling and causing injury.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.