* 2304033
* Topological Quantum Field Theory and Geometric Structures in Low Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Efstratia Kalfagianni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 377,544.00

The study of three-dimensional spaces, and knotted strings in them, is essential
for our understanding of several aspects about the shape of the universe. To
classify such spaces we need to mathematically understand the possible shapes
they can take as well as their rigidity and flexibility properties. Such
properties are called invariants of the spaces and they arise from a variety of
mathematical considerations, often with crucial input from physics. The proof of
Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture established that certain three-dimensional
spaces, called manifolds, decompose into pieces with nice geometric properties.
In the last few decades, ideas from quantum physics have led mathematicians to
discover a variety of subtle invariants and structures of three-manifolds.There
are several open conjectures, both in physics and in mathematics, that predict
deep relations between quantum structures and geometries of three-manifolds.
This project will study the relations of these quantum invariants to the
geometric structures arising from Thurston's picture, with an eye towards
developing tools to tackle open conjectures in topology and physics. The project
includes topics for graduate student research and contributes to training and
professional development by providing critical support through mentoring and
conference travel.

One direction of the project will study relations between asymptotic aspects of
Topological Quantum Field Theories, the coarse geometry of Teichmuller spaces
and volumes of fibered 3-manifolds.Another direction will study the asymptotic
growth of the Turaev-Viro three-manifold invariants aiming to prove that it
detects the existence of hyperbolic pieces in the geometric decompositions of
three-manifolds. A third direction will continue the study of relations between
the colored Jones knot polynomials and incompressible surfaces in link
complements. The PI will further develop this framework and, in particular,
study the strong slope conjecture, and its applications, within it. The PI will
also use quantum invariants to understand classical invariants such as crossing
numbers and crosscap numbers of knots.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.