* 2304533
* SBIR Phase II:  A Software Platform for Assessment of Untrusted Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Raj Gautam Dutta, SILICON ASSURANCE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 907,793.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to address hardware security and trust issues that are
threatening the semiconductor supply chain. Various threats exist from the
design stage till the end of the life of chips, such as malicious logic
insertion, intellectual property (IP) theft, reverse engineering, backdoor
insertion, and information leakage from fabricated chips. Ensuring the security
of the supply chain necessitates enhancing chip integrity through proactive
measures starting from the design stage to distribution. With security concerns
increasingly gaining prominence in specific market segments, such as automotive,
defense, and healthcare, various stakeholders, such as device manufacturers,
system integrators, end users, and governments are voicing the need for a
trusted semiconductor supply chain. Using the proposed software platform,
stakeholders of the chip industry will be able to address security challenges at
a low cost, without needing trained experts. Furthermore, the team's tools will
contribute to minimizing electronic waste generated from refabricating flawed
chips and developing software patches that reduce the performance of insecure
systems. The proposed technologies will drive chip designers to prioritize
enhancing chip security, ensuring competitiveness in environments where secure
systems are essential.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to address
the challenge of commercial deployment of hardware security software to detect,
assess, and mitigate hardware security vulnerabilities in system-on-chip (SoC)
designs. By utilizing a novel methodology, the tool converts Common Weakness
Enumerations (CWEs) into a formal description of security properties, which the
platform's remaining tools can interpret to identify commonly occurring errors
and vulnerabilities in hardware designs. The software seamlessly integrates with
major commercial electronic design automation (EDA) tool flow, enhancing the
deployment of hardware security software. The toolsets detect security issues in
SoCs, including access control violations, asset leakage, and malicious logic or
backdoors. The software considers security concerns in the global electronic
supply chain involving untrusted entities. The team will collaborate with
industry leaders to ensure widespread accessibility. Partnerships with several
design companies will demonstrate the unique capabilities of the tool to analyze
large designs, e.g., RISC-V processors, and detect a wide array of security
vulnerabilities. The utilization of the product will significantly enhance the
technology readiness level (TRL) and drive widespread adoption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.