* 2304324
* STTR Phase II:  Stem Cell Delivery in Microscopic Hydrogel Droplets for Faster and More Complete Healing of Equine Tendon and Ligament Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Benjamin Noren, CellDrop Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II
project involves continued development of technology to extend the therapeutic
window of cell-based tissue regeneration therapies. This technology could
significantly enhance the scientific understanding of cellular therapies and
enable the healing of injuries more rapidly and less invasively than current
techniques. A significant need for this technology has been identified in the
competition horse market. A significant fraction (98%) of competitive horses
suffers from soft tissue injuries and more than 80% of these horses develop a
tendon or ligament injury. These injuries can take years to heal and are the
leading cause of missed performancesâ€” drastically reducing quality of life for
the animal and often necessitating euthanasia. This is a significant emotional
and financial pain-point for horse owners and veterinarians. The technology
being developed offers a solution by providing veterinarians a means of healing
tendon and ligament injuries in a faster and more durable manner than currently
possible, resulting in fewer missed performances, reduced need for animal
euthanasia, and significantly reducing earning losses. Initial implementation of
this technology in the equine market is expected to result in the subsequent
commercialization of products to improve the healing of orthopedic injuries in
humans.

This project addresses the slow healing and frequent reinjury of superficial
digital flexor tendon (SDFT) injuries in elite equine athletes. A significant
fraction (98%) of veterinarians uses stem cell injections to aid in recovery of
these injuries, however, this strategy has limited efficacy due to poor
viability of injected cells and short cell retention times at the site of
injury. This problem is addressed by this technology to preserve and localize
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) at an injury site through delivery in inert,
injectable hydrogel microparticles. The research objectives are twofold: 1)
examine early healing metrics in an equine model of SDFT injury treated with
encapsulated MSCs compared to conventional unencapsulated MSCs, and 2) examine
long term healing metrics using the same model. The goal of this research is to
provide evidence of two key customer needs: faster tissue healing and more
durable tissue regeneration of SDFT injuries. Functional, histological, genetic,
and biomechanical metrics will be used to assess experimental outcomes and the
results are anticipated to lead directly to a clinical trial in elite equine
athletes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.