* 2304797
* Invertibility and deformations in chromatic homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vesna Stojanoska, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2026
* USD 331,147.00

Invertibility is a concept in mathematics which can be studied any time we have
a notion of multiplication, though it is dependent on the setting. Within the
world of natural numbers, only 1 and -1 are invertible, yet all non-zero
rational numbers have an inverse. In stable homotopy theory, the role that
numbers play in ordinary arithmetic is taken by objects called spectra, which
arise as algebraic invariants of topological spaces that are unaffected by
continuous deformations. There are not very many invertible spectra, only
spheres of various dimensions. Here again we observe a phenomenon that the
situation changes when we pass to certain localizations analogous to passing
from the integers to the rationals. The localizations in question are studied by
chromatic homotopy theory, which aims to disassemble complicated homotopical
information into building blocks with more understandable with more regular
behaviors. This proposal aims to undertake a systematic study of the role of
symmetries to get a grasp of the exotic invertible objects in chromatic
homotopy, with the hope of understanding the extent to which such exotic objects
can be understood as twisted versions of spheres. The main focus of the PIs
broader impacts is the rebuilding and strengthening the mathematical community
in the post-coronavirus pandemic, through efforts such as organizing workshops,
conferences, seminars, discussions, as well as a research program at a
mathematical institute, all with a particular emphasis on inclusivity and
support for underserved groups.

The research supported by this grant will work towards a better understanding of
large-scale invertibility phenomena in chromatic homotopy theory, namely the
exotic K(n)-local Picard groups, by attempting to organize a variety of ad-hoc
computational methods into a systematic investigation using equivariant and
representation-theoretic methods. At least two different avenues will be
pursued: one is a shift of focus from subgroups to quotients of the Morava
stabilizer group, already subtly present in the PIs previous work (with Barthel,
Beaudry, Bobkova, Goerss, Henn, and Pham) on determinant spheres, and on the
K(2)-local exotic Picard group at the prime 2. The other idea, pursued in a
collaboration with Dicks, is a completely new use of Mazurs classical
deformation theory of modular representations, which is much less explored but
is promising new connections and deeper understanding of invertible objects in
chromatic homotopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.