* 2304067
* Collaborative Research: Extracellular vesicles as vehicles for microbial interactions in marine Black Queen communities
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2027
* James Morris, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 04/30/2027
* USD 721,455.00

The function and stability of microbial communities in the ocean depends on
exchanges of biological products and services between individual cells. Marine
microbes are typically far apart from one another, so some of these exchanges
occur through the release of products or services into the surrounding water,
where they travel to other cells via simple diffusion. Understanding the degree
to which such valuable products made by one organism are targeted to a specific
partner, and how, has important implications for our understanding of the
ecology and evolution of the marine microbiome. This project examines the role
played by a poorly understood type of very small particle – extracellular
membrane vesicles – in mediating functional interactions within the oceans.
Extracellular vesicles are released by most marine microbes and are abundant in
ocean waters, but our understanding of their functions remains in its infancy.
As vesicles can contain diverse molecules, including active enzymes, and
transport them between cells, they may work as a packaging and delivery system
for goods and services traded between ecologically important microorganisms.
Broader impacts of the project include providing hands-on research experiences
for undergraduate and graduate students - including those from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM fields - and the development of new active
learning exercises to help increase knowledge about the roles microbes play in
students’ lives.

This project explores vesicle functions across multiple scales, combining -omics
analyses, field experiments, and functional studies in cultures of diverse and
ecologically important microbes to arrive at new understandings of vesicle
contributions to cellular exchanges. These experiments incorporate an
evolutionary perspective for exploring the range of vesicle functions and
genetic mechanisms affecting their production, examining how their contents have
changed in co-cultures of phytoplankton and heterotrophic bacteria following
hundreds of generations of experimental laboratory evolution. Fundamental
ecological questions are addressed concerning whether vesicles, and their
associated functions, act as truly ‘public goods’ in the oceans or can instead
be targeted to a subset of cells, possibly yielding ‘club goods’ that define
interacting, cooperative networks. Collectively, this effort will generate new
insights into the mechanisms marine microbes use to interact with one another,
and experimentally define the functional potential and ecological impact of EV-
mediated trafficking networks in the oceans.

This project is jointly funded by the Biological Oceanography Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.