* 2304844
* An Immersive GEO-Revolution Adventure Experience for HBCU Undergraduates
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Aynaz Lotfata, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 273,918.00

The History, Geography & Museum Studies Department at Morgan State University in
Baltimore City, USA will operate a two-year pilot bridge program involving 20
undergraduates of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The
pilot aims to assist these students in transitioning to graduate-level degree
programs in geography, the geosciences, and geospatial sciences. The targeted
undergraduates will have had preparation and demonstrate substantial promise for
graduate study in those discipline fields through completed elective and
required coursework in relevant major and minor degree programs. HBCUs located
in the Chesapeake region of the United States are the principal talent pools of
the program, and are inclusive of Bowie State University, Coppin State
University, Howard University, Morgan State University, and the University of
Maryland Eastern Shore. The aim of the program is to equip the next generation
of scientists representing geography, the geosciences, and geospatial sciences
with conceptual and practical tools that serve to produce culturally relevant
solutions to water hazards and climate change matters of an environmental,
political, and economic quality. Those matters most often disproportionately
impact people of color residing in urban, suburban, and coastal environments.
The program will provide classroom-based and virtual workshops emphasizing
leadership principles and values espoused by geographers, geoscientists,
geospatial scientists, and those in other disciplines. Additionally, field-based
study opportunities are offered to help participants formulate a higher degree
of understanding towards scientific research and advocacy relating to water
hazard mitigation in Baltimore City and elsewhere in the Chesapeake region that
reflect past, present, and forecasted climate change exposures of variable cause
and consequence which lead oftentimes to disasters of small and extreme
proportions. By combining training workshops and field study exercises relating
to water hazards and climate change in different environment types, particularly
for those who encounter institutional and other place-based constraints, the
program has great potential to stand as a model example of leadership
development for people of color to empower themselves to be scientists who hold
in the highest regard and practice principles of justice, equity, diversity, and
inclusion within the academy and beyond through their research and citizenship
duties. Furthermore, the program may offer non-participating HBCUs and other
minority-serving institutions across the United States functional approaches for
increasing their number of undergraduates who intentionally seek and view the
acquisition of advanced degrees in the disciplines of program focus as the means
for greater representation and leadership across other scientific fields of
endeavor and in the larger society.

This two-year pilot bridge program serves to build the quantity and quality of
United States graduate students of color in geography, the geosciences, and
geospatial sciences through hands-on research training exercises, expert
guidance, and mentoring support. The program targets those enrolled at HBCUs
located in the Chesapeake region who possess a major as well as moderate
relationship with the disciplines of focus through degree enrollment status and
coursework completion yet may lack additional stimuli, supports, and pathways
towards graduate-level study. The program aims to enable target students to go
beyond traditional classroom structures and embark on field research adventures
that contribute to building their: (1) comprehension of scientific viewpoints in
geography, geosciences, and geospatial sciences relating to water hazards and
climate change; (2) confidence in the use of scientific research instruments
towards knowledge production for policymaking and practice purposes; and (3)
communication skills for public awareness campaigns in close proximity and equal
partnership with city neighborhood residents, community-based nonprofit
organizations, government agencies, professional organizations, local and
national conservation groups and institutes, and environment-centered
laboratories. Three principles defining program suggest that: (1) high-touch
field-based research experiences are effective learning and career development
pathways towards environmental matters like water hazards and climate change;
(2) the chances for graduate program application and enrollment success with the
disciplines of focus rise when HBCU undergraduates receive intentional and
caring support; and (3) community-university partnerships lead to better science
and discovery towards greater public understanding and implementation of
culturally responsive approaches towards dealing with variable and
disproportionate water hazard and climate change impacts when people of color in
cities, suburbs, and coastal towns across the Chesapeake region and perhaps
beyond its boundaries are centered in such work.

This project is jointly funded by the Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership in
Diversity (GOLD-EN) Program and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR) Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.