* 2304596
* SBIR Phase I:  The Automated Forensic Economist: Towards Affordability, Transparency, and Efficiency in Forensic Economics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Devrim Ikizler, INDUSTRIAL ANALYTICS AND MODELING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 257,604.00

The broader impact/commercial impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project capitalizes on the inefficiencies of the existing expert
witness industry and brings affordability, versatility (unlimited scenario
generation), simplicity, transparency, and standardization to legal proceedings.
The team will develop an ecosystem that will keep experts accountable and
credible (using a peer-review system) and allow lawyers and their clients to be
better informed with enhanced access to high-quality services. The team has
validated that a profitable market exists for a standardized and automated
method of evaluating economic losses in civil legal disputes in an automated,
fast, inexpensive, standard, and objective manner. The quality of expert witness
services will increase across the industry, as experts will be able to focus
more deeply on the more disputed issues of litigation rather than the
automatable portions of the estimation process. Better-informed attorneys and
firms will be able to counsel their clients and develop better legal strategies
throughout the process, while judicial personnel and juries will benefit from
improved legal and expert witness services, gaining access to more standardized
information to make better, more-informed decisions and be less susceptible to
biased or inaccurate opinions.

This SBIR Phase I project consists of a set of deterministic algorithms intaking
user inputs (facts and data regarding parties in a lawsuit) and retrieving
relevant data series from pre-harmonized external databases, which are then
processed through a set of economic and statistical computations, producing a
set of outputs, including an estimate of financial gains (losses) for the
lawsuit characterized by user inputs. The proposed innovation improves on the
inefficiencies of the existing expert witness industry in several dimensions,
and as a result brings affordability, versatility, simplicity, transparency, and
standardization. In Phase I, the algorithm and a usable prototype for capturing
employment and personal injury-related financial gains (losses) estimation will
be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.