* 2304785
* Continuous Twisted Nano-fibrous Yarns for Smart Piezo-Textiles
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Majid Minary-Jolandan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 10/31/2025
* USD 371,324.00

Clothing, after food, is perhaps the most common human essential, and textiles
are a basic aspect of human life that has not changed from their “passive” form
for many decades. Current fabrics are made of passive materials such as nylon
and cotton. The goal of this project is to investigate scientific foundations to
realize controllable, and reproducible production of functional smart fabrics
from nano-sized smart (piezoelectric) polymer yarns, and their integration with
conventional fabrics. Applications of smart textiles could include power
generation and storage, personal protection, sports, fashion, communication,
medical and physiological monitoring applications, and the internet of things.
In particular, smart piezoelectric fabrics can be used for mechanical energy
harvesting, for thermal energy harvesting through the pyroelectric effect, for
ferroelectric applications, as pressure and force sensors, for motion detection,
and for ultrasonic sensing. Smart fabrics will have the ability to react to
different physical stimuli (mechanical, electrical, thermal, etc.) and as such
can interact (sense, respond, communicate, and/or adapt) with their environment.
This project will address the following challenges to realize smart
piezoelectric polymer fabrics: development of processing and scale-up
fabrication capabilities for production of continuous (weavable, knittable, and
sewable) piezoelectric yarns; significant improvement in their electromechanical
conversion efficiency; and design strategies for integration and packaging of
piezoelectric yarns with conventional and conductive threads. The educational
objective of the project is focused on increasing the diversity in
nanotechnology-STEM through summer programs for high school students. These
students will be trained on nanotechnology research, in particular smart fabrics
made of piezo nanofibers.

In this project, a manufacturing process based on continuous electrospinning is
proposed that enables continuous production of twisted yarns. A major obstacle
in the utilization of piezoelectric polymers for smart fabric applications has
been the low electromechanical conversion efficiency of piezo polymers (~2%)
compared to the piezo ceramics (~50%), which are inherently brittle and not
suitable for smart fabric applications. The scientific outcomes of this research
will be the inter-relation of thermomechanical processing, percentage of
crystallinity, and orientation of crystallites and elastic and piezoelectric
properties of the piezoelectric nanofibers and twisted bundles. Through
fabrication and processing steps combined with computational analysis, the
project will produce polymer yarns with significantly enhanced piezoelectric
efficiency. This will be achieved through thermomechanical processing (thermal
annealing, and drawing) designed to control the morphology (percentage of
crystallinity, and orientation of crystallites), and hence properties (elastic
and piezoelectric properties) and performance and output power under various
external loads of piezoelectric polymer fibers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.