* 2304482
* SBIR Phase I:  Multifunctional coatings for building envelopes
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Derek Stein, TECHSTYLE MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

This broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop coatings for walls and ceilings
that have climate-regulating properties, resulting in improved energy
efficiency, durability, and comfort for buildings. Buildings account for around
40% of primary energy consumption in the United States, and while increasing
insulation and airtightness can lower energy costs, this also increases
vulnerability to moisture damage. Inadequate moisture management has significant
costs, and over one third of U.S. structures experience damp conditions that
promote the growth of harmful pollutants like mold and bacteria. Moreover, water
is a major cause of failure of building materials. Multifunctional coatings
provide a solution that can be incorporated in a straightforward manner into
both new constructions and retrofits.

The architectural coatings to be developed in this project have commercial
potential and will make a broad impact because they will provide a cost-
effective solution to the interconnected challenges of humidity control, thermal
efficiency, and moisture durability. The coatings use the high energy storage
capacity of moisture storage materials, mimicking how plants use water to
regulate their temperature through transpiration. The research will focus on
optimizing the formulations of a primer and a topcoat so that they work together
as a multifunctional material system capable of effectively managing the flows
of water vapor and heat. A first function of the system is to provide
directional control over vapor diffusion in the manner of a vapor diode. This
diode will create a pumping effect that actively removes moisture from the wall
cavity and enhances a building's durability. A second function of the coatings
is to buffer the humidity in the building, which increases comfort. A final
function is to store and release significant amounts of latent heat as water
vapor evaporates and condenses within its structure, which reduces temperature
fluctuations and energy consumption required for climate control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.