* 2304193
* I-Corps: Bearingless Electric Motors for Industrial Compressor Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Eric Severson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new technology that produces completely integrated electric
machines. These machines will leverage geometry not readily manufactured with
conventional machining to support 3-dimensional flux paths and actuate across
all six degrees of freedom. This project's bearingless technology can unlock
customer gains through enhanced system sensing capability to enable predictive
maintenance and decreased noise, vibration, and harshness. The value proposition
of bearingless technology is particularly strong for turbomachinery applications
in wastewater aeration, waste heat recovery, automotive turbocharges, and
thermal grid storage. By eliminating bearings, the proposed technology can
increase the mean time between failure of motor systems. Through increased
system reliability and lifetime, this technology can accelerate deployment of
highly efficient, sustainable, and intelligent infrastructure solutions for the
benefit of society.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of new bearingless electric
motor generator technology that provides the benefits of magnetic levitation
while solving the challenges associated with magnetic bearings. The mechanical
bearings used to support the shaft of today's electric motors and generators are
a source of major pain for integrators, owners, and operators of electric
machines. These pain points primarily come in the form of low system reliability
and high total cost of ownership. While magnetic bearing manufacturers have
attempted to solve these pain points by magnetically levitating the shaft
(thereby eliminating mechanical bearings from motor/generators), this solution
has seen limited market acceptance due to increased capital cost, lengthy
timelines for new product commissioning, and integration challenges. This
project's bearingless motor technology integrates the functionality of a
magnetic bearing into the existing hardware of an electric motor/generator.
While conventional electric motor/generators use stator winding current to
control electromagnetic torque on their rotor, this bearingless motor/generators
additionally use stator current to control electromagnetic forces on the rotor
that make the motor act as if it were also a magnetic bearing. This technology
is employed by unlocking the large radial electromagnetic pressure that is
present in today's electric motor/generators but is canceled by deliberate
design symmetry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.