* 2304913
* RUI: Self-Assembled Interfaces: Protolipids, Asymmetry, and Energetics
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2027
* Sunghee Lee, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 11/30/2027
* USD 345,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sunghee Lee and her research group in
the Department of Chemistry at Iona University are undertaking studies on how
living cells arrange molecular components in their membranes. These boundary
layers are composed of long-tailed lipid (fatty) molecules that assemble in a
double layer (a bilayer) with different kinds of lipid molecules on the inner
layer relative to the outer layer. This molecular difference, or asymmetry, is
vital for cell function, and yet the fundamental reasons for this arrangement
are not fully known. Professor Lee and her team will explore a large array of
lipid compositions of cell membranes, using cell-size water droplets that self-
arrange into asymmetric bilayers, and microscopically examine the resulting
physical, chemical, and mechanical properties of these cell-mimics. The goal of
the project is to determine how the differing shapes and sizes of individual
lipid molecules can impact cell-membrane mechanical strength, leakiness, and
stability, which determine the functions and the life cycle of living cells. The
project has the potential to provide insights that aid in the design of soft
matter systems and functional materials, and also contribute to better
understanding of biologically relevant materials. The scientific broader impacts
of the proposed work relate to potential longer term implications of these
studies for the production of biosensors, diagnostics, and drug screening
platforms. This project will also employ research methods that will help train
the next generation of globally-competitive scientists with hypothesis-driven
interdisciplinary research, and is expected to include participation from
members of underrepresented groups. Outreach activities are planned to extend
the public engagement with this research by involving middle/high school
students and teachers at minority serving institutions.

Under this award, Professor Sunghee Lee and her group will impose increasing
spontaneous curvature upon symmetric and asymmetric planar lipid bilayers and
ascertain changes in the driving force for bilayer formation, to develop a
direct experimental transducer for curvature elastic stress energy. Models of
symmetric and asymmetric bilayers comprising lipids of negative curvature will
be examined for their effect upon the thermodynamic driving force for bilayer
formation. To quantify the effects of lipid shape, the Lee group will acquire
water transport parameters across the bilayer, determine bilayer stability
parameters, ascertain electrical properties, use vibrational spectroscopy for
determination of acyl chain order, and perform thermotropic analyses of lipid
dispersions. Dissemination of the technology will include working with
collaborators to apply the techniques of asymmetric droplet interface bilayers
for studies of protein function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.