* 2304251
* STTR Phase I: Biocontrol of Pythium pathogens in hydroponic greenhouses
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Vipaporn Phuntumart, LLC BG BIOLOGICS
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is to develop a targeted biological pesticide
for the control of pythium pathogens in the hydroponic greenhouse production of
leafy greens. Fresh market production of tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, lettuce,
and spinach is shifting to hydroponic greenhouse operations because these
operations are more efficient in their use of land, water, and fertilizer than
conventional operations. Despite these advantages, pythium pathogens are a major
threat to their economic viability. The accidental introduction of pythium
pathogens into the recirculating water in these operations can result in
complete crop losses as the pathogen spreads rapidly through the water and
infects the roots causing root rots and leaf yellowing. In lettuce, root rots
impair nutrient absorption and slow plant growth rates. Crop rotation cycles
must be extended to produce the same amount of product, and ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation of the recirculating water may be needed to mitigate disease losses.
The reduced integrity of plant roots may enable pathogenic bacteria in the water
to migrate via the plant vascular system into the leaves and potentially cause
disease. One such case of E. coli-contaminated lettuce has already reported.
Thus, there is a need for the development of an organic-based approach for this
disease problem.

The proposed project will assemble a collection of pythium pathogens that
reflects the genetic diversity of these pathogens in different hydroponic
facilities. This collection of isolates will take into account several
parameters: 1. geographic diversity, 2. crop species (arugula, basil, cannabis,
lettuce, and spinach), and 3. production system e.g., deep water raft
hydroponics, vertical hydroponic systems and small scale, family-owned
operations. This project will evaluate 10 Pseudomonad strains that have
exhibited contact-dependent killing of all pythium strains from a smaller
collection of pythium isolates to identify the most potent combinations of these
biocontrol agents. A bioinformatics approach will be used to identify the genes
responsible for the killing phenotype. Targeted gene deletions will be made in a
sequenced strain and virulence assays of the mutated strains will be used to
assess the role of specific genes. This strategy is expected to identify the
genetic basis for host-specific killing of pythium species and provide evidence
that these microbes are not pathogens of humans or plants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.