* 2304613
* Coupled Ionic-Electronic-Structural Dynamics in Organic Mixed Conductors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Connor Bischak, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2026
* USD 460,667.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Connor G. Bischak of the University of Utah is
elucidating the relationship between electronic transport, ion motion, and
structural dynamics in conjugated polymers that operate as organic mixed ionic-
electronic conductors (OMIECs). OMIECs are soft polymeric semiconductors which
can conduct both electronic and ionic charges. This unique ability makes them
particularly suitable for a variety of applications of relevance to next-
generation bioelectronic, optoelectronic and energy storage devices. However,
for many of these applications, it is currently difficult to choose a
combination of polymer molecular structure, polymer processing conditions, and
electrolyte to achieve a specific performance metric. This project will fill
these knowledge gaps by exploiting the high spatial resolution and chemical
specificity of novel scanning probe imaging approaches, as well as a
complementary suite of traditional and novel in situ techniques. Fundamental
correlations established as a result of this work have the potential to help
guide synthetic chemists towards synthesizing the next generation of OMIEC
conjugated polymers. The interdisciplinary nature of this research will provide
strong training and professional development opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students. The project will additionally support an
outreach effort to supply local high school chemistry classrooms with affordable
3D-printed spectrometers to learn about light-matter interactions, similar to
those that are used to interrogate OMIEC polymers.

This research will focus on investigating organic mixed ionic-electronic
conductors (OMIECs) to uncover relationships between ion motion, electronic
transport, and structural dynamics. Poly(thiophene)s with various backbones
comprised of hydrocarbons, oligo (ethylene glycol)s, or carbonyl functionalities
will be the focal points, in part because they are currently the highest
performing OMIEC materials. In the first specific aim, reversible and
irreversible structural dynamics will be investigated using blends of
semicrystalline and amorphous polymers to tune the crystallinity and measure ion
injection kinetics as a function of crystalline to amorphous polymer ratios. The
second aim will extend studies to ion dependent effects. Finally, the impacts of
heterogeneous polymer structure will be addressed through correlative nanoscale
imaging that will be used to answer basic questions about the doping process and
structural dynamics. The combined efforts have the potential to afford new
insights into chemical design elements that enable more effective conductivity.
This research aims to address critical knowledge gaps in the field with the goal
of enabling design of optimal ionic and electronic conductivity in such systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.