* 2304658
* Designing Chemical Processes with Multicomponent Solvents through Self-Evolving Solubility Databases and Neural Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Seonah Kim, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 449,440.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Seonah Kim of the Department of Chemistry
at Colorado State University is developing novel machine-learning (ML)
predictive models for solubility in complex multicomponent systems. Solubility
is essential to designing various chemicals such as pharmaceutical drugs,
renewable fuels, electrolytes, and polymers. Further, solubility also plays a
key role in the synthesis and separation processes employed to obtain these
chemicals. In this project, the Kim group will build an extensive self-evolving
solubility database from computational and experimental data and develop an ML
solubility prediction model using graph neural networks (GNNs) for more rapid
and accurate solubility predictions. A novel innovation in this approach will be
expansion to multicomponent solvent systems and polymer solubility. The project
will offer graduate and undergraduate students an opportunity to acquire a
diverse range of relevant skills for the modern scientific enterprise.
Additionally, the Kim research team will actively participate in outreach
events, connecting with local schools and reaching a nationwide audience through
in person and virtual activities.

The proposed research will first develop innovative self-evolving solubility
databases and GNNs. The approaches will adopt semi-supervised self-training,
which combines experimental and computational databases to rectify the
discrepancies between these two data sources. A unique aspect of this approach
will be the correction of solubilities calculated from quantum chemistry (QC)
methods prior to integration into the database. This data augmentation process
will be performed for a broad scope of solutes and solvents. Multiple QC methods
will be employed, such as the Conductor-like Screening Model (COSMO) and density
functional theory (DFT) with an implicit Solvation Model based on Density (SMD),
for a reliable augmentation. The self-training scheme will then be expanded to
multicomponent systems. Various GNN variants will be examined by incorporating
the descriptors for complex interactions among multiple components and the model
will be leveraged to generate new solvent parameters for SMD. Prediction of
polymer solubility will be followed by experimental validation as another
practical application. Dr. Seonah Kimâ€™s group will develop extensive, self-
evolving, and reliable solubility databases and accurate solubility prediction
GNNs for a wide range of solutes, including polymers dissolved in single and
multicomponent solvents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.