* 2304069
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated One-Hour Testing for Bacteremia and Antibiotic Sensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Mustafa Al-Adhami, ASTEK DIAGNOSTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 274,587.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve early detection and clinical
management of bacteremia in patients suspected of bacterial sepsis. Over 250,000
patients die of sepsis each year in the U.S., which results in hospitalization
costs exceeding $20 billion. A sepsis patient’s risk of death has been
demonstrated to increase by 4-7% per hour, where timely administration of
appropriate antibiotics is expected to improve patient survival. Unfortunately,
the standard of care approach for determining antibiotic susceptibility requires
overnight culturing that can take a day or more. Currently, broad spectrum
antibiotics are administered within the first hour of treatment with the hope
that the pathogen will be susceptible, while waiting for antibiotic
susceptibility results. The growing landscape of antibiotic resistance severely
undermines the efficacy of the standard approach, as many pathogens are
increasingly resistant to broad-spectrum antibiotics. This project seeks to
advance development of a novel optical approach for determining antibiotic
susceptibility results within 1 hour to support the use of appropriate
antibiotics, which has significant potential to improve patient mortality
outcomes and reduce hospitalization costs.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves an
optical technology for the rapid determination of antibiotic susceptibility
results from a blood sample for patients suspected of bacteremia. The product
uses an assay for assessment of bacterial metabolism, where a blood specimen may
be cultured with and without antibiotics to determine antibiotic susceptibility.
Advancements in the assay and microfluidics enable delivery of antibiotic
susceptibility results within one hour. This timeframe would enable clinicians
to use antibiotics that are targeted to the patient’s specific bacterial
pathogen significantly earlier, which is expected to improve patient outcomes.
The goal of this project will be to rigorously demonstrate the proof-of-concept
and reproducibility of the technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.