* 2304684
* Singularities and rigidity in geometric evolution equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* William Minicozzi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,998.00

This project focuses on geometric flows, where a geometric object - such as a
function, a surface, or a Riemannian metric - evolves over time with the
evolution determined by a differential equation modeled on the classical heat
equation. The classical heat equation describes the evolution of the temperature
as heat spreads out over time. The equations that the PI and collaborators
consider were first discovered in materials science, engineering and applied
mathematics and are extensively studied in pure mathematics. These geometric
flows are nonlinear generalizations of the heat equation and the nonlinear
effects lead to new phenomena, including the development of singularities even
when starting from a smooth initial configuration. Understanding and modeling
these singularities is a fundamental problem, both theoretically and in applied
science. The broader impact of the project includes graduate advising,
undergraduate mentoring, curriculum reform, writing graduate textbooks,
dissemination, seminar and conference organization, and other service to the
community including multiple editorial boards. The project studies geometric
flows focusing on singularities and rigidity in Ricci and mean curvature flow
(MCF). Mean curvature flow is a nonlinear parabolic evolution equation that
originated in materials science and has been intensely studied in pure and
applied mathematics. A closed surface evolves to decrease its area as
efficiently as possible, pulling itself tight. As the surface gets smaller, the
flow contracts even faster and, thus, singularities always occur. The key is to
understand the singularities. Function theory plays a role, both continuous and
discrete, and unique continuation. A second main direction is to understand
certain properties of singularities in Ricci flow, including when blowups are
unique, which blowups are rigid, and the asymptotic structure of gradient
shrinking Ricci solitons.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.