* 2304144
* Conference: Travel Support for the 8th Thermal and Fluids Engineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Krishna Kota, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 47,800.00

This NSF support will enable numerous students, early career engineers, and
faculty members around the country to attend the 8th Thermal and Fluids
Engineering Conference (TFEC), thereby leading to their significant intellectual
benefit and professional development. The TFEC, organized by the American
Society of Thermal and Fluids Engineers (ASTFE), is growing to be one of the
leading platforms for presenting and discussing research advances in thermal and
fluids engineering. Since its inception in 2015, TFEC has been organized in a
progressively student-centric fashion by seeking firsthand input from the
student attendees. In line with the students' top priority, the 8th TFEC will
invite 17 plenary, keynote, and special talk speakers and facilitate their
interaction with the students. This support will also enable the students to
realize their second priority: networking and socialization.

The field of thermal and fluids engineering impacts a vast spectrum of our
industry and society. New advances in this field prompted by increased
attendance and collaborations at the conference through this support would help
improve and optimize numerous applications of societal benefit such as gas and
wind turbines, fuel cells, electric vehicles, electronic devices, freshwater
production, power plants, industrial processes, and medicine among others. In
addition, the organization of the Early-Stage Career Development program at the
conference will aid in enhancing the professional development and career
selection skills of both the current and the future workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.