* 2304878
* New Anion Binders Based on Aromatic Linear and Cyclic Aromatic Oligoamides
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2026
* Bing Gong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Bing Gong of the State University of New
York at Buffalo will be studying designer molecules with cyclic scaffolds known
as macrocycles and how they interact with anions. This research aims to further
understanding of how macrocycle design can be finely tuned to build in anion
specificity and to establish new ways to bind particular anions, especially for
those that are important for energy and the environment. The team will also be
looking at how these macrocycles can move anions through different barriers such
as cell membranes or non-polar organic solutions, which could be useful in many
different fields. This project will integrate molecular design with experimental
studies and provide research training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, including students from underrepresented groups. The research
results will be publicized broadly in the scientific community and incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate teaching.

The macrocycles being targeted herein have a constrained aromatic oligoamide
backbone that enforces the convergent placement of multiple amide NH and phenyl
CH groups. These NH and CH groups define an electropositive binding cavity that
is highly pre-organized for binding anions. Because of their hydrogen-bonding
capabilities and differences in preference for anions, the macrocycles are
expected to exhibit versatile binding capabilities for anions with varying
properties. The macrocycles will assist in transporting anions across cell
membranes or bulk non-polar organic solvents. The efficiency and selectivity of
anion transport will be assessed using established fluorescence assays including
those based on vesicles (liposomes) or those using U-shaped tubes. This research
team will (1) optimize and scale up the synthesis of the anion-binding
macrocycles, (2) conduct systematic anion binding studies to quantify the
binding affinities of the macrocycles with different anions in various solvents,
and (3) examine anion transport across lipid bilayers or non-polar organic
solvents to determine the efficiencies and selectivity of transporting
homologous series anions, such as halides and oxoanions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.