* 2304042
* RUI:Targeted Structural Diversity and Assessments in Quasiracemates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kraig Wheeler, Whitworth University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 434,041.00

Non-Technical Summary With the support of the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, the collaboration
between Kraig Wheeler (Chemistry) and Diana Schepens (Mathematics) synthesizes
and characterizes unique families of materials that align predictably in
molecular crystals. While many structural details responsible for molecular
interactions are known, there also exist chemical features that produce less
manageable motifs via ill-defined or weak contacts that are no less critical to
the overall molecular recognition process. Molecular shape is one such
structural feature and the focus of this investigation. The goal of this
research is to understand how the shape of small organic molecules can be used
to advantage to construct predictable molecular assemblies in crystals. Findings
from this work supply necessary information about the shape space of molecules
that is transferable to the design of functional materials. In addition, given
the unique molecular recognition profiles of the small organic compounds under
study and the development of computer-aided discovery methods, the knowledge
gained from these studies contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of
the self-assembly process for broad classes of compounds. This project supports
the training of a cohort of undergraduate and high school students through
hands-on experiences in experimental and computer-assisted research at Whitworth
University, a predominantly undergraduate institution. Outreach efforts also
include support for a summer X-ray crystallography conference, where
participants from across the country receive essential training for their
ongoing teaching and research programs.

Technical Summary This interdisciplinary project combines experimental solid-
state organic chemistry and math topology to examine how near enantiomers
assemble into energetically favorable crystalline assemblies. The research
explores the structural boundaries of molecular shape to the molecular
recognition process by using the quasiracemate approach for constructing
bimolecular compounds. Chiral building blocks formulated from known organic
precursors are prepared using benzoyl amino acid molecular scaffolds. Though the
study of quasiracemic materials has now progressed to an established science,
the intimate details of assembling pairs of quasienantiomers remain relatively
unknown. This project explores how increasing crystal lattice stabilization via
strong hydrogen bonds leads to materials with a greater structural variation of
the quasienantiomeric components. The behavior of the target systems is expected
to offer critical insight into molecular recognition profiles. Crystallographic,
video-assisted thermomicroscopy, calorimetric, and lattice energy calculations
are utilized to assess the ability of these materials to form quasiracemic
materials. This study also develops in silico methods for determining the shape
space differences and degree of inversion symmetry of pairs of quasienantiomeric
components that will provide diagnostic tools for quasiracemate prediction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.