* 2304841
* Smooth 4-manifolds, hyperbolic 3-manifolds and diffeomorphism groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* David Gabai, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2028
* USD 354,727.00

Low dimensional topology is the study of objects modeled on surfaces (two
dimensions), our space (three dimensions) and space-time (four dimensions). It
is a central area of mathematics with intense contemporary interest. It is at
the crossroads of many subfields of mathematics, methods from which have
contributed to the development of low dimensional topology, and conversely,
research in that field stimulates advances in those areas. The research project
supported by this award addresses fundamental questions in smooth four-
dimensional topology including the topology of self-mappings of four dimensional
spaces. Additional topics related to structures for globally understanding three
dimensional spaces, will be investigated. A part of the project is to carve out
research problems suitable for undergraduate and beginning graduate students.
Background material needed for the research as well as new ideas discovered will
be incorporated into the courses the PI teaches.

The PI aims to develop his program for resolving the smooth 4-dimensional
Schoenflies conjecture and to study diffeomorphism groups of manifolds of
dimension at least four. Projects include relationships between taut foliations,
transversely orientable essential laminations, and left orders on hyperbolic
three-manifold groups. The PI also plans to investigate Margulis numbers on
hyperbolic three-manifolds and to address the structure of low volume hyperbolic
3-manifolds. The PI and his collaborators have discovered new techniques to
address these problems and propose to use these methods and discover new ones to
make further advances.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.