* 2304479
* Ecological and evolutionary consequences of climate warming for fungal pathogens
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Rachel Penczykowski, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2026
* USD 722,586.00

Environmental change is expected to impact the risk of disease for plants and
wildlife worldwide. Predicting those impacts requires understanding the role of
climate in determining when and where diseases can occur. Understanding how
climate affects pathogen evolution is also essential for improving disease
prediction and management. Fungal pathogens cause many diseases that threaten
hosts of agricultural and conservation concern. However, effects of
environmental change on fungal pathogens are poorly understood. This is largely
because fungi have complex life cycles that are challenging to study with
respect to climate. For example, many fungi reproduce in different ways under
different climate conditions. The researchers will determine effects of warming
on fungal pathogens using mathematical models, field studies, and experiments.
The models will simulate spread of infections by several types of pathogens
under different climate scenarios. Data collection and analysis will focus on
common plants and their fungal pathogens. These will be studied over a wide
range of climate conditions. Undergraduates will contribute to the project
through an introductory biology course at Truman State University. In that
course, students will analyze images of diseased plants that were collected by
citizen scientists around the world. Students will also be recruited to
participate in field and laboratory research through the Tyson Undergraduate
Fellows program at Washington University in St. Louis.

The central goal of this project is to determine how climate warming changes the
ecology and evolution of fungal pathogens. Most fungi are capable of both
asexual and sexual reproduction, and each phase of the life cycle can be
temperature dependent. In temperate regions, many fungal pathogens produce
asexual (clonal) spores from spring through early fall seasons and then undergo
sexual production of an overwintering stage when temperatures cool in later
fall. Warming should alter the production, survival, and dispersal of clonal
spores as well as the frequency of sexual reproduction and genetic
recombination. In Aim 1, the researchers will develop a general metapopulation
model to evaluate how effects of temperature on pathogen life-history traits
lead to changes in pathogen prevalence and genotypic diversity under different
climate scenarios. They will resolve how model outcomes depend on pathogen
thermal biology, mating system, and other parameters. In Aim 2, the researchers
will experimentally quantify thermal performance curves for life history traits
of a fungal plant pathogen collected along a climatic gradient. They will test
for pathogen local adaptation to thermal regimes and wild host plant
populations. In Aim 3, the researchers will assess relationships between climate
and the occurrence and genotypic diversity of the focal pathogen. This aim will
be accomplished through field surveys, genotyping, and a citizen science project
coupled with a course-based undergraduate research experience. Those data will
be compared to predictions from a version of the metapopulation model
parameterized for the focal study system. The project will integrate student
training in a course-based undergraduate research experience class with data
management and communication training to undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.