* 2304209
* RAPID: Investigating Social Influence and Mitigating Disinformation Campaigns in Non-English Social Media
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Morteza Dehghani, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,926.00

Non-English Twitter and other social media have served as public spaces for
activists in non-Western countries to express opinions and exchange information
during public protests. However, cyber-attacks by different actors have been
used to distort the news, malevolently distract audiences, interrupt collective
action, and foster affective polarization and outgroup hate. The project team
will be studying how cyber-attacks and communication in this online world are
correlated with offline protests, violence, and state action. The project team
is collecting a large representative corpus of Non-English social media. The
team is building tools to identify misinformation and its sources in order to
provide a more secure and trustworthy cyberspace to everyday users who rely on
social media for receiving news.

Given the scientific significance of the corpus being collected, along with the
potential security concerns of this domain, the project team is working on a
data sharing agreement for researchers interested in studying this corpus while
providing a level of security and anonymity to users. Part of the data is being
annotated for bots, misinformation, and different types of rhetoric. The data
will be used to design and optimize models of bot and troll detection for this
domain that will be incorporated in browser plug-ins to help users detect
problematic information and accounts. The interdisciplinary project will advance
our basic understanding of the role of online communication and offline violence
in an understudied cultural setting, adding to the emerging line of work on
online behaviors outside Western democracies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.