* 2304903
* Machine Learning Models for Interpreting Molecular Structure from Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectra
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brandon Rotavera, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Brandon Rotavera and Geoff Smith at the University of
Georgia are developing new machine learning tools to facilitate identification
of the structure of molecules from their gas phase spectroscopy. The machine-
learning models target >95% accuracy (based on validation experiments using
models with known structure), to provide confidence in predicting critical
details of molecular structure â€“ particularly for elusive molecules that are
important in chemical science and related engineering applications. This project
is expected to have broader scientific impact by contributing new data-informed
modeling tools that provide predictive capabilities to support innovative
methods for the identification of molecules that are important to
photochemistry, chemical kinetics, chemical physics, combustion processes, and
atmospheric chemistry. The project will provide research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, including veterans.

Data-enabled computational science such as machine learning (ML) offers critical
insights for ongoing development of sustainable energy technologies, which rely
extensively on understanding fundamental chemical mechanisms of elusive radicals
that are central to next-generation biofuel combustion. Success of this effort
is predicated on the ability to identify multi-functional intermediates,
including substituted cyclic ethers, organic hydroperoxides, and other complex
species. Isomer-resolved vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectroscopy is a cutting-edge
tool to detect such species via differential absorption coupled with mass
spectrometry. This project leverages such measurements to develop new data-
enabled ML tools to advance analysis and interpretation of molecular structure.
Resulting insights will facilitate detection and recognition of chemical species
relevant to tropospheric chemistry, combustion chemistry, and other areas.
Specifically, the Rotavera/Smith team is working to convert elements of
previously unassigned VUV absorption spectra to specific isomers and/or
stereoisomers. Resulting chemical insights may allow one to link isomers to
specific reaction pathways on potential energy surfaces that, as an example,
underpin numerical combustion models needed to accelerate the design of
sustainable hybrid combustion systems. For this project, the principal
investigators are using several promising ML methods to identify functional
groups and other molecular motifs: (1) deep neural networks, (2) boosted
decision trees and (3) support vector machines (SVMs). Such methods will be
particularly useful for identifying functional groups in molecules for which
authentic standards are not available commercially and which are difficult or
impossible to synthesize.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.