* 2304432
* Stability in Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Otis Chodosh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2026
* USD 546,334.00

Many phenomena arising naturally in science, engineering, and mathematics can be
described by configurations seeking to minimize some energy. For example,
choosing an optimal driving route could involve minimizing the total distance
traveled or the total energy consumed by the vehicle. The mathematical study of
such questions is known as the Calculus of Variations. Mathematicians seek to
improve our big-picture understanding of questions like "what does the optimal
configuration look like?" or "if I deviate slightly from the optimal
configuration, how much more energy do I use?" The principal researcher's work
is focused on such problems that arise geometrically. For example, just like the
optimal driving route might minimize the length between the starting and ending
points, a soap film spanning a wire loop can be modeled by saying that it tends
to form the configuration that minimizes the surface area among all possible
shapes spanning the loop. Closely related ideas include functionals from
materials science that model contact between distinct phases of matter. Even
though these are natural and well-studied settings, many basic questions about
the shape and nature of optimal configurations remain unsolved. These projects
will focus on the notion of "stability" which is related to the question of how
a configuration compares to nearby-less optimal-configurations, and specifically
will study the ramifications of stability for such questions about optimal
configurations. One key component of these activities will involve training the
next generation of researchers to tackle such problems. This will be
accomplished by mentoring and teaching as well as creating publicly accessible
educational materials describing cutting edge research topics.

This research program will focus on stable minimal hypersurfaces and related
problems. Jointly with Chao Li, the principal investigator has recently solved
the stable Bernstein problem in four-dimensions: a complete stable minimal
hypersurface in four-dimensional Euclidean space is flat. A series of questions
will be studied that are connected to stable minimal hypersurfaces as well as
related problems such as scalar curvature, with the eventual goal of
understanding stable Bernstein problem in higher dimensions. Similar problems
will be investigated for related areas such as the Allen-Cahn equation. These
projects will also consider the relationship of stability and scalar curvature
comparison geometry, as well as investigate weaker forms of stability (finite
Morse index) as it relates to the min-max constructions of minimal (and other)
surfaces. For example, these projects will investigate the area-spectrum
(p-widths) of other surfaces, following work with Christos Mantoulidis computing
the p-widths of the two-sphere. The PI will continue to mentor graduate students
and postdocs, as well as continue to give classes and minicourses related to
these areas of research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.