* 2304388
* SBIR Phase II:  An AI-Enhanced Angiographic System to Guide Endovascular Treatment of Intracranial Aneurysms
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mohammad Mahdi Shiraz Bhurwani, QAS.AI INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,862.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is improving the surgical outcome for patients undergoing neuro-
endovascular interventions for the treatment of intracranial aneurysms (IAs).
IAs affect 6% of the population and IA rupture results in lethal hemorrhagic
strokes, which account for ~25% of cerebrovascular deaths despite improvements
in management. Most ruptured IA patients (~65%) die due to the initial bleed or
its immediate complications. Of the survivors, ~50% are left disabled and
dependent on others for daily activities. When IAs become symptomatic and
medical therapy or lifestyle changes are ineffective, treatment could involve
neuro-endovascular interventions. Although these surgical approaches provide
reliable and fast access to the lesion with fewer complications than open skull
surgery, they do not achieve complete IA healing, with as many as 30% of the
cases requiring repeated interventions. The artificial intelligence technology
developed in this project will allow real-time assessment of the surgery
progress by analyzing images acquired through the angiographic unit. The
solution will provide the odds of failure to achieve healing of the IAs before
the patient leaves the surgical suite.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will support
development of the worldâ€™s first artificial intelligence platform that enables
real-time informed decision support for image-guided neuro interventions to
treat intracranial aneurysms. The technology uses imaging biomarkers extracted
from routinely acquired angiograms during image-guided endovascular procedures
and machine learning methods to account for large heterogeneity in patient
pathology, neuro-interventionalist approach, and imaging equipment
characteristics. The platform includes multiple innovative aspects: 1) a fully
automated method to identify the location and extent of the IA, (2)
instantaneous extraction of the imaging biomarkers, (3) prognosis of the
surgical outcome at one-year post-procedure in a fraction of a second to allow
neuro-interventionalist to readjust the endovascular therapy, and (4) full
integration with the angiographic systems regardless of the manufacturer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.