* 2304265
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-invasive Closed Loop Neuromodulation to Treat Obstructive Sleep Apnea
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Desmond Keenan, NEUROSOMNICSLLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,942.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a non-invasive, externally worn appliance for
treating obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a condition affecting over 88 million
Americans (26% of the American adult population). Those impacted by OSA are at
risk of serious comorbidities such as diabetes, stroke, and heart disease. Many
sufferers remain untreated due to intolerance to current treatment options with
adherence and compliance rates as low as 40%. The economic impact is estimated
at $30 billion resulting in $150 billion aggregate indirect costs due to motor
and workplace accidents as well as productivity losses each year. The technology
aims to capture part of the $18 billion sleep device market which remains
significantly under penetrated due to approximately 80 million undiagnosed cases
in the US alone. This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
aims to develop a non-invasive, dental neurostimulation device capable of
activating the motor nerve fibers supplying the muscles responsible for dilating
the upper airway in a controlled, non-perceptible manner. The appliance will be
integrated with multiple sensing and stimulation electrodes to activate precise
nerve branches in order to provide continuous innervation of relevant upper
airway muscle groups, without interfacing directly with the nerve branch itself.
Algorithms employing machine learning will be used to process neural electrode
feedback signals and control electrical field stimulation waveforms. The project
will consist of appliance design, benchtop testing, and overnight sleep studies
in patients to build datasets and construct new algorithms. A software
application will then be developed to automate routines in real-time in order to
demonstrate concept feasibility of a new non-invasive therapy for obstructive
sleep apnea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.