* 2304430
* SBIR Phase II:  An Injectable Protein Matrix to Enhance the Stability of Autologous Fat Grafts
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Stefan Roberts, INSOMA BIO INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 979,197.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation and Research (SBIR) Phase
II Project will improve clinical outcomes for the thousands of patients globally
who undergo craniofacial repair surgery each year. Facial disfigurement, whether
congenital or acquired, can have profound physical and psychosocial implications
including altered body image, reduced quality of life, and poor societal
integration. Fat grafting is one of the most rapidly growing procedures in
facial reconstructive surgery due to its lack of reliance on foreign or
synthetic materials, safe harvest, and minimal surgical risk. While fat grafting
has potential to make groundbreaking strides in facial reconstruction, the
technique is held back by unreliable volume and shape loss. Craniofacial repairs
are particularly challenging for surgeons given the requirement for exquisite
control of graft shape and volume. The product supported by this proposal has
the capacity to dramatically improve the shape, volume, and survivability of
grafted fat. This technology has the potential to not only provide a novel and
innovative option for clinicians facing challenging craniofacial cases, but
success in this beachhead market will also support the rapidly growing utility
of fat grafting in other procedures such as breast reconstruction, amputation
site bulking, and hand/foot pad repair.

The proposed project is focused on the development and commercialization of a
recombinant, protein-based biopolymer engineered from human elastin to enhance
the use of fat grafting in craniofacial reconstruction. This product is one of
the first materials to make use of a new paradigm in understanding protein
engineering: that highly disordered proteins with defined 3D structure play key
roles in the mechanical and biological activity of the body. Using iterative
design and molecular engineering of specific protein ordered and disordered
domains, the team has generated a new class of biomaterials that are uniquely
suited to meet the key criteria for a fat grafting support matrix including: (1)
a temperature-dependent phase transition from a liquid to a moldable solid at
body temperature, (2) a porous matrix that allows cellular infiltration and
supports long-term viability of the tissue in vivo as well as the
vascularization required for tissue viability, and (3) enhanced protein
stability that allows simple use at the point-of-care with minimal modification
to current clinical practice. This Phase II project will focus on core needs for
scale-up, toxicity studies, biocompatibility, and large animal efficacy
evaluations in preparation for regulatory submission, clinical evaluation, and
commercial approval.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.