* 2304833
* Elucidating Bio-Nano Interface Atomic Structure and Peptide Directed Nanoparticle Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Gregory Holland, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2026
* USD 472,690.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Gregory Holland of San Diego State University is
developing atomic and molecular level structural understanding of nano-bio
interfaces and the influence of nanoparticle curvature, mesoporosity and
morphology on biomolecular ligand structure, dynamics and organization on
nanoparticle surfaces. The inorganic cores and the biomolecular ligand coatings
are structurally distinct entities but strongly influence each other
synergistically determining the collective properties of the nanoparticle
system. The systems of interest include a range of silica nanostructures with
varying morphology and naturally inspired hydroxyapatite nanomaterials
functionalized with protein- and lipid-based ligands. Elucidating the atomic,
molecular and nanoscale detail of biomolecular assembly on nanomaterials,
developing novel peptide-directed nanoparticle syntheses and understanding the
surface chemistry of biomolecules on nanoparticles is the research focus. This
fundamental chemical knowledge could contribute to the development of next
generation devices and sensors that couple nanomaterials with biomolecular
functionality. The project is creating valuable research training opportunities
for students at various levels that is further integrated with outreach activity
development. Dr. Holland is building a highly interdisciplinary research and
education program on nanoparticle surface characterization involving broad
participation of graduate, undergraduate and High School interns contributing to
the training of a diverse workforce.

The vast majority of chemically synthesized and naturally occurring
nanostructures, regardless of their chemical compositions, inorganic core,
morphology and crystallinity, are coated with a ligand shell. The primary goal
of this research is to determine the atomic and molecular level structure of
nano-bio interfaces and to exploit biomolecules, including peptides and lipids
as ligands in nanoparticle synthetic strategies. There are two main foci: (1) to
investigate biomolecules assembled on a range of nanostructured silicas
including colloidal monodisperse spheres, highly defective, branched fumed
silica, and mesoporous silica nanoparticles where the behavior of biomolecules
encapsulated within nanopores is the focus; and (2) naturally inspired
hydroxyapatite nanorods and nanosheets synthesized with peptides as the
templating agents. A combination of physical/analytical techniques will be used
in the research, including solid-state NMR spectroscopy, electron microscopy and
molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) to determine the structure and assembly of
peptides and lipids at the interface of these systems and elucidate the
influence of nanoparticle curvature and morphology on ligand architecture. This
work is expanding on the synthetic and characterization methods available to the
global nanoscience community for improved fundamental understanding of nano-
biostructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.