* 2304352
* SBIR Phase I: Scientific Discovery Translation of Snow-Covered Road Perception Software to a Lane Detection in Snow (LDIS) Product
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Zachary Asher, REVISION AUTONOMY INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is improved automotive transportation safety, usability, and
equity for the general public which reduces the annual 5,300 fatalities, 418,000
injuries, and billion-dollar losses from inclement weather crashes in the United
States. The technology identifies the driving lane using camera data processing
in challenging driving conditions such as congested intersections and bridges,
dark tunnels, and during sun glare and active snowfall. Addressing these
problems also enables U.S. technology competitiveness in the global automotive
market, development of technologies relevant to national defense and energy
efficiency applications, expansions of existing university courses, and
entrepreneurial engagement from underrepresented communities. The foundation for
the proposed research is the utilization of camera and global positioning data
specifically for navigation in snow using real-time machine learning methods
without an overreliance on deep learning. This technology can be implemented in
current vehicles, enabling a widespread commercial impact and a strong means to
grow a viable business that is generating tax revenue and offering technology
jobs to the local community.

The strong technical innovation of this work is a hierarchical computer vision
system built using a resilience engineering methodology, individually tuned
classifications, camera and GPS fusion, and fast processing machine learning.
This system provides verification of successful performance with respect to
human-observed ground truth without an overreliance on deep learning so that it
can be successfully validated by automotive companies using standard practices.
This innovation allows current driving assistance products to remain functional
when they are needed most: in low visibility, low traction situations. This
research aims to verify the innovation in two-lane intersections, bridges,
tunnels, under sun glare conditions, in 100+ miles of active snowfall, and in
instances of misleading environmental information. Data for these instances will
be collected and the existing technology will be modified and improved.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.