* 2304501
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost Isotope Battery for Long-Lived Applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kirsten Adams, NU PLANET PHARMACEUTICAL RADIOISOTOPES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2024
* USD 274,821.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes creating radioisotope materials which
can be used for high performance power production decay batteries used in deep
space, medical applications, unmanned drones, and other uses. These materials
will be able to provide electrical power for months or years at a time enabling
game changing technologies by enabling ubiquitous and readily available nuclear
power to become a reality. Not only can this technology be used for power, but
the specific isotopes produced can also support efforts to fight cancer, perform
medical imaging, and explore natural resources. According to Allied Market
Research, nuclear driven battery markets are expected to reach $87.2 billion by
2026.The unique capabilities of radioisotopes can provide many benefits in many
different areas, but their rarity often limits their use.

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to generate a power-producing radioisotope
material from a naturally-occurring source and show that it can be used for
power in a long-lived nuclear battery. The technical hurdles for this project
include being able to use radioisotopes not currently considered for decay
batteries and generating useful amounts of radioisotopes for an attractive cost.
In order to overcome these hurdles, a functioning prototype will be constructed
and driven with isotopes made at NPPR to empirically show feasibility. This will
be accomplished by demonstrating the ability to induce radioactive decay in the
feedstock, collecting the radioisotope produced, and showing its use in a power
source. With the developments made in this project, radioisotopes will be more
readily available. Medical, aerospace, defense, and many other markets will see
great opportunities for advancement with the newly available materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.