* 2304624
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Deep Learning Technologies for Designing Humanized Antibody
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Zahra Hemmatian, MARWELL BIO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,822.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate antibody design and engineering
through the development of proprietary computational approaches. Compared to
conventional antibody drug development approaches that are often lengthy,
costly, and inefficient, this innovation may offer a more efficient and cost-
effective alternative. The proposed approach aims to create better therapeutic-
grade antibodies while unlocking novel antibody design possibilities. The market
opportunity addressed by the proposed technology is significant, as the global
therapeutic antibody market for cancer and infectious diseases is projected to
reach $235 billion by 2028. This project has the potential to transform the
field of antibody discovery and provide new therapeutic options for patients.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an artificial intelligence (AI)-based platform that efficiently designs novel
antibody drug candidates with possible lower toxicity and immunogenicity risks.
The research will involve developing novel and proprietary AI based models to
create best-in-class antibody therapeutics and validate them through state-of
the-art in-silico experiments. To successfully complete this Phase I project the
company plans to: a) develop a novel computational model to design antibody hit
sequences, b) demonstrate the scalability of the proposed computational model in
designing antibody hit sequences against diverse targets, c) assess biological
values of the antibody hit sequences predicted by the computational model. The
expected technical outcomes involve a more rapid and efficient process for
designing therapeutic antibodies, resulting in lower development expenses and a
quicker path to market. The AI technologies have the potential to design the
most promising therapeutic antibodies to treat infectious diseases and cancer in
months rather than years, reducing the time and resources needed for the pre-
clinical development of therapeutic antibodies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.