* 2304616
* SBIR Phase I:  Regolith size sorting technology for space resource utilization
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Gary Lai, INTERLUNE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 246,028.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a core enabling technology for
lunar in situ resource utilization: the ability to sort “Moon dirt” (lunar
regolith) by particle size. Size sorting is an important capability for nearly
all in situ resource utilization activities that use lunar regolith as a
feedstock material. By enabling raw lunar regolith to be sorted into multiple
streams by particle size, the technology will provide appropriate feedstocks for
lunar oxygen extraction systems, lunar 3-dimensional printers, and other
applications. The use of the Moon’s resources is a disruptive capability that
will enable missions there to “live off the land,” making the development of
this technology important for government agencies and industry alike. The many
potential applications of lunar in situ resource utilization promise to make
this a multi-billion dollar market.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and demonstrate a novel regolith
size sorting system for use on the Moon that has 10x smaller volume, 5x lower
mass, and greater reliability than traditional devices such as vibratory sieves
(vibrating screens). The project will also develop a new lunar regolith simulant
designed to mimic real lunar regolith’s particle size distribution and flow
properties. While size sorting on Earth is well understood, size sorting
dynamics on the Moon are not well understood and size sorting is identified as a
gap in lunar technology road maps. The team will address performance and
scalability risks by developing a device which uses rotating paddles to provide
centrifugal motion to sieve the particles through a screen. A variety of
centrifuge aspect ratios, paddle configurations, and rotational speeds will be
tested to optimize throughput. Additionally, blinding (plugging) of the sieve by
regolith particles will be characterized at different rotational speeds and
addressed, if necessary, by developing and testing anti-blinding features on the
rotating paddles, such as brushes and low-friction wipers. Finally, the device
will be demonstrated to operate in lunar gravity on a parabolic aircraft flight
using the new simulant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.