* 2304837
* Development of Multidimensional Ion Mobility-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (IMSn-FT-ICR MSn) Tools for the Characterization of Complex Mixtures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Fahad Saeed, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Environmental Chemical Sciences
and the Environmental Engineering programs, the groups of Francisco Fernandez-
Lima and Fahad Saeed at Florida International University are developing new
analytical detection and processing tools for the analysis of complex mixtures,
with a focus on dissolved organic matter (DOM). DOM is the fundamental source of
bioavailable carbon transported from terrestrial environments to aquatic
ecosystems and plays a crucial ecological role as a source of nutrients for
aquatic microorganisms, as protection for aquatic organisms by controlling light
penetration, and as a medium to mobilize metals and aquatic contaminants. Using
newly devised analytical protocols, the project is addressing long-standing
basic DOM science/environmental questions and providing a data resource for the
research community. The project outreach program – FIUMASS - seeks to enhance
learning and exposure to modern analytical techniques for students (including
those underrepresented in science) in partnership with local community colleges.

The team aims to develop and integrate complementary, multidimensional
analytical separations and data processing tools for the characterization of
complex mixtures at the molecular structural level, with a focus on dissolved
organic matter (DOM). To this end, a platform combining tandem ion mobility
spectrometry and ultra-high-resolution Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometry (IMSn-FT-ICR MSn) is being developed, along with data
acquisition, processing, and visualization tools. The existing FIUMASS
educational and outreach program is being expanded to include offerings related
to “Following Environmental Transformations at the Molecular Level.” The
program’s multi-level approach integrates seminar series, curriculum development
activities at the undergraduate and graduate level, laboratory open-house
events, hands-on MS experiences, and MS visual experiments and summer
internships for students from underrepresented minorities (URM). Working
synergistically with local community colleges and URM minority programs at FIU,
this plan seeks to enhance learning and exposure to the modern MS techniques and
to recruit URM students into STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.