* 2304863
* CPS: Small: Neuro-Symbolic Learning and Control with High-Level Knowledge Inference
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Zhe Xu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The use of artificial intelligence in cyber-physical systems is limited by
challenges such as data availability, task environment complexity, and the need
for expressive and interpretable high-level knowledge representations. To
address these challenges, this project aims to develop a set of neuro-symbolic
learning and control tools by integrating machine learning, control theory, and
formal methods. The results are expected to find application across cyber-
physical systems such as robotic systems, autonomous systems, and networked
cyber-physical systems. Validation in a testbed environments should facilitate
safe deployments in real-world physical environments with provable guarantees
and robustness against potential adversaries.

The research tasks mainly focus on improving the data efficiency,
interpretability, scalability, and resiliency of the neuro-symbolic approaches
in cyber-physical systems, with special focus on cyber-physical systems where
extensive online interactions may not be safe or feasible, but high-level
knowledge can be useful in completing tasks in complex and adversarial
environments with provable correctness guarantees. Specifically, the neuro-
symbolic learning and control algorithms offer the following three key features.
Firstly, they incorporate template-free inference of high-level knowledge (e.g.,
temporal logic formulas) from uncertain data into neuro-symbolic learning to
enable data-efficient reinforcement learning with both offline training and
online fine-tuning. Secondly, the approaches are capable of achieving scalable
and resilient reinforcement learning in multi-agent adversarial environments
where high-level knowledge can be inferred for expediting the agents' learning
processes. Lastly, the algorithms provide provable guarantees on complex task
specifications using neuro-symbolic learning-based adaptive control with unknown
dynamics. The results of this research will be shared through a range of
educational activities, including undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as
research workshops. Additionally, outreach programs will be implemented to
engage K-12 students and diverse groups in the scientific and engineering
communities and broaden their participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.