* 2304969
* Collaborative Research: Syntheses and Solution-Phase Properties of Rigid Conjugated Ladder Polymer Chains
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiaodan Gu, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Lei Fang of Texas A&M University and Xiaodan Gu of
the University of Southern Mississippi are preparing and investigating solution-
phase properties of rigid-rod conjugated ladder polymers. Conjugated polymers
are a unique class of polymers with semiconducting properties resembling that of
the chemical element silicon, unlike commonly used insulating polymers. They are
extensively used in light emitting devices (LEDs), flexible electronics,
sensors, biomedical imaging, and other applications that utilize the
optoelectronic property of these polymeric materials. Conjugated ladder
polymers, on the other hand, are a type of double stranded polymers with the
bond connectivity resembling a ladder, so that the repeating units along the
polymer main chain are all fused in the form of conjugated rings. Such a unique
constitution imparts a conjugated ladder polymer with distinct polymer physics
properties in comparison with conventional single stranded polymers. The studies
associated with this project will focus on polymer-solvent interactions, single
chain conformation, as well as chain diffusion dynamics in a series of
conjugated ladder polymers that are soluble in common organic solvents.
Additionally, synthetic methodologies will be developed to further gain control
over polymer’s chain lengths and distribution of molar masses. This research has
the potential to impact other fundamental scientific disciplines, including
synthetic chemistry, polymer physics for semi-rigid polymers, biomacromolecules,
polymer processing, and organic electronics. The education plan will focus on
revitalizing and modernizing undergraduate chemistry curricula by implementing
student-performed “Nobel Prize Reaction” experiments in undergraduate organic
laboratory courses at both institutions. Professor Gu will additionally conduct
extensive outreach activities among historically regional black colleges and
universities in Mississippi via site visits and workshops.

This research will aim to develop new fundamental understandings of the
solution-phase properties of rigid-rod conjugated ladder polymers. The specific
objectives will focus on (1) design and synthesis of defect-free conjugated
ladder polymers that can be truly dissolved in organic solvents without
aggregation, (2) understanding and quantification of polymer-solvent interaction
and chain conformation of these model conjugated ladder polymers in solution,
(3) development of controlled chain-growth polymerization methods based on
catalyst transfer polymerization to synthesize conjugated ladder polymers
featuring precisely tailored molar masses and narrow dispersity, and (4)
establishing quantitative correlation between molar masses of conjugated ladder
polymers with chain flexibility and diffusion dynamics. The combined
collaborative efforts have the potential to advance fundamental knowledge of the
synthetic chemistry and solution-phase polymer physics of rigid polymers and
enable rational design principles for various applications of conjugated ladder
polymers. These applications include organic field effect transistors, organic
electrochemical transistors, actuators, electrochromic devices, photo detectors,
and other optoelectronic devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.