* 2304846
* Low-cost Manufacturing of Bioinspired Damage-Tolerant Ceramic Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Majid Minary-Jolandan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2024
* USD 79,357.00

Despite favorable properties of ceramic-metal composites, they have not been
applied commercially to date, due in large part to processing cost and
challenges. The conventional method for manufacturing lamellar ceramic-metal
composites is melt-infiltration of the metal phase into the gaps of the ceramic
scaffold. The smaller the gap, the more difficult the infiltration. Because of
the poor wetting between most metals and ceramics, the process requires high
pressure and temperature to squeeze the molten metal into the gaps in the
ceramic phase. This project aims at developing manufacturing strategies inspired
by nature to enable low-cost fabrication of ceramic-metal composites. Natural
materials such as bone and the nacreous part of sea-shells have developed
structural composites, using a set of rather ordinary constituents, which
exhibit extraordinary mechanical properties. For example, seashells convert a
brittle ceramic material to a super-tough material (nacre) by incorporation of
around 5% polymer, in a layered ?brick-and-mortar? microstructure. The
scientific community has been very successful in identifying the design
principles of biological structural composites. However, manufacturing knowledge
gaps persist. These include the challenge of infiltration of small gaps between
ceramic bricks, the challenge of obtaining ductile (while strong) mortars; the
challenge in design of proper (metal-ceramic) interfaces; and the high cost.
Low-cost processes for fabrication of metal&#8722;ceramic composites can
substantially increase their applications in various industries including
automotive, aerospace, oil and defense, in products such as high performance
wear-resistance parts, cutting tools, lightweight structural composites, and
aero-engine components. For these reasons, the project directly impacts American
economic welfare and national security. The educational objective of the project
is focused on increasing the diversity in nanotechnology- STEM through
?NanoExplorer? summer program for high school students, with particular emphasis
on female students, including Latinos.

The goal of this research is to investigate the mechanisms underlying processing
and manufacturing of ceramic composites for damage-tolerant structural
applications. The project is focused on understanding infiltration of
nanotwinned metals into nano-gaps (<100 nm) of a 3-dimensional porous ceramic
scaffold by pulsed electrodeposition. A conservative estimate shows that the
energy consumption in this process is more than 200-fold smaller than the
conventional molten metal infiltration process. The liquid electrolyte in
electrodeposition has much less viscosity compared to molten metals, and hence
can effectively penetrate into the small gaps between the ceramic bricks. A
class of metals that defeat the trade-off between strength and toughness are
?nanotwinned? metals. Nanotwinned metals have high density of coherent twin
boundaries, which has been shown to enhance both strength and ductility. Pulsed
electrodeposition is one of the primary methods of synthesis of nanotwinned
metals. To address the metal-ceramic interface challenge, electroless deposition
of a thin metal layer on ceramic bricks is planned, which will result in uniform
coating, as well as strong adhesion between ceramics and metals. This research,
if successful, will result in new fundamental knowledge in following subjects:
(i) Growth mechanism and microstructure of nanotwinned metals directly
synthesized by pulsed electrodeposition into a laminated ceramic scaffold; (ii)
Kinetics of pulsed electrodeposition process in nano-channels (<100 nm); and
(iii) Infiltration of a nano-porous ceramic scaffold by electrodeposition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.