* 2304955
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Instrument Development:  Ångström-Scale Operando Spectroscopic Imaging at Heterogeneous Electrochemical Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Naihao Chiang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 381,999.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) Program, Naihao Chiang from the University of Houston and
Lindsey Madison from Colby College are studying solution phase heterogeneous
electrochemical systems using advances in hyperspectral imaging and simulation
tools. Chemical reactions that occur at an electrode surface are composed of a
mixture of molecules, which leads to varying atomic scale heterogeneity in
composition, electronic structure, and morphology. To better understand these
complex systems, Dr. Chiang and his students will construct a custom-built
electrochemical tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (EC-TERS) instrument to
experimentally characterize electrode surfaces while Dr. Madison and her
students will provide complementary information to determine and predict
molecular structures on the electrode surfaces. Chiang and Madison are also
developing after-school outreach activities to engage with students in primary
and secondary education.

In this collaborative project, synergistic computational and experimental
studies of electrochemical reactions at the atomic level will be studied through
the development of an electrochemical tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (EC-TERS)
imaging instrument. Predictions on the effect of small molecule oxidation states
on surface binding configurations and their non-resonant Raman response will be
made using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) and by time dependent density
functional theory (TD-DFT). By improving capabilities in spatial resolution
through advances in instrumentation, the interplay between electrical potential,
absorbed molecules, and electrolytes at EC interfaces will be studied. Proof-of-
concept systems will be explored to guide future applications in advanced
electrochemistry applications such as batteries and catalysts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.