* 2304250
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an enzymatic method to produce compounds found in human milk at commercial scale
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Sue Dagher, MAMMAE BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 271,443.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to assess an affordable enzymatic method for producing
marketable natural compounds usually found in human milk. Once this strategy is
validated, it could be implemented by domestic and industrial users. The
technology is capable of transforming the lactose in milk to highly desirable
compounds. These rare and valuable compounds can help enhance growth of
beneficial gut bacteria and are building blocks of human breast milk. These
compounds are widely desirable to fortify infant food, where they play a role in
intestinal health, supporting balanced gut microbiota, benefiting immunity, and
improving cognitive brain health. Furthermore, new research suggests that
affordable technologies for food fortification containing stable bioactive
natural compounds will benefit the healthy gut beyond infancy and across life
stages. As such, this technology opens new business opportunities for food and
dietary supplement manufacturers aiming to develop unique gut-strengthening
nutrition solutions.

The proposed project will enzymatically generate compounds found in human milk,
including N-acetylglucosamine (LacNAc). The research plan consists of testing
the scalability of enzyme Î²-hexosyltransferase (BHT) production, which will be
heterologously produced by K. phaffi. To validate industrial scalability,
product generation, and yields from 100 L working volume bioprocessing reactors,
the BHT generated will be utilized to catalyze the repeated addition of
galactose to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). The products, in addition to
galactooligosaccharides, will include LacNAc disaccharides, generated by
sequential transgalactosylation reactions. The recovered products will be tested
in preclinical safety/toxicity studies. Data collected during this study will
allow for a more precise cost-benefit analysis, which will include product
yields, carbon balances, microbiome benefits, and metabolic data. Cost savings
are expected from a more efficient enzymatic biosynthesis method for producing
LacNAc due to BHT specificity, synthesis in one-step reactions, low-cost
substrates, sustainability, and overall low environmental impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.