* 2304609
* STTR Phase I:Constellation of Nanosatellite Radars for Near-Hourly, Global Ocean Surface Vector Winds
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Michael Walton, CARE WEATHER TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a significant improvement in the accuracy of
weather forecasts by increasing the refresh rate of sea wind measurements ten-
fold. This forecast improvement will increase the economic competitiveness of
the United States by improving efficiency in maritime, agriculture, and
logistics industries. Improved weather forecasts will advance the health and
welfare of the American public by enabling earlier storm warnings that save
thousands of lives. Improved weather forecasts will support national defense,
while also saving hundreds of millions of dollars in false-alarm hurricane
evacuations. Sea wind data will also directly benefit maritime operators,
including recreational sailors, ocean carriers and fishers. Wind map and
forecast subscriptions from maritime customers represent a $3 billion commercial
opportunity.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to study the feasibility of increasing the
refresh rate of sea wind measurements ten-fold using a constellation of
nanosatellite radars (scatterometers). Current satellites for measuring sea
winds are prohibitively expensive and performance has not substantially improved
since they were introduced decades ago. The objective of this research is to
evaluate the measurement accuracy, cost, and refresh rate of the proposed
nanosatellite scatterometers. Additional objectives study the regulatory
feasibility, post-processing feasibility, and commercial feasibility. The
research includes calculations of the radar signal, heat, data geolocation,
cost, mass, data rate, latency, radio interference, and license feasibility. The
research also includes simulations of the radar measurement geometry, the post-
processing, the wind maps that will be generated by the scatterometer, as well
as the constellation, its operations, and its replenishment requirements. The
studies in this project answer key feasibility and performance questions posed
by potential users. The results, such as data quality, availability, and
simulated sample data, will be used in customer discovery to ensure the needs of
potential users are met.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.