* 2304963
* CAS: Fluorine Beyond PFAS: Pathways to Sustainable Fluorochemical Design Through Environmental Degradation Studies and Fluorine Mass Balances
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* William Pomerantz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 567,231.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, William Arnold, William Pomerantz, and Sebastian Behrens at the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities will investigate the environmental presence
and degradation of mass-produced chemicals, specifically pharmaceuticals and
pesticides that contain one or more fluorine atoms. While the poly- and
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) class of chemicals has received much attention,
there is limited understanding about the identity and fate of other fluorinated
chemicals that reach the environment and whether unknown, persistent byproducts
are formed. This project will expose multiple students to green chemical design
principles and offer interdisciplinary training in fundamental environmental,
synthetic, and computational chemistry as well as the biological processes and
engineering concepts involved in water treatment. Partnerships with government,
utility, and industry/consulting partners will provide a means to communicate
with those actively seeking to assess and regulate fluorinated contaminants.
Forums for communities impacted by chemical pollution facilitated by a community
artist will be used to share perspectives and concerns regarding potential
solutions to pollution issues.

A major impetus for this work is the incorporation of fluorine into increasingly
more organic chemicals, even as the most widespread and environmentally
persistent fluorinated actors (i.e., PFAS) are phased out. Given that there are
few natural fluorinated organic molecules, it is critically important to
understand how the incorporation of fluorine into organic molecules affects the
full suite of potential degradation pathways in natural and engineered aquatic
environments and, in particular, what persistent fluorinated products form from
both chemically- and biologically-driven processes. The project will use a
screening approach to identify fluorinated functional groups resistant to
transformation. The reaction rates for abiotic and biological degradation
processes will be measured and fluorinated reaction products identified. Lastly,
a method using fluorine nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will be
developed to quantify fluorinated compounds in environmental samples.
Ultimately, this information will guide the development of molecules that
require fluorine incorporation to obtain a desired effect, yet are able to
breakdown into innocuous products under environmental conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.