* 2304014
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing quantum and supporting technologies in the Northern Intermountain States (MT, WY, ID)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Lee Spangler, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alan Cohen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on Quantum
Information Science and Engineering (QISE), an area of critical importance to
the nation's security and future economy. In classical computing, information is
encoded and processed in bits that can exist in one of two states, typically
depicted as 0 or 1, and each bit acts independently. Quantum bits (qubits)
behave fundamentally different and can be placed in a superposition state,
representing a combination of all possible configurations of the qubit. This can
potentially solve complex problems beyond our current computing capability.
Additionally, quantum systems can be entangled, which links the behavior of two
separate items. This can increase quantum computing capability and provide
unbreakable encryption in quantum communication. QISE has the potential to
revolutionize all information science areas, and leadership in this field
represents a huge economic opportunity. The region of service for this
Development Award includes the states of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, which
contain one of only two NSF-funded Quantum Foundries nationally, multiple
existing quantum research groups, and multiple companies that are part of the
Quantum Supply Chain producing not only quantum materials but also other
photonic, electronic, cryogenic and classical computing components required to
stabilize, encode and decode, transmit or interface with quantum computers and
information systems.

University-led use-inspired research will include investigating quantum devices
by Boise State University's Quantum DNA group, new methods of designing and
fabricating topological Josephson junction qubits by the University of Wyoming,
two-dimensional quantum materials, and quantum networking by Montana State
University. Much of this work will collaborate with Montana Instruments,
Teledyne FLIR, Cylynt, Quantel, AdvR, Wavelength Electronics, Micron, and
Qubitekk. Collaborative research, with private sector input into performance
requirements and vested interest in the outcomes, will improve the probability
of translation of that research. The envisioned Engine team will comprise
educational institutions at the university, community college, and Tribal
college levels, incubator and accelerator entities, business alliances, economic
development organizations, non-profits, and state and local government economic
development-related offices. The team has a coalition of members with track
records of success in accelerating advances in emerging technologies and
industries, taking innovations to commercialization, supporting and creating
start-ups and small businesses, workforce development, and catalyzing local and
regional economic development. The Development Award will allow the team to
strengthen and coordinate these emerging partnerships as they move towards an
NSF Engine for quantum and supporting technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.