* 2304402
* Conference: 9th International Conference on Fog, Fog Collection, and Dew 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Collett, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2023
* USD 29,973.00

This project will support student and early career scientist travel to the 9th
International Conference on Fog, Fog Collection, and Dew to be held at Colorado
State University in Fort Collins from July 23-28, 2023. Held every three years,
this conference is the international scientific communityâ€™s premier
comprehensive meeting on fog and dew. The Fort Collins meeting, the first time
the conference has been held in the United States, will bring together experts
from around the globe to exchange information and stimulate new research
concerning how, when, and where fogs form, how they impact the safety of our
highways and airports, how fogs and dew provide important input of water to
water-limited ecosystems, how fogs and dew impact air pollution, and how fogs
and dew can be harvested to provide a source of fresh water in arid regions.

This project will support participation of graduate students and early career
scientists in a dynamic conference forum for the exchange of ideas and the
latest research findings from scientists interested in fog and dew chemistry,
fog microphysics, fog deposition to vegetation, dew formation on natural and
artificial surfaces, fog impacts on transportation and other infrastructure, the
collection of fog and dew for freshwater production, satellite remote sensing of
fogs and low clouds, numerical simulation of fog formation, studies of ice fog,
riming, and frost, impacts of a changing climate on fog and low cloud
occurrence, and more. Its interdisciplinary nature lends this conference a
unique character at the crossroads of meteorology, ecology, atmospheric
chemistry, cloud physics, water resources, climate, and resiliency of built
infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.