* 2304715
* 2023 Bacterial Cell Biology and Development GRC
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2023
* Erin Goley, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 22,500.00

The first Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Bacterial Cell Biology and
Development will be held at Southern New Hampshire University in Manchester, NH,
from June 4-9, 2023. This meeting will be attended by graduate students and
postdocs, and will bring together senior and junior researchers from broad
ranging disciplines to discuss and advance our understanding of all aspects of
the machinery and function of bacterial cells, with sessions on cell division,
cell fate and decision-making, cellular organization, morphology and dynamics,
cell envelope structures, cellular motility, and cell-cell interactions. The
application of novel light and electron microscopic techniques will be presented
and discussed, as well as the ability to perform single-cell studies on
bacteria. The interactions of cell biologists, microbiologists, biochemists, and
biophysicists will increase understanding of these cells, and engage with and
train junior scientists (graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and beginning
assistant professors). This engagement is a priority of the conference, along
with extensive poster sessions to allow interactions between senior and junior
scientists. NSF support will be used to defray registration fee and/or travel
costs to allow attendance of participants from these stages of their careers,
especially for members of groups historically under-represented in this field.

The science presented at the Bacterial Cell Biology and Development GRC will
cover the biochemistry and cell biology of a wide variety of bacterial phyla,
including talks on the asymmetry and dynamics of intracellular organization,
membrane biogenesis, compartments within bacterial cells, cell wall mechanics
and biogenesis, and the wide range of structures, developmental strategies,
biochemistry, and movement of many different bacterial species, including free-
living and commensal bacteria, and animal and plant pathogens. The diversity of
disciplines represented among invited speakers and discussion leaders - ranging
from genetics, cell biology and biochemistry to biophysics, bioinformatics, and
modeling - and abundant opportunities for interactions among all conference
participants is expected to inspire innovative thinking and potentiate new
perspectives and research directions in the field. In addition to advancing
fundamental understanding of bacterial cell biology and development, given the
relative simplicity and modularity of bacterial systems, the science presented
at this conference may be leveraged to advance synthetic biology and other
industrial applications. Education of a wide range of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows will increase the critical mass of future independent
investigators studying these organisms, which are critical to understanding
animal and plant health, ecosystems, and the environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.