* 2304875
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Geochemical taphonomy of a rare dicynodont bonebed and its paleobiological implications of social behavior in the stem-mammalian lineage
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Zoe Kulik, Kulik, Zoe
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Zoe T. Kulik has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to investigate
the depositional history of a rare fossil-rich bonebed that preserves over 100
fossils of a dicynodont species allied with the mammalian lineage called
Dolichuranus. Insights from this bonebed can provide a potential snapshot of
what life was like for these extinct mammal-relatives from ~240 million years
ago. For example, using the geology of the surrounding host rock,
interpretations can be made to confirm or refute if this fossil assemblage
represents a single population. Furthermore, insights from the microscopic
details of fossilized bone tissue composition can be used to reconstruct the
skeletal and histological changes that this species (and perhaps population)
experienced during growth and development to large body size. Indeed, hard
tissue histology- the study of dental and bone tissue microstructure and
composition- provide the only insights to understand growth rates in the fossil
record. To this end, the project goals are to characterize the depositional
history of the bonebed in order to contextualize palaeobiological
interpretations that can be understood from the fossilized remains that were
recovered there, which can provide new information on social behavior, evolution
of large body size, and population age structures in the deep evolutionary
history of mammals. Broader impacts of this work include (1) working with the
Field Museum of Natural History to disseminate results to a broad audience
through a temporary exhibit in the Grainger Science Hub, (2) mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students at Loyola University Chicago, and (3)
developing a curriculum for college students focused on geochemical taphonomy
and bone histology at Macalester College.

This project aims to investigate the depositional history of a dicynodont-
dominated bonebed using traditional and geochemical taphonomic approaches. This
bonebed is the lowermost occurrence in a stratigraphic succession of fossil
localities in the Lifua Member of Tanzania that will be used to assess the
degree of temporal and spatial reworking of vertebrate remains in fluvial and
floodplain deposits. In addition, this project aims to test whether morphology,
size, and age are correlated in the large dicynodont species, novel work that
has not yet been done due to the scarcity of mix-aged dicynodont assemblages.
Preliminary geochemical and traditional taphonomic results suggest that the
dicynodont bonebed preserves a homogenous taphonomic history reflective of a
single, rapid burial, but a larger sample is needed to validate that this
bonebed is a snapshot of a single population. Through independent lines of
evidence including sedimentology, petrography, bioclast preservation, trace-
element analysis, and size-age assessment through hard tissue histology, this
project will reconstruct the life history and preservational history of
dicynodonts from this bonebed from microstructural to assemblage-wide scales.
This novel combination of methods will establish a new line of inquiry in the
long- studied question of mammalian social behavior and will also fill critical
gaps in our understanding of growth and development in the most abundant group
of Permo-Triassic stem-mammals to provide valuable comparative data to identify
ontogenetic stages in dicynodonts more broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.