* 2304386
* Ion/ion Chemistry and Ion Trap Approaches for the Structural Characterization of the Lipidome
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Scott McLuckey, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 494,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Scott McLuckey and his group at Purdue University are
developing novel approaches for the structural characterization of lipid
molecules. The reactivities of molecules and the roles that they play are
intimately tied to their structures. Molecules comprised of the same atoms but
with different linkages between atoms (i.e., isomers) can have markedly
different reactivities. The chemistries associated with all forms of life are
replete with examples in which isomeric molecules play key and unique roles. As
a class of biomolecules, lipids are emerging as highly informative markers of
the biological state of an organism. The lipid complement of an organism is
referred to as its ‘lipidome’. Many examples of isomerism have been identified
in lipidomes, many of which are already known to be biologically significant.
However, tools to characterize the structural diversity of the lipidome are
lacking. Professor McLuckey and his students are inventing new tools and
approaches to characterize the lipidome, which will enable the scientific
community to generate a deeper understanding of the chemistry of life.

This project seeks to develop novel ion/ion reaction and electrodynamic ion trap
approaches for the structural characterization of ions derived from lipids
present in complex mixtures. An underlying theme of the work is to employ the
most sensitive approach to ionization while using gas-phase ion/ion reactions to
convert the initially formed ion-type to alternate ion-types that yield
structural details that a single ion-type alone cannot provide. Collision-
induced dissociation under a range of conditions will be used to probe the ion-
types generated using various reagents. Isomer distinction, for example, will be
based on differences in product ion identities and/or abundances and differences
in dissociation rates. The even-electron lipid ions generated directly by
electrospray ionization will be subjected to reactions that will lead multiple
alternate ion-types that include odd-electron ions, metal-containing ions, and
combinations thereof. This work has the potential to yield a flexible means for
the structural characterization of a variety of lipids present in complex
mixtures and, as such, could provide valuable enabling analytical technology for
the study of frontline questions in lipidomics and lipid biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.