* 2304731
* Stimulus Responsive Oligopyrrole Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Jonathan Sessler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 570,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jonathan L. Sessler of the
University of Texas at Austin and coworkers will undertake to develop new
supramolecular systems whose switching functions are manifest in terms of
changes in electronic structure, ion recognition, and self-assembly. Pursuing
the project-specific aims will enhance coworker training and provide a
technically savvy workforce. The University of Texas at Austin ia a Hispanic-
Serving Institution since 2020, and this affords the Sessler group the
opportunity to reach out to members of underserved groups as an educator and
researcher; he will devote considerable effort to providing educational
opportunities across several different strata, which include helping with local
outreach activities and teaching short courses on supramolecular chemistry and
intellectual property from an academic perspective. Supramolecular systems,
particularly those comprised of oligopyrrolic macrocycles, possessing inherent
chirality represent an unexplored frontier. This project will investigate the
influence of chirality on driving self-assembly of a chiral stacked system in an
off-equilibrium fashion. The proposed pyrrole-based chiral macrocycles will be
tested for their anion recognition properties using, inter alia, chiral sulfonic
acids and amino acids as putative substrates. Efforts will be devoted to
exploring the effect on chirality, including "outside" and "inside" binding, on
stimulus-induced ring expansion and contraction. To complement these studies,
non-conjugated chiral oligopyrrole cages bearing 3D- and belt-like morphologies
and new chiral receptors derived from the calix[3]pyrrole systems will be
prepared. Finally, receptor-based ensembles will be created to develop the
concept of chemical communication in supramolecular systems wherein small
molecule messengers are used to transfer chemical information from one discrete
recognition site to another. There is significant potential for broad, long term
scientific impact of the results of these studies upon the fundamental
understanding of molecular recognition and chemical communication in
supramolecular systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.