* 2304986
* 3D Nanoprinting via Controlled Assembly of Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 545,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Gang-yu Liu of University of
California, Davis, plans to control how molecules, such as lipid, arrange in
space, with nanometer precision. Controlling how molecules assemble represents a
frontier area of research in chemistry, requires the proposed deep understanding
of how molecules interact during the assembly processes. The work envisions
achieving these goals by, (1) enabling the delivery of ultrasmall droplet (sub-
aL) of solutions containing molecules with attractive interactions; (2)
controlling the geometry of spatial confinement during drying of droplet, and
(3) controlling the molecular packing within each structure. Better
understanding of these fundamental chemical attributes has the potential to
extend the capability of additive manufacturing to the nanometer scale, i.e., 3D
nanoprinting, which could be used for production of nanosensors, quantum
electronic devices and engineered cells and new materials. In conjunction with a
local community college, the training and research will bring graduate and
undergraduate students from under-represented groups to the forefront of
nanotechnology and help position them to be future leaders in chemistry in areas
such as 3D-nanoprinting.

Using a state-of-the-art integration of nanofluidic delivery with an atomic
force microscope, ultrasmall droplets, sub-femtoliter solutions will be
delivered to designated locations on substrates. The impact of experimental
parameters (e.g., aperture size, delivery pressure, contact time, local surface
tensions) on the individual droplet volume in the nanofluidic setup will be
systematically investigated to achieve sub-aL delivery. During solvent
evaporation, molecules will assemble as guided (or controlled) by the shrinking
droplet boundaries thereby controlling the molecular packing within each
structure. The proposed work aims to demonstrate the concept of controlled
deposition by overcoming attractive intermolecular interactions (e.g., with
carbohydrates) and collective molecular interactions (e.g., with lipids).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.