* 2304853
* Collaborative Research: Supramolecular Multi-Component Peptide Nanofibrils: Bridging Understanding at Atomic and Mesoscopic Scales with Structure and Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Cristiano Dias, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Bradley L. Nilsson of the University of Rochester,
Cristiano Dias of the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), and Edward
Egelman of the University of Virginia will study the supramolecular self-
assembly of peptides into nanofibril biomaterials. Peptides are naturally
occurring molecules found in all organisms that perform important biological
functions, including acting as signaling hormones, including such bioactive
peptides as insulin and oxytocin. Peptides can adopt different conformations
that influence how they interact with each other. Beta-sheets are one common
peptide structural motif. Peptides that assume beta-sheet conformations often
rapidly self-assemble into nanofibrils. Some of these nanofibril assemblies are
associated with protein misfolding disorders like Alzheimer’s disease and others
have been designed to be functional biomaterials. In this work, the team will
study how these peptides the co-assemble into these structures. Novel beta-sheet
materials, “rippled” beta-sheets, that are distinct from the “pleated” beta-
sheets found in nature, will be studied using experimental and computational
techniques. These efforts will provide critical insight into the structure of
both natural and artificial beta-sheets and the molecular-scale interactions
that dictate the assembly of these materials. This research is directed at
opening up new avenues for the design of next generation peptide-based
nanomaterials. Outreach activity associated with this work includes an inquiry
based mini-course on hydrogels called “The Science of Slime” which will be
conducted at the participating institutions for pre-university students from
grades 7-12. Additionally, the research teams will host high school interns for
six weeks during the summer to provide mentoring and increase exposure to
scientific research and to the chemical sciences, in general.

Under this award the collaborative Rochester, NJIT, Virginia team will
investigate the supramolecular assembly of beta-sheet nanofibrils composed of
mirror-image peptides by determining the structure of these systems with near-
atomic precision and by using computer simulations to investigate the forces
driving the formation of these assemblies. This work is directed at the rational
design of rippled beta-sheet nanofibril systems. In the first objective, cryo-
electron microscopy will be used to elucidate the structure of related pleated
and rippled beta-sheet assemblies and complementary computational analyses will
be used to rationalize their mechanisms of assembly. In the second objective,
computational methods will be used to predict and design novel self-assembled
beta-sheet peptide materials and these predictions will be tested
experimentally. The results of the experiments will be used to validate and
improve predictive computations. This work aims to provide key knowledge
regarding the molecular basis for peptide self-assembly processes that will be
relevant to understanding protein misfolding processes and for the design of
biomaterials with potential applications in energy science and biomedicine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.