* 2304461
* STTR Phase I: Rapid Dehydration and Stabilization of Biopharmaceutical Formulations at Room Temperature
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Howard Stone, INAEDIS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to serve international markets in drug formulation and delivery by
allowing the pharmaceutical industry to avoid the critical vulnerabilities that
plague traditional cold chain systems. By offering a robust solution for thermal
stabilization, the technology will have far-reaching effects on population
health and immunization. Additionally, the solution will substantially reduce
the wastage of pharmaceuticals caused by inadequate temperature control during
transportation, resulting in an annual equivalent of $35 billion. By providing
an alternative to cold chain logistics, the technology will drive economic
benefits in both pharmaceutical formulation and distribution, cementing the
position of the US as an innovator and linchpin of the global pharmaceutical
industry. This innovative method for the stabilization of biopharmaceutical
formulations will improve the safety, reliability, quality, and availability of
vital medicines that will facilitate vaccine immunization programs, prolong the
safe shelf-life of biologics and vaccines, and reduce product wastage, the
carbon footprint, and environmental impacts of pharmaceutical transportation and
storage.

This project seeks to establish an innovative. room-temperature dehydration
process that improves the thermal stability of biopharmaceuticals and
circumvents the need for a cold chain supply. Cold chain breach has been
associated with cases of vaccine-preventable disease or even adverse events
following immunization, with one study reporting health issues suffered by 7% of
patients administered with temperature-compromised vaccines (15% of these health
issues were considered serious). Dehydration is a known thermal stabilization
method, but current drying technologies are time-consuming, poorly scalable,
energy inefficient, and potentially destructive due to the application of high
stresses. This project focuses on thermal stabilization of formulation for
robust vaccine transportation and storage solutions. The research and
development establishes the efficacy, reliability, and applicability of rapid
Room Temperature Aerosol Dehydration (RTAD) as a commercially promising platform
for the dehydration of various biologic drug molecules. The application of RTAD
to proteins and nucleic acids is investigated with two major classes of
biological molecules. The quality and chemical/biological integrity of the
dehydrated formulations will be demonstrated. Also, the biopharmaceuticals will
be microencapsulated in a controllable manner. This effort will provide proof of
concept supporting further RTAD technology development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.