* 2304987
* Equipment: Helium Recovery Equipment: Acquisition of a Helium Recovery and Liquefaction System for the IU NMR Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Xinfeng Gao, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2026
* USD 320,810.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Xinfeng Gao and Dr. Jonathan
Karty at Indiana University are acquiring helium recovery and liquefaction
equipment to recycle the helium used by eight spectrometers in the nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) facility at Indiana University – Bloomington (IUB). NMR
is an essential method used by researchers to investigate the structure and
motion of a wide range of molecules. Liquid helium is used to maintain
superconductivity of magnets essential to NMR spectrometers. As helium slowly
evaporates, periodic refills with liquid helium are needed. About 4,200 liters
of liquid helium are annually used by the IUB NMR facility. Helium is a precious
non-renewable natural resource critical to the aerospace, medical, and
scientific research communities. Current supplies are not sufficient to meet all
needs. IUB will build a system to capture helium gas as it evaporates from NMR
magnets and then liquefy that helium for reuse. This helium recovery system will
reduce the IUB NMR facility’s liquid helium purchases substantially, generating
significant helium and cost savings.

The IUB NMR facility provides access to state-of-the-art instrumentation and
expertise in solution NMR spectroscopy to more than 160 researchers, supporting
research into organic, organometallic, materials, carbohydrate, supramolecular,
protein, peptide, and medicinal chemistry while also providing high resolution
NMR instrumentation for upper-division laboratory courses for undergraduates.
Training the next generation of chemists and biochemists is a core mission of
the IUB Chemistry Department. Undergraduates, graduate students, and post-
doctoral trainees need access to high resolution NMR spectrometers to learn
modern techniques and complete their research. This helium recovery and
liquefaction system will insulate IU Bloomington researchers from future helium
supply shortages and ensures that the NMR facility will remain a viable research
resource and a critical asset to the university's teaching mission. Sustainable
and affordable research infrastructure significantly will enhance IUB
Chemistry’s ability to recruit a diverse cohort of faculty and students for both
the research and teaching missions of the department.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.