* 2304548
* CAS: Development of a General System for Upcycling Polyolefins through C-H Diversification
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Erik Alexanian, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2027
* USD 652,777.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Erik J. Alexanian of the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill is developing chemical reagents for upcycling
polyolefins through C-H bond diversification. Polyolefins are a family of
polyethylene and polypropylene thermoplastics that are non-toxic, durable, heat
resistant, and capable of withstanding most kinds of chemical corrosion. They
are produced mainly from oil and natural gas by polymerization of ethylene and
propylene, respectively. They are the most widely utilized plastics in the
world, with variations of each used in numerous products, ranging from drinking
straws to sophisticated laboratory instruments. By chemical structure, they are
long chain hydrocarbon macromolecules consisting exclusively of C-C and C-H
bonds. This project will address sustainability and recyclability of polyolefins
by developing reagents that enable the selective C–H diversification of
polyolefin mixtures. Essentially, through such diversification, C-H groups along
the main polymer backbone will be replaced with other valuable and diverse
chemical functional groups. In the long run, the approaches associated with this
research have the potential to provide valuable methods for polyolefin
upcycling, where post-consumer plastic waste will serve as an abundant feedstock
for the synthesis of plastics with a greater economic value and a smaller
environmental footprint. The UNC Chemical Education Outreach group, established
by Prof. Alexanian, will involve graduate students teaching at a range of local
schools, especially those with high ethnic and socioeconomic diversity. The
topics will aim to draw important connections between chemistry and its impact
on our lives. Additionally, “Polymer Upcycling” outreach activities through the
UNC Morehead Planetarium and Science Center’s Launch Lab Makerspace will engage
local K-12 learners and the public on the challenges and opportunities for
building more sustainable polymer lifecycles.

This project will focus on the development of novel classes of N-functionalized
amides and radical traps that enable the selective C–H diversification of
polyolefin mixtures and impart a range of new polymer properties. In the first
objective, new classes of O-alkenylhydroxamate and N-dithiocarbonyl reagents
will be developed to increase the practicality of the platform and enable
scalable, site-selective polyolefin C–H diversification. The second objective
will focus on utilizing these structurally optimized reagents for the selective
functionalization of polyethylene/polypropylene mixtures, and mixtures with
other polymers commonly found in plastic waste streams. Finally, the last
objective will identify a diverse set of thiosulfonates as radical trapping
reagents to introduce a range of functionality onto polyolefins in a selective
manner. Direct polyolefin C–H heteroarylation will also be pursued. The tools
developed with this research have the potential to enable the upcycling of
polyolefins to a range of new polymers under conditions relevant to the
processing of mixed plastic waste.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.