* 2304781
* Rational and equivariant phenomena in chromatic homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Nathaniel Stapleton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 297,584.00

Many of the most productive themes in modern mathematics sit at the intersection
of several different fields. This project involves problems in between algebraic
topology, number theory, and group theory with some applications to differential
geometry and input from algebraic geometry. One of the primary goals of this
project is to solve a problem suggested by the work of Morava in the 1970s. A
solution to this problem will be an important step toward understanding how
spheres of different dimensions can wrap around each other -- a problem that is
central to modern algebraic topology. The research will be integrated with the
PI's educational efforts at the undergraduate and graduate level.

The goal of this project is to make use of recently developed tools to attack
several open problems in chromatic homotopy theory. The PI will work with
collaborators to show that the rationalization of the monochromatic layers of
the sphere spectrum are exterior algebras over the p-adic rationals on certain
generators. This problem dates back to the 1970s and is one of the central open
problems in chromatic homotopy theory. The PI will also address a question
concerning the kernel of the canonical map from the Burnside ring of a finite
group to its monochromatic cohomotopy. This question is bound up in the theory
of power operations and the theory of fusion systems. Together with graduate
students, the PI will develop tools to help produce a universal exponential
relationship between multiplicative and additive power operations. Finally, the
PI will work with collaborators to build on previous work and advance
understanding of the multiplicative properties of global equivariant
complexified elliptic genera.

This project is jointly funded by the Topology program, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.