* 2304047
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing clean energy technologies in the Piedmont region to Generate Innovative New Economic Systems (NC, SC)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Michael Mazzola, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alan Cohen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Engines Development Award is focused on clean energy (CE) resource
technologies, including land-based and offshore wind, solar, clean hydrogen,
marine energy, and the electric-energy delivery and storage systems that support
their integration with the grid. Leveraging the creativity, research, and
development expertise, infrastructure, and professional networks of partner
organizations, this project will benefit the communities in the renewable energy
resource basin of the Carolinas through use-inspired research and technology
creation, translation to practice, and workforce development leading to regional
economic development. The project's activities will support the CE
transformation of the Carolinas for a net-carbon-neutral electric grid in 2050.
The ecosystem will lead to a more just and equitable distribution of wealth
through upward economic mobility enabled by education and employment in high-
wage jobs typical of a knowledge-driven economy. The region of service is
centered in Charlotte. It encompasses the Piedmont and Coastal Plains of North
and South Carolina, focusing on areas in the eastern parts of both states,
especially the Southeast Black Belt. The region is the most representative of
the nationâ€™s emerging CE economy through significant existing carbon-free power
production and capabilities to invent, design, build, and manufacture CE
technologies. The project is led by UNC Charlotte and comprises a diverse
coalition of currently identified and aspirational partners from higher
education, industry, government, and consortia/community organizations.

This NSF Engines Development award will accelerate use-inspired research to
improve the competitiveness of numerous products related to renewable energy
(solar, wind, and marine) and smart grid technologies that are needed to
integrate large increases in CE. When successful, the future NSF Engine will
develop disruptive technology for clean hydrogen as a second energy carrier to
support a cluster of hydrogen companies in the Southeast. This project will
embrace, through a pervasive diversity, equity, inclusiveness, and accessibility
(DEIA) culture, engagement with economically distressed communities in the
region. Innovative workforce development activities coordinated with NC A&T
State University will help prepare competitive communities in the knowledge-
based economy that will rapidly grow CE production. The Development Award will
support these activities through four thrusts: (1) an innovation inventory of
regional scientific and technical expertise in CE; (2) workforce development for
CE innovations and manufacturing; (3) demonstration of the culture of DEIA; and
(4) organizational activities leading to an effective leadership team and a
roadmap for transitioning to the nascent phase of a future NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.