* 2304840
* Geometry and dynamics in moduli spaces of surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Apisa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Moduli spaces pervade mathematics. Given a mathematical object the corresponding
moduli space parameterize the shapes that the object can have. For example,
following a path in the moduli space of triangles corresponds to watching a
movie of one triangle deforming into another. In this way moduli spaces helps us
understanding how manifestations of a mathematical object can be deformed one to
the other. The PI will investigate moduli spaces of surfaces with some
additional geometric structure and use this to make advances in solving a suite
of long-standing conjectures about their geometry and topology. The moduli
spaces in question admit an action, i.e. a way of “mixing-up” the space, that is
intimately connected to understanding the ``physics” governing the space. The PI
and his collaborators have recently developed techniques for studying this
action, which the PI will use to solve a series of problems. The PI will
integrate his research with efforts to engage students from a diverse pool of
backgrounds and mathematical talent. This will include devising computational
research projects for undergraduate students, including those with minimal
mathematical background, inviting graduate students to act as research mentors.
Students will also be recruited to help produce computational and educational
materials, which will be made available to the public.

The project will make advances in PI's ongoing investigation of the GL(2, R)
action on the Hodge bundle and applications to the study of associated moduli
spaces. These questions connect to various problems in dynamics, low-dimensional
topology, and algebraic geometry and use new techniques developed by the PI and
collaborators. Recent groundbreaking work has shown that each GL(2, R) orbit
closure of a point in a stratum of the Hodge bundle is locally linear in period
coordinates, but as yet no classification of these orbit closures exists. The PI
will make progress in classifying all GL(2, R) orbit closures in hyperelliptic
loci of strata that are “sufficiently big”, and will use the theory of Hurwitz
spaces to build a purely combinatorial mechanism for producing new orbit
closures. In addition, using recent work on geminal orbit closures, the PI will
uncover properties of totally geodesic submanifolds in the moduli space of
Riemann surfaces. This inquiry will lead to a deeper understanding of when
complex geodesics in Teichmuller space are holomorphic retracts. The PI will
also study the moduli spaces of complex affine structures to make progress on a
conjecture that strata of the Hodge bundle are aspherical in the orbifold sense;
and will work on a program to determine the Hausdorff dimension of the set of
divergent Teichmuller geodesic rays. Put together, these projects will resolve
open questions about the geometry of moduli space, while shedding fresh light on
the study of rational billiards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.