* 2304179
* CAS-SC: Threading the Needle: Recycling Commodity Plastics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2028
* USD 950,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Plastics are ubiquitous, providing innumerable benefits to society across
virtually all aspects of life. From medical implants to food packaging to green
energy producing windmills, synthetic polymers offer enabling solutions to many
of the worldâ€™s most demanding technical challenges. However, these materials are
largely indestructible and are accumulating in the environment at an alarming
rate. This research aims to develop an economically tractable approach to
recycling polyethylene, polypropylene, and polystyrene, which together
constitute more than 60% of all plastics produced worldwide. Unlike aluminum and
glass, few commercial plastics are recycled after use, representing a tragic
waste of resources. One strategy for recycling is to blend these plastics
together at elevated temperature followed by reformulation into useful products.
Unfortunately, this results in brittle and mechanically inferior materials due
to the inability of chemically different polymers to mix at a molecular level,
leading to phase separation. Poor interfacial adhesion promotes cracks and bulk
failure during mechanical deformation. This project will explore the synthesis
of commercially viable block copolymers that can migrate to the interface when
mixed with phase separated polymers, thereby stitching the plastic domains
together and recovering the superior mechanical properties associated with the
virgin materials. This research effort will result in the training of Ph.D. and
undergraduate students, along with postdocs, in the field of polymer science and
engineering, one of the largest segments of the chemical and materials
industries in the United States. Interactions of the participants with the local
community will inspire students, and their families, to embrace science and
engineering for higher education and prospective careers.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The crisis of plastic waste requires the development of new strategies for
returning polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (iPP) and polystyrene (PS),
representing more than 60% of all synthetic polymers, to product feed streams
after use. One approach to recycling involves melt blending these plastics
together, followed by formulation into useful items of commerce. This program
will explore the synthesis of triblock and multiblock copolymers that localize
at the phase separated domain interface, resulting in topological constraints
and cocrystallization, which together create interfacial strength leading to
mechanical properties competitive with the pure homopolymers. Butadiene and
styrene will be polymerized anionically, and the polybutadiene blocks
catalytically hydrogenated, yielding PE-PX, PS-PX, and PS-PE diblock, triblock
and multiblock copolymers, where PX is a random copolymer containing
approximately 90% ethylethylene and 10% ethylene repeat units. PX is melt
miscible with iPP. Micelle formation and interfacial activity of these block
copolymers with the respective pairs of homopolymers will be explored using
small-angle neutron and X-ray scattering (SANS and SAXS), and atomic force and
transmission electron microscopy (AFM and TEM). Blends will be formulated by
melt mixing and evaluated in the solid state by tensile and impact testing.
Interfacial adhesion will be quantified using peel tests. The overall goals of
this program are to establish the dependence of blend ductility on: block
copolymer molecular weight, composition, and architecture; block copolymer
concentration; and processing conditions. This sustainability effort aims to
create an economically viable approach to recycling the most prevalent commodity
plastics. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.