* 2304670
* Short- and Long-Range Structural Complexity from Ortho-arylene Foldamers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Christopher Hartley, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2026
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor C. Scott Hartley of Miami University
will investigate methods by which the folding of non-biological molecules can be
controlled. Biochemical systems make use of molecules that are both large and
structurally complex. This combination is necessary for the remarkable
sophistication, and thus function, of biochemical systems. Constructing
comparable non-biological molecules is currently beyond the capabilities of
synthetic chemistry. Nature’s strategy for generating structural complexity is
by folding a long chain molecule into a specific shape. This research project
aims to increase our understanding of the factors that govern the folding of
long chain molecules. The ability to control molecular folding into complex 3D
structures is important for advanced applications in molecular recognition and
catalysis. The work will involve graduate students and undergraduates, who will
be trained in synthetic and physical organic chemistry. Additional broader
impacts include the development of a new teaching laboratory activity on
attractive interactions relevant to molecular folding and work with a program
from a consortium of Ohio universities supporting students from underrepresented
backgrounds.

This project aims to study the folding of a class of non-biological molecules
called “foldamers” and to develop two strategies for controlling their folding
into 3D structures. More specifically, this project will focus on studying
ortho-arylene foldamers. ortho-Phenylenes are a simple class of aromatic
foldamers that exhibit two very useful properties: their folded structures can
be determined in solution with great precision using nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy and computational chemistry, and their folding propensities
are weak enough to be easily perturbed. These properties make them well suited
to progressing from secondary to tertiary structure, a current challenge for
foldamers research. In the first strategy, the folding of chains that mix
attractive and repulsive interactions within a single molecule will be studied.
By programming folding through the incorporation of pyrazine-2,3-diyl units into
the sequence, complex structures will be obtained that are to be used to
construct the coil segments necessary for tertiary structure. In the second
strategy, cage structures incorporating multiple o-phenylene units will be
investigated as simple examples of tertiary structure. Emphasis will be placed
on understanding how the folding of the o-phenylenes responds to cage geometry
and the inclusion of guest molecules. This research has the potential to provide
access to and understanding of fundamentally new molecular folder systems to
build complex non-biological structures with great potential for binding small
molecule analytes and the potential for providing a new molecular scaffold for
catalysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.