* 2304814
* RUI: CAS-MNP: Molecular Behavior at Colloidal/Aqueous Interfaces of Heterogeneous Nano- and Micro-Plastics - Binding Interactions and Effect of Aging
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mahamud Subir, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 338,547.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Mahamud Subir and his team of graduate and undergraduate students at
Ball State University will perform surface-selective second harmonic generation
(SHG) spectroscopy and quartz crystal microbalance technology with the aim of
determining the adsorption parameters pertaining to various types of micro- and
nano-plastics (MNPs). Plastic pollution has become a major environmental
concern. In the aquatic environment, plastics can break down and form small
fragments ranging from a few nanometers to hundreds of micrometers in size.
These micro- and nano-plastic (MNP) particles offer a large surface area, which
allows other organic contaminants dissolved in water, to interact with the MNP
surfaces. Understanding these binding interactions is important as they
determine the fate and transport properties of both MNPs and organic pollutants.
Moreover, elucidating the surface affinities of MNPs is critical in developing
effective adsorption techniques to remove microplastics. In this project,
surface interactions of different types of organic compounds with MNPs of
various compositions and surface properties will be investigated. The project
will not only generate new knowledge on the binding behavior of MNPs in the
presence of organic molecules, but also train future scientists in tackling
persistent challenges associated with plastics pollution.

MNPs are heterogeneous and their interfacial chemistry is complex. Therefore, a
systematic investigation using surface-selective second harmonic generation
(SHG) spectroscopy and quartz crystal microbalance technology will be performed
to determine the adsorption thermodynamic and kinetic parameters pertaining to
various types of MNPs. The adsorption studies will be conducted using charged
and neutral SHG probe molecules. Temperature-dependent adsorption studies are
expected to reveal the binding strengths and mechanisms of their interaction
with MNP/aqueous interfaces. Together, these experiments have the potential to
help establish relationships between surface functional groups of MNPs and
binding interactions. The role of non-specific vs. specific binding interactions
will be examined. Additional objectives include investigating the impact of MNP
ageing and of their size and shape on molecular binding. Determining a
correlation between organic compound adsorption strength and chemical
characteristics of MNPs has the potential, in the longer term, is expected to
provide a foundation for improved modeling of the fate and transport of these
emerging aquatic contaminants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.