* 2304348
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure Image Recognition and Machine Learning Using Advanced Cryptography
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Daniel Rubin, L-Infinity Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,356.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be a significant step towards resolving the
access vs. privacy dilemma of the big data era. The use of people’s biometrics,
internet traffic, and financial, medical, and genetic data can enable better
crime prevention, targeted ads, and health innovation, but at the expense of
privacy. Data may also be too sensitive to be given to third parties. The
immediate impact of adopting this technology will be greater security for
sensitive image data with easier access to useful inferences. The solution will
shift the paradigm of institutions storing sensitive data onsite to one in which
even sensitive data is stored and accessed in the cloud. With the capability of
private outsourced data analysis will come a marketplace for computational
tasks, including machine learning as a service, that will spur research and
deliver better results to patients and clients faster and without risk of
exposure.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will adapt
existing Deep Neural Network models to use a fully homomorphic encryption scheme
to perform image classification on encrypted images. The primary challenge is to
reduce the computational overhead of operations on encrypted data to make the
scheme practical at desired levels of accuracy and security. The proposed
research and development addresses this challenge through innovation in machine
learning, computational number theory, approximation theory, and computer
science. The goal of the proposed research and development is to demonstrate the
commercial viability of secure image recognition by achieving a reasonable level
of security, accuracy, and server cost. The team will experiment in training and
testing modified convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image classification
using carefully chosen activation functions and/or approximations to the testing
function, and simultaneously building onto existing homomorphic encryption
libraries new functionality to compute these operations homomorphically.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.