* 2304909
* Fundamental Principles of Multivalency in Nanoscale and Macromolecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rob Macfarlane, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 536,677.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Robert Macfarlane at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) will investigate an important gap in
knowledge for extending principles of multivalency to more complex materials
systems involving polymers and nanoparticle assemblies. In contrast to weak
monovalent binding, multivalent interactions offer the advantage of a multiple
and thus dramatically enhanced binding on a molecular scale. Multivalent
structures function in a number of systems to generate a strong but reversible
interaction between two objects and is a key design tool that can be used to
precisely program material properties in a manner that is unobtainable through
traditional organic synthesis. The fundamentals of multivalency have largely
been examined with molecular models, however these models have limitations and
do not permit full explanation of how multivalency occurs in polymer- or
nanoparticle-based materials. This proposal will permit this challenge to be
addressed via a “stepwise” approach to increasing complexity in multivalent
systems. By first measuring the supramolecular behaviors of individual
molecules, then measuring additional systems with gradually increasing
modifications, each of the complicated factors that may influence supramolecular
multivalency can be individually examined. As a result, the proposed work seeks
to permit rational examination of massively multivalent systems consisting of
100s or 1000s of individual supramolecular groups. The design principles gained
from this research are then to be translated to fundamental studies explaining
how nanoscale systems of massively multivalent binders can be used to control
the behaviors of macroscopic systems in the context of both recyclable and
easily processed polymers, and the self-assembly of nanoparticle superlattices.
This proposal will also be used as the basis of an outreach program for students
from underrepresented groups in local community colleges, providing them with
the technical expertise and research experience to pursue either higher STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education goals or careers in
STEM fields.

To achieve the goal of better understanding how to use a systems-level approach
to control multivalency, established experimental techniques will first be used
to measure the thermodynamic parameters of model monovalent supramolecular
binders (SMBs). Subsequent experiments will introduce “step-wise” increases in
complexity (e.g. molecular modification to the SMB, grafting the SMB to a
polymer chain, binding multiple polymer-tethered SMBs to nanoparticle
scaffolds), and these same thermodynamic parameters will be re-measured to
determine how each step-wise increase in system complexity affects SMB
interactions. Using the information on monovalent binding thermodynamics
obtained from these experiments, trends in multivalency as a function of
nanoscale scaffold design will be examined. Multivalency numbers will be
measured for both macromolecules and brush-grafted nanoparticles modified with
SMBs deposited onto substrates expressing complementary SMBs (to measure the
thermodynamics of a single multivalent binding event), and for binary assemblies
of particle- and polymer-scaffolds that express complementary SMBs. The ability
to tune the breadth and onset temperature of multivalent dissociation will then
be investigated to allow the use of supramolecular chemistry to alter polymer
processability. Tailorable multivalent binding between short-chain polymers will
be examined as an approach to produce polymers that are easily processed,
recycled, or reconfigured but still mechanically strong. Separately, the effects
of altering supramolecular multivalency on nanoparticle self-assembly will be
used as a means to understand how collective supramolecular interactions dictate
the hierarchical organization of nanoparticles within superlattice
architectures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.