* 2304102
* SBIR Phase II:  A Platform for Health Care Data Integration Using Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Irene Woerner, EMTRUTH, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,658.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide the personal healthcare data
needed to improve the patient’s outcome and experience]. Because healthcare data
is protected, a secure way of sharing the right data, with the right people, at
the right time is needed. Currently, attempts to harmonize data from many
systems, and in many formats and sizes is very difficult and expensive and so
such efforts are lacking. Advancing blockchain and artificial intelligence
technologies for distributed data management and enabling radical data
interoperability benefits patients and addresses a priority need in a $3.93
trillion healthcare market.

This team develops the technology for a platform that secures data of any type
from anywhere in immutable blockchains while respective data owners retain
ownership and control to securely share just-needed data following their data
governance criteria. Data is transformed and normalized into more granular
blockchains and that can be combined for individual or aggregated population
health modeling. Natural language processing is combined with a curated
thesaurus to automatically create metadata tags for encrypted blockchains,
facilitating data searches, discovery, and advanced analytics. Because
healthcare data is complex and diverse, this project demonstrates, through
priority use cases, how data needs to become interoperable. Such use cases
include 1) sharing patient clinical data for participation in clinical research
with consent; 2) creating a more complete patient healthcare record that spans
many services or treatments; 3) bridging an operational gap between clinical
data and claims; and 4) collaborating among research organizations in severe
disease treatment. Additional technologies include instantiating a "datamart on
demand" from blockchains for analytics, machine learning, and automating sharing
of data, via smart contracts, capturing criteria, and like consent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.