* 2304748
* CRII: SHF: Analyzing the Linux's KBuild Makefile
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2022,03/31/2023
* ThanhVu Nguyen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 32,798.00

The Linux system empowers a wide range of computer devices, ranging from tiny
IoT sensors and mobile phones to desktop and supercomputers. This flexibility is
due to the highly-configurable design of Linux, allowing the users to customize
and build Linux with an extensive set of options. This reconfigurability has
many benefits, but it also greatly complicates tasks such as testing and
debugging due to the large number of possible configurations. This project aims
to develop algorithms and tools to analyze the complex Linux build process to
understand how configuration options affect the building of individual source
files. This research will allow developers to find orphan files that are never
used in the build process, examine and test configurations that affect
individual source files, and determine how patches or code changes affect a
given configuration. The research also helps users, e.g., allowing embedded
system manufacturers to optimize Linux to fit their devices. In addition, the
research allows for the discovery of many interesting and useful information
about the Linux build system, e.g., the complexity of build conditions, highly-
influential configuration options, etc.

This project aims to develop static and dynamic analyses to analyze the Linux
build system, in particular the "makefiles" that control the building and
linking of individual source files. The research is divided into three main
activities. The first develops a symbolic execution technique that simulates the
runs of the makefiles to obtain path conditions over configuration options
mapping to built files. These path conditions provide a formal description of
how configuration options affect the building of individual kernel files. The
second develops a dynamic analysis that learns path conditions from kernel files
built from actual make runs over a sample of configurations. This analysis will
be based on a recent work developed by the team that alternates between a
learning and checking phase to improve the overall quality of the learned
conditions. Finally, by representing the obtained path conditions as logical
formulae, modern constraint solvers can be applied to solve problems such as
finding orphan files and the impact of configuration options to files included
in a build.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.