* 2304541
* Developing Champions of Diversity with Appreciative Inquiry and Computational Simulation (CHAMPIONS)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Robert Kirsch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 324,297.00

The CHAMPIONS (Developing Champions of Diversity with Appreciative Inquiry and
Computational Simulation) project aims to address the persistent lack of
diversity in the geosciences field by taking a unique and inclusive approach. By
embracing the principles of belonging, accessibility, justice, equity,
diversity, and inclusion (BAJEDI), this project seeks to empower geosciences
faculty to become catalysts for change within their departments. The
significance of this project lies in its bottom-up approach, which emphasizes
compassion, empathy, and the lived experiences of individual faculty members. By
creating a positive and inclusive environment that values diverse viewpoints and
experiences, the project aims to foster a sense of empowerment for
underrepresented minority (URM) faculty, enabling them to lead from within and
drive sustained progress in broadening participation outcomes.

The CHAMPIONS project will be implemented through a three-step process. 1)
Convene an appreciative inquiry summit that engages geosciences faculty in
identifying challenges and desired BAJEDI outcomes within their departments.
This qualitative approach allows for a comprehensive understanding of the
specific obstacles and opportunities that exist in each unique context. 2)
Develop a computational simulation model that will be informed by the data
collected from the summit. The model will simulate the long-term impacts of
bottom-up interventions on BAJEDI outcomes in the geosciences. 3) Deploy the
model to serve as a decision-making tool, training faculty in systemic and long-
term thinking when addressing BAJEDI issues. By enabling faculty to visualize
the potential effects of their interventions, the project aims to foster
intentional and effective strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.