* 2304483
* SBIR Phase I: Combating Pathogens, Helios-1 Onsite Universal Detection
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Darrell Marshall, TOTAL ANALYSIS L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is protection against pathogen-related infections. Currently,
detection tests for pathological agents are laborious, time-consuming,
expensive, and require advanced technical expertise to conduct. The proposed
portable, onsite pathogen detector will allow for fast, specific, sensitive, and
cost-effective pathogen tests that can be conducted with minimal personnel
training and equipment. The solution is intended to be used at healthcare
centers, transport nodes, defense facilities, and any other site where the
spread of infectious diseases is a possibility. This technology will benefit the
population’s health and welfare, by facilitating the implementation of pathogen
detection routines that reduce the risk of large-scale infections. Such
infections disproportionally affect under-represented groups. The solution will
also improve the national defense against bioterrorism, since the proposed
technology could be as standard as a typical metal detector used in large,
populated venues, on the battlefield protecting troops, or at airports to keep
the traveling public safe. The nation’s economic competitiveness may also
improve, since the proposed solution could mitigate and even avoid the economic
consequences of a health crisis.

The proposed project seeks to prove that Matrix Assisted Ionization can be
coupled with Ion-Mobility Spectrometry (MAI-IMS) for pathogen detection and
identification. The recent pandemic outbreak has demonstrated the necessity of
rapid, on-site, and accurate pathogen detection devices. The proposed method is
to use the existing IMS technology and modify it to detect pathogens by
fabricating a Matrix assisted ionization vault (Helios-1) that overcomes the
biomolecule volatility restriction of all current ion mobility spectrometers. A
crucial technical hurdle is finding the device's optimal ionization and
operational environment. To overcome this challenge, the most similar conditions
to mass spectrometry must be found, which will involve experimental tests to
determine the adequate environmental conditions and the engineering
modifications of the MAI extension chamber to adapt IMS for non-volatile
biomolecule detection. Standardize organism sample conditions and protocols are
also needed. This challenge represents a critical step to prevent variation
caused by the extraction of the sampling procedure. This challenge will be
tackled by testing different extraction procedures until they meet the criteria
for satisfactory performance. Additionally, machine learning algorithms will be
employed for pathogen recognition. All of the above will help prove the
feasibility of the proposed MAI-IMS-based pathogen detection and identification
platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.