* 2304898
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Processive Ring-Opening Metathesis Polymerization Through Molecularly Confined Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Wenyu Huang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 310,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program and the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of Chemistry,
Jia Niu of Boston College and Wenyu Huang of Iowa State University are
developing ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) catalyzed by
organometallic ruthenium complexes confined within molecularly defined cages.
Despite the significance of ROMP in producing a plethora of functional polymers,
existing techniques still cannot completely prevent chain transfer and
termination, in particular when low-strain monomers are involved. As a result,
mixtures of linear and cyclic macromolecules of different sizes are formed that
are difficult to separate. This research endeavors to directly address this
unmet challenge and introduce a distinct strategy for processive ROMP. In this
strategy, polymerization catalysts will be encapsulated in molecularly defined
cage structures, such that, ideally only monomers, but not nascent polymers, can
access the catalyst. This will thereby inhibit the chain transfer and
termination caused by the interaction between the catalyst and the nascent
polymer, resulting in linear macromolecules with controlled molecular weights.
The developed methodology will also be applied to ROMP of sustainability-
oriented monomers that are considered challenging for ROMP due to their low
strain. These monomers include cyclic alkenes with low ceiling temperatures and
those consisting of degradable functionalities. This research will provide
interdisciplinary training for students in polymer synthesis and sustainability.
The collaborative team will additionally develop a hybrid three-week summer
workshop aimed to introduce polymer chemistry principles and practices into
3D-printing. The workshop will be integrated with existing outreach programs to
stimulate interest in polymer science and catalysis among college and high
school students in the communities served by Boston College and Iowa State
University.

Synthetic polymers ranging from commodity products to specialty goods are at the
center of modern society. Among many properties, molecular weight, sequence, and
dispersity are essential in determining the material performance of polymers.
Therefore, the precise control over these properties is the central goal in
modern synthetic polymer chemistry. This research will focus on developing
processive ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) of low-strain cyclic
alkenes through confining organometallic ruthenium catalysts into molecularly
defined cages. Such an approach is expected to allow access to monomer molecules
but prevent the nascent polymer chains from accessing these confined catalysts.
As a result, well-defined, high, and ultra-high molecular weight, low dispersity
polymers from ROMP could be realized. The first objective will focus on design
of homogeneous and heterogeneous Zr-based cages using the reversable aperture
opening/closing approach. These cages will then be utilized to encapsulate
ruthenium-based Grubbs and Hoveyda-Grubbs ROMP catalysts. The second objective
will leverage molecularly confined catalysts to enable polymerization of
sustainability-oriented monomers containing degradable functionalities. Lastly,
kinetic behaviors of ROMP mediated by molecularly confined catalysts will be
systematically investigated. The basic guiding principles associated with this
project are general and have the potential to be applied to various other
catalyst-mediated chain-growth polymerization techniques in which the control of
termination and/or chain-transfer events is desirable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.