* 2304819
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Assessing the Resilience of Centralized and Decentralized Water Supply Infrastructure to Hurricane Fiona in Puerto Rico
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2024
* Yang Deng, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2024
* USD 90,076.00

This RAPID project focuses on the resilience of water supply infrastructure in
Puerto Rico in response to Hurricane Fiona. Highly transient, perishable data
will be collected through surveys on different hurricane-impacted water
suppliers, workshops with a broad range of stakeholders, and field trips to
monitor the quality of raw and finished water at selected water supply systems.
The data will be organized, synthesized, and analyzed to 1)assess and compare
behaviors of centralized vs. decentralized water supply systems in Puerto Rico
in and after Hurricane Fiona; 2) evaluate the effectiveness of technological and
management strategies taken since Hurricane Maria to strengthen the resilience
of water supply; 3) assess short and long-term impacts of Hurricane Fiona on
water quality; and 4) explore potential alternative emergency water supply
methods and their barriers to application in Puerto Rico. The efforts will
advance fundamental understanding on the responses of different water supply
infrastructure under a shock such as storms. The resulting knowledge will
support the development of the principles for hurricane-adaptive water supply
infrastructure.

This project will enhance the adaptive capacity of water supply infrastructure
to prepare for, respond to, and recover from a strong storm. Although this
project targets Puerto Rico, the knowledge gained may readily be extended to
water infrastructure in other U.S. coastal areas (e.g., Florida and North
Carolina) and territories (e.g., U.S. Virgin Islands). The benefit is
straightforward and immediate to disaster-affected populations because water is
an essential demand. Particularly, this project will benefit the rural and
isolated communities relying heavily on small water supply systems, which are
typically more vulnerable to a natural disaster and a changing environment.
Water sanitation will reduce the transmission of faceco-oral diseases and
exposure to disease-bearing vectors to help disaster relief.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.