* 2304877
* Instanton homology in low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Kronheimer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project will develop tools to study questions about the geometry of
intersecting surfaces, using novel tools arising from areas of mathematics that
have not previously seen application in this area. Since antiquity,
mathematicians have studied surfaces such as spheres, ellipsoids, paraboloids
and hyperboloids in three-dimensional Euclidean space. These surfaces, familiar
to the Greeks, can all be described in cartesian geometry by equations of the
second degree. Modern algebraic geometry, as developed primarily in the 20th and
21st centuries, provides tools to study surfaces defined by equations of higher
degree. While a single equation of degree five (for example) may define a smooth
surface in three-space, a pair of such equations will define a pair of surfaces,
and the intersection of the two surfaces will be a curve in space. The project
will seek to answer long-standing questions about the possible singularities of
a curve arising in this way, using tools that first arose in the description of
the fundamental forces of nature at the atomic and nuclear scale. These same
tools will also be used in addressing questions about network flows. At the same
time, the project will train graduate students and disseminate results to
researchers in the area.

The project activity will be in the following specific areas. In collaboration
with T. S. Mrowka, the PI will develop properties of an instanton homology for
spatial trivalent graphs and for knots in general three-manifolds. In
particular, tools will be developed that will enable the calculation of
instanton homology more generally than is currently possible. This instanton
homology was constructed in previous work using a gauge theory related to
representations of the fundamental group of complement of the knot or graph in
the group of rotations, SO(3). When defined using a local coefficient system,
instanton homology of knots and links yields new constraints on the topology of
embedded surfaces whose boundary is a given knot or link. Specifically, it
yields information about the possible genus of such surfaces and the number of
their singularities. The final goal is to develop these tools to the point where
they will answer long-standing questions in algebraic geometry concerning the
topology of algebraic curves. For example, the PI will seek a negative answer to
the question of whether two smooth quintic surfaces can intersect in an
irreducible singular curve of genus zero.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.