* 2304637
* The Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) Workshop; Scranton, Pennsylvania; March 17-18, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Nathaniel Frissell, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 11/30/2023
* USD 49,999.00

This award provides support to the Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation
(HamSCI) workshop to be held at the University of Scranton March 17-18, 2023.
The HamSCI workshop is an annual workshop that aims to bring together members of
the amateur radio and professional radio space science communities for mutual
benefit. This workshop series has led to cutting-edge work in the fields of
space physics, citizen science, and the use of crowd-sourced ionospheric data.
The 2023 HamSCI Workshop will feature prominent leaders in radio science, space
science, and space weather. The 2023 HamSCI workshop is particularly important
and timely, as both the professional science and amateur radio communities are
preparing for the upcoming 14 October 2023 annular solar eclipse and the 8
October 2024 total solar eclipse. Both eclipses have paths that sweep across the
continental United States (CONUS). These are the last solar eclipses to traverse
the CONUS until 2044, and are therefore important, time-sensitive, information-
rich opportunities for running unique and “controlled” ionospheric experiments.
This meeting will also serve as a bi-annual development meeting of the HamSCI
Personal Space Weather Station (PSWS), a project funded through the NSF Aeronomy
Distributed Array of Small Instruments (DASI) program.

During this two-day workshop, professionals and amateurs come together to give
oral and poster presentations, equipment demonstrations, and have informal
discussions and networking related to both amateur radio and applicable
scientific fields. The workshop topics include the use of amateur radio
techniques for observing and understanding the physics behind traveling
ionospheric disturbances (TIDs), Sporadic E, the ionospheric response to solar
flares and geomagnetic storms, and space weather effects on radio wave
propagation. An attendance on the order of 100 people in person and up to 500
virtual participants is expected. This will be a hybrid workshop with free
interactive Zoom participation and live streaming by the Ham Radio 2.0 YouTube
channel to ensure broadest accessibility. All presentations will be archived on
YouTube and made available through hamsci.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.