* 2304631
* STTR Phase I:  Wafer-Integrated Soft Magnetic Composite Films for Inductors with High Power Density and Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Uppili Sridhar, Himet Materials LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,972.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is to revolutionize the miniature-powered Integrated Circuit
(IC) converter market, widely used in cellular phones, Internet of Things
devices, and microsensors. The technology will provide form factor reductions of
various modules, leading to the further miniaturization of on-chip components. A
manufacturing facility can service several IC companies by providing foundry
capabilities to integrate inductors according to each customer’s design. The
technology can provide US manufacturers of such devices with a significant
competitive edge in the very large mobile electronics and miniature electronics
markets both in commercial and defense markets. Establishing manufacturing
capability in the US will support a revival of component packaging and back-end
integration business.

Mobile device miniaturization is increasing at a rapid rate. In on-board power
converters, passive components such as inductors and capacitors are among the
largest components. The non-availability of IC-compatible, low-cost, soft
magnetic cores with low loss, high frequency (>10MHz), and high saturation
magnetization limits the implementation of on-chip inductors. The project aims
to create innovative, soft magnetic composite (SMC) materials for inductor
cores. IC-compatible high-performance SMC films, with thicknesses that can be
scaled to 50 microns and above without losing performance, will be developed for
the first time. The project's initial goal will be to develop physical and
electrochemical synthesis methodologies for high magnetic moment, low loss, SMC
materials that can be used to fabricate on-chip inductors, replacing ferrite
core-based inductors in circuits. The approach can be scaled to handle different
ranges of power and can be integrated on wafers, package substrates, or boards.
These cores will enable inductor thickness to be reduced by at least 10 times
for use in low form factor, point-of-use, direct current (DC) to DC power
converters and IC voltage regulator circuitry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.