* 2304639
* I-Corps: Ecological Asset Tradeoffs
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Nathaniel Stern, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to enable farmers with as little as one hectare of
land to participate in global carbon and ecosystem services markets supporting
their transition from traditional, degrading farming practices (e.g., monocrops
and dependence on fertilizers, herbicides, and insecticides) to regenerative
farming practices (e.g., agroforestry, low-till, and naturally nutritious,
healthy soil) by offering companies the opportunity to meet their sustainability
goals through the purchase of practice-based ecological assets. Although the
market for these types of ecological assets has not yet been tested, the demand
for carbon credits and other ecosystem services is growing rapidly. Current
carbon credit origination costs are too expensive for small projects, only
making financial sense beyond 1200 hectares in most cases. This technology will
unlock the ability for the roughly 5 million small-holder farmers (farmers with
only a few hectares of land) around the world to participate in these markets,
scaling supply to meet the current demand and making meaningful progress toward
climate goals.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of practice-based methodologies
for verifying changes in ecological state using human-sensing (images and data
recorded via smartphones), sky-sensing (satellite and drone images), remote-
sensing (internet of things devices and sensors) and reputational-sensing
(community accreditation of trustworthy projects). This project is developing a
sustainable and scalable model for issuing practice-based ecological assets
using decentralized, digital forms of measurement, reporting, and verification
of ecosystem services. The technology is a platform to collect, synthesize, and
share verifiable carbon sequestration data from international small-scale
farmers. This approach reduces costs and increases climate action by leveraging
often-overlooked small-holder farmers and technology readily available to them
(more affordable, on their mobile phones, and via satellite imaging), to prove
their conversion to regenerative practices. It also places data immutably on-
chain as Proof-of-Impact (lower cost and more transparent than current methods).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.