* 2304143
* SBIR Phase II:  A software-based tool for beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) drone's connection reliability enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Kim Mahler, VOLTELA INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 998,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will improve Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Systems
(UAS) services used in package delivery, aerial surveillance, and infrastructure
inspections. The goal of the effort is to provide UAS services beyond the visual
line of sight (BVLOS) and enable reliable communication links to remote ground
control stations. Existing solutions for control of BVLOS drones are based on
either satellite connections with expensive subscription fees or cellular-based
products with limited network availability, frequent interruptions, and high
interference. The team’s integrated software solution will enhance the
connection reliability for BVLOS drones using the voice channel redundancy of
the existing mobile network (2G/3G/4G/5G), identify and mitigate the
circumstances of the link failure, and provide an accurate visualization of the
network coverage for optimal route selection. The team’s ubiquitous,
ultrareliable, and low-latency communication technology allows cellular-
connected UAS service providers to reliably control their long-range UAS, and
benefit from fewer mission abortions and reduced costs compared to satellite
links. The flexibility of the software solution can serve every drone use case
and can get more drone companies through the regulatory approval process faster,
reducing the time to enter the market.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop
a software-based solution that provides scalable, redundant, and guaranteed
cellular network connection for BVLOS drones. The proprietary software solution
is based on three enabling features voice channel redundancy, a connection
selection algorithm and a network mapping tool. In this project, the research
and development efforts will be dedicated to 1) the development of the scalable
software-only version of the data-over-voice technology operating with
commercial off-the-shelf communication hardware, 2) implementation of software
solutions to make drone connectivity reliable end-to-end and dynamically adapt
to the requirements of drone use cases; 3) development of the aerial network
coverage visualization tool to provide the drone industry with valuable insights
into connectivity in airspace, 4) firmware implementation of solutions for
overcoming the connectivity failures and further enhancing the network
reliability, and 5) development of an application programming interface (API)
which manages connectivity dashboard. The successful completion of these
activities will deliver the fully functional software-only solution for BVLOS
drones with its safety and performance validated with ground/air measurements,
thus confirming the commercial potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.