* 2304080
* Low-dimensional topology and links of singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Olga Plamenevskaya, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 372,697.00

In nature, singularities are associated with sudden changes or catastrophic
events. In case of a complex surface the link of a singularity is a three-
dimensional object encircling the singularity, or the sharp point, within the
surface. This object often has a complicated shape reflecting properties of the
singularity. In this context, the PI will study a number of questions relating
algebraic and topological properties of the link and its fillings that are four-
dimensional shapes with given boundary. The project includes applications of
these shapes to other much-studied questions in geometry and the role they may
play in certain new constructions. The research has applications in several
other areas of mathematics and science. The PI's activities related to the
project will make significant contribution to undergraduate education,
curriculum development, and graduate as well as postdoctoral training. The PI
will co-organize research seminars, conferences, workshops, and continue her
editorial work at Quantum Topology, a research journal.

The PIâ€™s collaborative research will make significant contributions to important
areas in topology of three- and four-manifolds, with connections to algebraic
geometry and combinatorics. This project will further develop and expand recent
results of the PI and her collaborators, where a new perspective and novel tools
were introduced to the study of symplectic and contact topology of links of
singularities. One of the important questions to be addressed is the comparison
between symplectic fillings that arise in the algebraic context and those that
have more general nature. In addition to fillings, symplectic cobordisms will be
studied. The PI plans to find applications of the newly-developed tools to
constructions of exotic smooth four-manifolds and exotically knotted surfaces.
Another goal is to understand further connections between combinatorial and
symplectic phenomena, and in particular, to use invariants such as Khovanov
homology to detect "unexpected" monodromy factorizations and symplectic
fillings. The project goals include work on a long-standing conjecture about
finiteness of certain types of fillings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.