* 2304526
* SBIR Phase I:  Surgical training platform with customizable training scenarios enabled by 3D printing and artificial intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Travis Reiss, SURGIC, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a customizable surgical
training platform supported by artificial intelligence. Existing surgical
simulators allow trainees to practice in safe environments prior to operating on
patients. These simulators are limited in recreating the challenges of the
operating room and providing feedback to assess trainees’ performance. The
technology developed in this project focuses on forming a better understanding
of methods and techniques to recreate synthetic patient anatomy and how to
provide higher quality assessments of surgical training procedures. The project
will provide a platform for improved medical training of medical students,
residents and surgeons that results in better skilled medical practitioners that
deliver higher quality patient outcomes.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
raising the quality of surgical training platforms by improving the realism of
recreated anatomy and enabling scenario customization during training. The
project uses techniques of 3D printing, mechanical testing, and machine learning
to characterize the properties of synthetic anatomy and objectively assess
trainees’ surgical performance for each scenario. The artificial intelligence
will be trained by mechanical measurements of synthetic anatomy before/after
training operations from users. Comparisons of surgical performance will be
conducted between experienced, practicing surgeons and inexperienced/less
experienced medical students. The anticipated results are the development of a
customizable surgical platform that provides objective feedback on a
personalized basis to improve the standards of surgical practice among trainees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.