* 2304920
* Geometry and topology of surfaces and graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jing Tao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 275,396.00

This project concerns the symmetries and shapes of spaces in dimensions one and
two. Symmetries are formalized mathematically via algebraic objects called
groups. The PI adopts a modern perspective by seeking out spaces where abstract
groups can manifest as symmetries of those spaces. Leveraging the geometric
properties of those spaces, one can deduce algebraic properties of the groups,
and vice versa. The robust interplay between algebra and geometry is a central
theme in mathematics, and working in low dimensions offers the distinct
advantage of working with concrete objects. These objects can be visualized,
drawn, modeled, and held, allowing for a true and intuitive understanding. This
project provides research training opportunities for graduate students. While
this project belongs to pure mathematics, the skills developed, such as strong
geometric intuition and imagination, hold wide-ranging applications beyond
mathematics.

A fundamental theorem in surface theory is the Nielsen-Thurston classification
of surface homeomorphisms. Inspired by Bers’s proof of the classification
theorem, the PI recasts several extremal problems in complex analysis using the
language of hyperbolic geometry. The solutions to these problems have several
applications, including a new proof of the Nielsen-Thurston classification and
the classification of isometries in the Thurston metric on Teichmuller space.
The PI's projects aim to develop a Nielsen-Thurston theory for surfaces of
infinite-type, arguably the most important problem in this burgeoning field. In
addition to surfaces, the PI will study the outer automorphism Out(Fn) groups of
free groups. Connections between mapping class groups and Out(Fn) are now quite
numerous, with the Thurston perspective exported almost entirely to the latter.
In line with this perspective, the PI's research will help determine crucial
dynamical properties of Fn–trees in the boundary of Culler-Vogtmann’s outer
space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.