* 2304222
* SBIR Phase I:  Drug discovery using stem cell derived organoids
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Kitchener Wilson, ROSEBUD BIOSCIENCES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,829.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the development of new therapies
for rare diseases in children. An estimated 350 million people worldwide - half
of which are children - suffer from an estimated 7,000+ known rare diseases
annually, yet 95% of rare diseases still lack treatment. Even though >80% of
rare diseases are genetic in origin, there have been relatively few actual drug
discoveries. This is an enormous problem as 30% of children with rare diseases
will not live to see their 5th birthdays. To address this, drug development can
be accelerated by screening investigational drugs against micro-organs
(“organoids”) that resemble young organs and have the same gene mutations as the
patients. In a simple petri dish, organoids enable the direct study of the
relationship between a patient’s genes and his/her disease. Such organoids
present an opportunity to rapidly identify new disease mechanisms and targeted
therapies. The team is scaling organoid technology into an automated drug
development platform that is high throughput, robust, and applicable to multiple
genetic diseases in children.

This project advances drug development for pediatric rare diseases by
accomplishing two primary objectives: (1) automated heart, liver, and brain
organoid derivation from human stem cells, and (2) automated machine learning
(ML) detection of disease in organoids derived from patients with genetic
diseases affecting any of these three organs. To do this, a combination of
robotics and specific protocols will differentiate tissue- and disease-specific
organoids under standardized conditions. The organoids are monitored with
microscopy as they transition between tissue state. The ML model learns what
healthy organoids look like and uses that information to identify when an
organoid exhibits a disease phenotype. These objectives are important for
reducing batch-to-batch organoid variability and human error that can confound
drug discovery efforts. In these same organoid models, drug screening and
development will be performed to try to reverse or retard the disease phenotype
unique to each disease. The result of this research will be the production of
organoids with high accuracy and precision, as well as an automated means for
detecting changes in heart, liver, and neural organoids that will be essential
for finding new therapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.