* 2304961
* Development of High-throughput Multidimensional Collision Induced Unfolding Technology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Brandon Ruotolo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Brandon Ruotolo and his group at the University of
Michigan are developing powerful new tools for characterizing the three-
dimensional structures of proteins and RNA â€“ both key classes of
biomacromolecules in life processes. Specifically, the Ruotolo group is
expanding the capabilities of "collision induced unfolding" (CIU), an approach
that studies protein structures by quickly removing the water which surrounds
biological molecules in their normal environment, then induces their unfolding
while monitoring their size and shape using a state-of-the-art tool known as ion
mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS). The approach has the potential to
revolutionize the detail and acquisition speed with which biomolecular stability
can be evaluated. Potential applications include the rapid analysis of next-
generation engineered biotherapeutics. The work will provide excellent training
for students interested in research at the interface between chemical
measurements and the pharmaceutical sciences.

Under this award, the Ruotolo research team at the University of Michigan aims
to addresses three main research goals. Firstly, the team will work on building
improved methods for the operation of cyclic-type IM-MS instruments for improved
retention of native-like biomolecular structure, collision cross-section (CCS)
calibration accuracy, and higher-order IM experiments (e.g., IM-CIU and CIUN).
Secondly, and in parallel, the Michigan team will endeavor to develop next-
generation software that incorporates features for automated peak picking,
feature skipping, on-board CCS calibration, and support for CIUN data types.
Then Professor Ruotolo and his students aim to leverage these improved IM-MS and
CIU tools to study antibodies and large RNAs in an effort to build assays that
support cutting-edge biomolecular engineering campaigns of significance to the
biotechnology sector.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.