* 2304682
* A Self-Contained Optical Heterodyned Second Harmonic Sensor
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* John Conboy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Biosensors Program in CBET,
Professor John Conboy and his research group at the University of Utah are
developing a novel optical biosensor capable of detecting and quantitating a
wide range of biological molecules. The proposed research seeks a reliable,
highly sensitive, multiplexed, label-free biosensor for analytes such as
biomarkers found in blood, serum, urine, or other fluids. The approach can
enhance clinical diagnostics and field detection of biological agents.
Integrated with the research is education of both graduate and undergraduate
students in bioanalytical/biophysical methods and techniques. The team is also
engaged in outreach to regional schools, aiming to attract students, including
students from underrepresented groups, to STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) careers.

The need for analytical methods capable of biomarker detection and
quantification is clear. Antibodies, with their exquisite chemical specificity
and high affinity, are exceptionally well-suited for bio-specific detection and
quantification. However, utilizing antibodies for the direct label-free
detection of low molecular weight biomarkers in a noncompetitive immunoassay
represents a major technical challenge due to the difficulty of sensing the
capture event. The Conboy group is using the nonlinear optical Second Harmonic
Generation (SHG) technique to develop a highly sensitive, label-free biomarker
biosensor. A key aspect of this biosensor is a unique optical heterodyned
detection system which significantly enhances the otherwise weak SHG response.
This novel sensor approach is capable of detecting most targets with pi-
electrons, which makes it sensitive to many biomarkers of interest, creating a
highly versatile, label-free detection modality. The methodology under
development in this project is expected to provide a unique analytical approach
that does not compromise sensitivity, yet provides a cost-effective and flexible
label-free noncompetitive biomarker immunoassay.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.