* 2304456
* NSF INCLUDES Network Connector: Expanded Network for Broader Participation in Aerospace Engineering through Education, Mentoring, and Workforce Development
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Chiang Shih, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,528.00

The Expanded Network for Broader Participation in Aerospace Engineering through
Education, Mentoring, and Workforce Development (ENBP-AE) project seeks to
provide research and workforce development opportunities for the nation’s URM
students in aerospace engineering and aerospace-related disciplines. The project
goal is to equitably scale up the Broadening Participation of Next Generation
Aerospace Engineers (BP-AE) program, a NASA MUREP-INCLUDES grant at Florida A&M
University, which has successfully provided aerospace internships and
educational opportunities to students at three Florida universities through the
identification of shared goals, measures, and mutually reinforcing activities.
The expansion project will be executed across three fronts. First, the multi-
sector BP-AE partnerships that unite the expertise and resources of a broad
range of stakeholders will be expanded to include five additional HBCUs, ongoing
NSF projects at FAMU, and the NSF Eddie Bernice Johnson INCLUDES National
Network. Second, a sustainable and evidenced-based mentoring structure will be
implemented for all network participating students. Third, the leadership role
of the networked MSIs to strengthen and expand the engineering workforce will be
fostered through research and project-based learning activities.

Through an innovative integration of industry-supported research, aerospace
internships, workforce development, and mentoring activities for undergraduate
and graduate students, the ENBP-AE project addresses the need for sustainable
solutions to the shared goals of URM students, MSIs, and the aerospace industry.
The project will lead to new knowledge about the efficient development of STEM
mentoring, research, and educational paths for MSI programs. One aspect of the
work is a multi-layered recruitment strategy that includes inter-university
project-based learning to increase the STEM identity of URM students and propel
their interest in STEM graduate programs. Another aspect of the work is an
evidenced-based and sustainable mentoring structure that eases the transition to
effective STEM mentoring for network partners. Finally, the work aims to advance
the MSI faculty leadership role in broadening participation through
collaboration with each other, research centers, and industry.

This project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the
Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering
and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate
collaborative infrastructure building to advance and sustain systemic change to
broaden participation in STEM at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.