* 2304235
* STTR Phase I:  Mechanically Controlled Drug Delivery Platform for Joint Environments
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* George Dodge, MECHANO THERAPEUTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to address the strong clinical need for a
single injection/dose sparing delivery system that can safely release
therapeutics in the joint space over time in a controllable dosing manner for
sustained symptomatic relief. Early and efficient treatments that mitigate
inflammation are becoming increasingly critical to ease the care and cost
burdens associated with musculoskeletal conditions, which impact 1.71 billion
people globally. The proposed platform, which can be applied to a wide variety
of drugs, including small molecules, proteins, and biologics will address the
market need for improved drug delivery systems by providing a tunable drug
delivery system that is responsive to different degrees of mechanical force
created by different movement types. The solution will allow for more precise
delivery of drugs when and where they are needed. This feature will translate to
fewer injections, fewer systemic side effects, and overall improved drug
efficacy compared to current offerings, in turn providing improved patient
quality of life and outcomes. The proposed mechano-activated drug delivery
platform is expected to have a major impact in controlling musculoskeletal
diseases by improving efficacy of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved
treatments and enabling new therapeutic strategies.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a force-stimulated drug delivery system that uses the body’s natural
physiological loading of musculoskeletal environments for controlled release of
nearly any drug. The technology is based on the tunable rupture profile of
proprietary mechano-activated microcapsules - translating to fewer injections,
fewer systemic side effects, and overall improved drug efficacy. Preliminary
work has demonstrated the ability of the microcapsules to encapsulate and
release viable biological therapeutics upon mechanical force, to provide tunable
mechano-activation thresholds, and to stay and rupture within a living joint.
For this Phase I project, a proof-of-concept study will be conducted to
establish the feasibility of the mechano-activated microcapsule drug delivery
platform in a biological joint environment. This study will be accomplished by
evaluating the anti-inflammatory therapeutic effects of interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1Ra), a drug with established ability to inhibit acute joint
inflammation, delivered via mechano-activated microcapsules in an established
equine model of Interleukin-1-beta (IL-1beta)-induced acute joint inflammation,
in comparison to soluble formulations. This study will provide a basis for
investigation into more specific disease applications, models, and terminal
outcomes where modification of the disease process over the long term can be
evaluated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.