* 2304888
* CAS-MNP: Understanding the Interactions Between Small Molecules and Plastic Nanoparticles for Environmental Remediation and Sensing Using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Leah Casabianca, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 505,594.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the Division of
Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Leah Casabianca and her team at Clemson University will carry out
experiments aimed at understanding the fundamental nature of binding between
nanoscale plastic particles and small molecule pollutants. Plastic pollution is
a growing environmental concern, made worse by the increasing use of plastic
during the coronavirus pandemic. Large plastic particles break down in the
environment to eventually form plastic nanoparticles. These particles may have a
variety of surface characteristics due to the variable conditions experienced by
the plastics in polluted waterways. Plastic nanoparticles also have a large
surface-to-volume ratio and can be porous, allowing them to easily sorb small
molecule contaminants that may also be present in polluted waterways. If plastic
nanoparticles are ingested by wildlife or humans, these toxic small molecules
may leach out of the plastic and cause harm. As part of the project, Dr.
Casabianca’s team will participate in summer camps sponsored by Clemson’s
Programs for Educational Enrichment and Retention (PEER) and Women in Science
and Engineering (WISE) programs and will also develop demonstrations for high-
school students that relate chemistry to the problem of nanoscale plastic
pollution.

The project will make use of Saturation-Transfer Difference Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (STD-NMR) spectroscopy to test different types of plastics
(polyethylene, polypropylene, and polyvinyl chloride) for their ability to bind
different contaminants. Competition STD-NMR will be used to investigate how
other substances present in polluted waterways influence sorption of potential
contaminants. Beyond just binding constants, the atomic site-specific nature of
NMR spectroscopy and detailed structural information that it can provide will be
used to understand the driving forces that are responsible for binding. Finally,
in this project, the Clemson team will endeavor to develop new NMR methods to
answer some the next questions on the horizon of environmental remediation and
sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.