* 2304153
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing water and energy technologies for the manufacturing and utilities sectors (WI, IL)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Amy Jensen, Milwaukee 7 Water Council
* Cooperative Agreement
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 995,943.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on facilitating
the solutions manufacturers and utilities need to mitigate and adapt to the
effects of climate change through water and energy innovation and quickly
scaling those solutions for wider use by industry, government, and other
stakeholders in the United States and across the world. The primary geographic
area includes eastern Wisconsin and northern Illinois from Milwaukee west to
Madison and from Chicagoland north to the Fox Valley and Green Bay. Eastern
Wisconsin has a strong reputation for manufacturing, innovation, and academic
research excellence. The region's companies, utilities, and researchers have
long focused on solutions to manage better, measure or store water and energy.
To retain Wisconsin's value as the top manufacturing workforce in the nation,
its industries must be equipped with the water and energy solutions they will
need to address the material risks posed by climate change. The main partners in
this project are The Water Council, MKE Tech Hub Coalition, Wisconsin Technology
Council, Marquette University, Madison Region Economic Partnership and Wisconsin
Center for Manufacturing & Productivity.

The project will build on existing ecosystems of partners and stakeholders,
particularly concerning water technology and energy efficiency, to create a
larger, more effective ecosystem continuously focused on developing better
solutions and getting them to market. The Engine will map existing use-inspired
research efforts at the university level, including NSF Industry-University
Cooperative Research Centers and university licensing groups, and within the
private sector to coordinate and strengthen efforts. It will also work with
manufacturers and utilities to determine energy- and water-related needs not
currently in the research pipeline. The team will leverage the existing
investor/angel network in Wisconsin and work to identify other investors with an
appetite for supporting climate resiliency solutions. Finally, it will include
an inclusive plan, especially targeting racial diversity, for growing a world-
class talent pipeline to foster climate resiliency technologies, including
enhanced STEM education and nontraditional re/upskilling of the incumbent
workforce. The Development Award will allow the Engine to build a unified,
integrated, and comprehensive water and energy resiliency engine plan ready for
immediate implementation encompassing the identification of critical use-
inspired research, workforce, and DEIA initiatives, private-sector angel and
venture investors, start-up maturity resources, private sector use-inspired
research commitments, significant financial public sector commitments supporting
the project, and the necessary experience and skills required by senior
leadership.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.