* 2304883
* Pillararene-Basket Conjugates, Deeper Cavity Baskets and Covalent Basket Cages for Allosteric Complexation of Toxicants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jovica Badjic, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 521,946.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jovica Badjić at Ohio State
University aims to develop novel sequestering molecules capable to binding to a
variety of analytes includes toxins. Vase-shaped compounds (i.e., baskets) are
to be prepared, functionalized, and tested for trapping small molecules using
methods of both computational and experimental chemistry. These studies are
aimed to broaden fundamental understanding about the process by which specific
analytes, including toxins, can be captured in complex biological environment.
The program will educate graduate, undergraduate students, and public about
health-related intoxications in our society and ways to use supramolecular
chemistry to address them. The interdisciplinary research training to be
provided to students will help to prepare a skilled workforce for the chemical
industry or academia.

The first objective of the program is to examine conjugation of molecular
baskets to pillararenes. A rigid, deep, and well-defined aromatic pocket of
basket-pillararene (BPr) hybrids is designed to favor a full inclusion and
desolvation of targeted biologically relevant guest ligands, including tobacco
pyridine alkaloids, stimulants, opioids, and hallucinogens contributing to the
formation of tight complexes. Two belts of functional groups, at the top and in
the middle, are positioned to generate favorable host-guest contacts to improve
stability and binding selectivity. The second objective of the program is to
learn about encapsulation of the potent anticancer drug, methotrexate, that
inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, thereby interfering with pyrimidine
biosynthesis, and hence DNA replication. This sizeable and negatively charged
compound is expected to fold and thus complement the inner space of deeper
cavity baskets holding negative carboxylates. The third objective of the program
is to develop allosteric encapsulation of four anti-cancer drugs within water-
soluble covalent basket cages, having the shape of a truncated tetrahedron with
four baskets at the corners. A projected mechanism of cooperative encapsulation
occurring over a narrow concentration window is anticipated to permit an
unprecedented level of control in the sequestration of toxicants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.