* 2304121
* Scalable Single Photon Detection Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nicole McFarlane, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2026
* USD 430,000.00

Extremely low light levels or low numbers of photons require the use of
extremely sensitive optical detectors. Challenges of working with these low
light levels impact many applications such as optical quantum communication,
nuclear imaging, and light detection and ranging. Single photon avalanche diodes
are capable of a response from only a single photon and Silicon Photomultipliers
are effectively an array of single photon avalanche diodes. A novel form of
these detectors, known as perimeter gated single photon avalanche diodes
(PGSPAD) have been successfully demonstrated in the commercial CMOS processes
which drive modern technological advances such as the cell phone. This project
seeks to extend this new device into successful implementation in other
technologies and to develop the full detection system. The broader significance
lies in the development of models and architectures for new scalable single
photon detectors which will impact basic science and influence fields such as
national security, geographical studies, space exploration, and public health.
The project incorporates mentoring of a diverse population of rising 12th
graders, undergraduate students, and graduate students by leveraging existing
training programs at the University of Tennessee. Results from this research
will be disseminated through conferences and journals as well as through
creation of short summary videos.

The project leverages perimeter gated single photon avalanche diodes to develop
scalable detection systems. The additional polysilicon gate of perimeter gated
single photon avalanche diodes can adjust important device properties such as
the dark count rate and the breakdown voltage. This adjustment facilitates
correcting non-uniformity of detector characteristics, such as the noise,
dynamic range, and photon detection probabilities, across an array of devices.
This project seeks to adapt the existing PGSPAD devices to other technologies,
such as silicon on insulator based technology, through fabrication of test
structures to verify physics based device and optical simulations, the
development of a scalable architecture based on tileable sub-modules and
wireless transmission across a stacked chip structure, and integration of
processing directly into the detection system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.