* 2304554
* SBIR Phase I:  Single-Pulse Radio Frequency Software Suite to Improve Advanced Driver Assistance Systems Safety
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Allyson McKinney, SOLOPULSE CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,059.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is focused on developing software to enhance the performance of
existing radar hardware on Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS). Despite
development of ADAS sensing technologies, there are, on average, 14,386 car
accidents per day in the United States alone. The performance of these
technologies still needs to be improved significantly to ensure the safety of
drivers. This project will transform the performance of current ADAS systems,
reducing the number of car crashes and fatalities that occur daily. The total
addressable market size for ADAS radar is estimated to be $6.61 billion, and
this is the fastest growing market among all ADAS sensors. The current radar
technology improvements being introduced today are focused on hardware, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence. These current technologies are addressing
issues that deal with resolution, but they come with the negative effects of
slower processing times, higher cost, and less efficiency. The successful
development of the software solutions in this project will disrupt the ADAS
industry as this innovation is physics-based and can unlock the true potential
of radar performance.

The intellectual merit of this project is focused on developing and deploying a
software suite for remote sensing and data transmission using existing hardware.
The software suite involves three primary steps: locating objects, identifying
objects, and communicating the findings to other vehicles and/or infrastructure
in the surrounding environment. The first two steps fall underneath the remote
sensing category. The third falls under the communications category. Simulation
development will be done for all three steps. Once robust simulations have been
developed, the remote sensing portion of the software suite will be tested on an
industry standard radar unit. The anticipated outcome of the test deployment is
that the remote sensing piece of the software suite will enable conventional
ADAS radars to achieve higher resolution and lower latency. This deployment is
the first step in hardware development to create a safer and complete ADAS
software suite. The results will be used to assess the reliability and
feasibility of the proposed software suite in a real-world environment.
Additionally, the results will be used to evaluate the efficacy of the software
suite by benchmarking performance against current ADAS radar performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.