* 2304514
* SBIR Phase II:  Building the digital twin of radiology operations
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Benoit Scherrer, QUANTIVLY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2025
* USD 979,657.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the utilization of medical
imaging equipment and potentially increase access to medical imaging for the
population. Today, medical imaging facilities operate expensive equipment but
lack access to operational data and modern tools to monitor and use them more
efficiently. The company is building a digital twin of radiology operations to
continuously capture imaging operations, monitor them, suggest optimizations,
and optimally schedule patients. Beyond reporting and scheduling capabilities,
the models will allow the prediction of interventions in software for the
evaluation and comparison of different scenarios in-silico without real-world
experimentation. The more efficient use of scanners is expected, in turn, to
potentially benefit the patient population as it will reduce the wait time for
imaging, increase patient access, shorten imaging protocols, reduce sedation
duration, reduce and predict delays, and ultimately improve the patient
experience. The data unified in the digital twin will also open new avenues of
research for radiologists and researchers.

The proposed project aims at developing and testing key technological
innovations underpinning our digital twin vision. The company will develop a
generic architecture to harmonize data across many sources, including from the
scheduling system and the scanners themselves. The company will develop and test
new artificial intelligence (AI) techniques to augment the data and unlock
essential descriptors to manage operations. This solution will include AI to
passively learn imaging protocols from the patients’ exams and automatically
detect protocol deviations. The company will also use AI to automatically
characterize the content of images and enable them to be queried. The company
will evaluate federated learning techniques to allow learning “at the edge” on
large datasets at scale, without sharing the data, alleviating data privacy
challenges. The company will incorporate advances into a smart recommendation
engine that continuously mines customer data to identify opportunities for
improvement and proposes interventions. Finally, the company will develop and
test key building blocks for implementing a smart scheduling assistant that uses
retrospective data and digital simulations to optimally schedule exams while
maximizing equipment utilization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.