* 2304946
* Chiral Electronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gang-Yu Liu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 760,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Colin Nuckolls and Xavier Roy
of Columbia University will explore the development of a new class of
macromolecular materials that exhibit a unique combination of electronic and
chiral properties and explore how the combination can manifest itself in
functional materials and new technological applications. The project is
interdisciplinary in nature, spanning concepts in chemistry, physics, and
materials science. It integrates state-of-the-art design and synthesis of chiral
macromolecular pi-systems with test structures to study their ability to act as
filters and valves for spin transport. The chirality of the macromolecular
building blocks will be tuned and the resulting structures will be assembled on
surfaces and in junctions. The macromolecules and their properties will be
evaluated for quantum mechanical applications such as spintronics, spin-
polarized light-emission, and spin-controlled catalysis. In the course of
conducting this research project, graduate students will be trained and prepared
for future multidisciplinary science careers. This will be complemented with a
coordinated effort that spans curriculum development, mentoring of undergraduate
students and outreach towards K-8 schools. In addition, the principal
investigators will continue to develop science demonstrations and programs to
increase public awareness of chemistry through their digital outreach efforts.

The project will explore how chirality in a class of designer organic
macromolecules can be tuned, dynamically and statically, to create effective
spin filters and spin valves. The molecules are an unusual class of
synthetically tunable electron-accepting molecules created by the principal
investigators. The program is built around two helical π-systems, namely
twistacenes and helicenes. These molecules have conduits for electron transport
that are helical in nature and some of these molecules exhibit the largest
molecular chiroptical activity known. These two important classes of helical
π-systems and their chirality form the basis for the project to understand how
their chirality can be used to control the spin-selective transport. The team
will couple these designed helical π-systems with a set of complementary, well-
controlled electrical and electrochemical experimental platforms to quantify the
molecules’ spin filtering capabilities. To realize this structure-properties
study, the molecules will be integrated into model electrical test structures as
a means to probe their spin-selective transport properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.