* 2304412
* SBIR Phase I:  A clean, biological solution to sustainable energy’s rare earth problem
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Alexa Schmitz, REEGEN INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to reduce the negative environmental impacts of rare earth
element (REE) production through the development of a clean, sustainable system
for REE extraction and purification using biology. Such a system would allow for
affordable, low-impact REE production in the United States which, in turn, would
reduce dependence on REE imports, alleviating a significant supply risk and
concerns for national security. REEs are critical for manufacturing many modern
electronics and sustainable energy technologies, including electric motors and
wind turbine generators, solid state lighting, battery anodes, high-temperature
superconductors, and high-strength lightweight alloys. Such applications are
increasing demands on the global REE supply, which is predominantly controlled
outside of the United States due to the cost of environmental regulations and
labor. Nearly all REE production today comes from mining ore, which can cause
its own environmental detriment, and will not be able to meet the rising demand
for REEs. To bridge the gap between supply and demand, and attenuate the impacts
of mining, REEs will be recovered from various waste and end-of-life sources,
promoting a circular economy. The recovery of REEs from secondary sources would
create new jobs, especially with the development of new infrastructure for the
collection and pre-processing of REE-containing materials.

The output of this SBIR Phase I project is an end-to-end biological system for
REE recovery that can replace the most environmentally damaging steps from
source to market, including bio-extraction, selection, and separation of REEs.
The use of microorganisms for each step allows for a much cleaner process, and
genomic optimization for rapid customization to a variety of REE feedstocks. REE
bio-extraction is done with biodegradable lixiviant produced by optimized
microbial strains. Bio-selection is done with REE-specific ligands immobilized
in a synthetic biological matrix. Finally, bio-separations are done through the
selective sorption and desorption of different REEs to engineered bacterial
membranes in columns that bind specific REEs with different affinities. Genetic
customization is enabled through comprehensive identification of the genetic
elements underlying a trait of interest, followed by incorporation of genetic
engineering for optimization of the overall commercial process. In Phase I of
the project, efforts are focused on the identification of the variables that
most contribute to efficiency, as well as the genetic mechanisms driving those
variables.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.