* 2304953
* Quantifying Agriculture as a Driver of Regional Climate Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Justin Mankin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2026
* USD 582,713.00

The transformation of global agriculture over the last century is rightly called
a revolution, as the use of fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation, and
hybridization has boosted crop yields by perhaps a factor of three. The
increased yields mean that today's croplands are home to the most intense
vegetation growth on earth, accompanied by the greatest plant water use on
earth. Most of the water taken up by plants is released to the atmosphere
through the leaves, thus higher crop yields should be accompanied by increases
in atmospheric humidity. Moreover, since thermal energy is expended in
converting liquid water into water vapor, increased humidity is typically
accompanied by cooling. In the absence of irrigation, atmospheric moistening
comes at the expense of soil moisture, as the water vapor released from the
leaves is first taken up from the soil by the plant roots. Given these effects
on humidity, temperature, and soil moisture, along with the fact that croplands
cover about a third of the world's land surface, it is natural to ask what
effects the Green Revolution has had on global climate. But such effects are
difficult to identify, particularly as they could differ from one region to
another.

In this project the Principal Investigators (PIs) examine the effects of
agriculture on climate extremes, focusing on three particular types: 1) heat
waves and humid heat waves, the latter measured by the wet bulb temperature, 2)
flash drought, meaning droughts with sudden onset, and 3) prolonged hot/dry and
cool/wet conditions. The PIs examine several hypotheses, one that agricultural
intensification increases the risk of flash drought during hot and dry growing
seasons. Another is that agriculture reduces the risk of dry heat waves but
increases the risk of humid heat waves. A central consideration for the work is
that the effects of vegetation on climate extremes are likely to depend on the
aridity of the region, as in more arid regions evaporation and transpiration are
limited by the amount of moisture in the soil, while in regions of greater water
abundance the limiting factor is the amount of energy (sunlight, in particular)
available to convert liquid water into water vapor.

The work involves analysis of several datasets including reanalysis products and
climatic precipitation datasets, and simulations from the Community Earth System
Model (CESM2) including version 5 of the Community Land Model (CLM, version 5),
and analysis of simulations from the Land Use Model Intercomparison Project
(LUMIP). CLM includes a representation of agricultural land cover and irrigation
which can be enabled or disabled to allow comparisons of simulations with and
without agricultural effects. The LUMIP archive includes simulations for a
historical period (1850 to the present) in which either CO2 or land cover is
held fixed, and with farm and pastureland treated explicitly as agricultural
land or counterfactually as either unmanaged grassland or as agricultural land
with irrigation fixed at 1850 levels.

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest given the impacts of
climate extremes on human activities. In addition the project provide support
and training to a graduate student and undergraduate work-study students.
Students are recruited in collaboration with the Syracuse Office for
Undergraduate Research and Creative Engagement (SOURCE) and other organizations
dedicated to enhancing the diversity of the science and technology workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.