* 2304829
* AI-Driven Design of RF Pulses for Enhancing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Gianluigi Veglia, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 540,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Gianluigi Veglia and his group at the
University of Minnesota are developing new radiofrequency (RF) irradiation
techniques to enhance the performance of important probes of chemical structure,
including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). Specifically, the Veglia group is utilizing powerful software
that invokes artificial intelligence to assist the design process. The resulting
methods have the potential to enable the acquisition of higher quality data for
chemical and structural analysis of biopolymers and, as a result, are expected
to improve image quality and acquisition times in MRI. The methods developed
will be made freely available to the scientific community. Undergraduate and
graduate students engaged in the research will receive rigorous training in
basic and advanced concepts in magnetic resonance and an introduction to the use
of artificial intelligence for optimization processes.

The Veglia group has recently developed new software (GENETICS-AI) that
generates highly compensated RF pulse shapes with unprecedented levels of
fidelity for applications to NMR and MRI. The new RF shapes are inherently
broadband, with tunable fidelity of spin operation. The new RF pulses have been
benchmarked using a classical spin entanglement problem, obtaining a fidelity
level of 99.999%. The application to liquid and solid-state NMR experiments
resulted in higher signal-to-noise levels for multidimensional spectra. The team
is now developing capabilities for RF pulses with both phase and amplitude
modulations using an evolutionary algorithm and subsequent training of an
artificial intelligence routine to optimize the power and phase of new RF
shapes. The ultimate goal is to obtain high-fidelity pulses and pulse sequences
that will be implemented on commercial NMR spectrometers or MRI scanners
operating at high and ultra-high magnetic fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.