* 2304998
* Development of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer with Zeptomole Sensitivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gurudev Dutt, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and partial co-
funding from the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Experimental Physics program,
Dr. Gurudev Dutt and his team at the University of Pittsburgh are investigating
processes in small volumes, such as inside a cell or within nanoscale materials
such as battery electrode materials. These processes often differ markedly from
those in bulk solutions due to increased surface area effects. Statistical
physics, thermodynamics, and dynamical considerations can play an outsized role
in these domains – it is therefore critical to develop sensing and imaging
technologies that can access this domain. Specifically, the Dutt group is
developing tools to provide a window into the very fast (nanosecond to
microsecond) functional dynamics of systems involving just a few hundred
molecules with sub-micron spatial resolution. The high-throughput platform can
provide images in an array of channels being subjected to various chemical or
physical stimuli. The multi-faceted challenges to be tackled provide educational
and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students that form the
future scientific and professional workforce. The PI also presents lectures
about optical spectroscopy to students at a local high school to serve as a
scaffold for junior year chemistry projects, and will work with their science
teachers to create a summer workshop on “Quantum Sensing and Quantum Computing
for Chemistry”. The long-term aim of these outreach efforts is to break the
cycle of generational poverty by preparing low-income youth for higher
education. The main objective of this research program is to create a next-
generation biochemistry and biophysics exploration platform to study nanoscale
electron spin dynamics under room-temperature conditions. During the three years
of this project, the Dutt team will measure electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectra of electron spin-labeled bio-molecules with zeptomole sensitivity
(10-21 moles) in an optically addressable microfluidic device, with full control
over temperature and magnetic field. They will design and construct a diamond-
based chip with quantum sensors that can obtain reproducible EPR spectra on
small ensembles of electron spins at room temperature, eventually reaching the
level of single spins.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.