* 2304486
* SBIR Phase I:  Radiation Tolerant, High-Voltage, Silicon Carbide Devices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* SUDARSAN UPPILI, SCDEVICE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to enable smaller, lighter, and higher-performance
satellites, thereby making satellites cheaper to manufacture and launch. Lighter
satellites reduce launch costs or permit greater payload performance for a given
mass. Less fuel is required to launch lighter satellites, reducing the
environmental impact of greenhouse gases generated during launch. Internet
connectivity through satellite is becoming increasingly pervasive, and if costs
continue to decline, it might become ubiquitous, supporting workforce
development and educational outreach in hitherto unserved places. Many
components, such as power supplies, can be made lighter and smaller when silicon
carbide semiconductors are utilized in place of silicon high voltage devices in
applications such as aerospace and satellites. The ultimate goal is to replace
all silicon high-voltage devices in satellites and aerospace with silicon
carbide products. It has been demonstrated that conventionally designed
commercial high voltage silicon carbide materials cannot withstand the high
radiation levels encountered in outer space applications. The objective of this
project is to develop, manufacture, test, and demonstrate the viability of
silicon carbide high voltage semiconductor products that are resistant to
radiation levels comparable to those encountered in space.

Commercially available silicon carbide (SiC) power devices are not approved for
use in heavy ion radiation environments due to their susceptibility to
catastrophic failure and burnout at voltages below 20% of the specified voltage
when exposed to radiation. Consequently, SiC high voltage devices are not
currently used in space applications, despite the fact that they offer very
compelling features for mission-critical applications. Using simulation tools,
the team has created a SiC junction barrier Schottky diode that can operate at
up to 1200 V under high ion radiation. A radiation-resistant silicon carbide
junction barrier Schottky diode rated at 1200 V will be designed, produced, and
tested for radiation resistance. To accomplish the target radiation performance,
a multi-pronged strategy will be applied, including novel device designs to
reduce the electric field and mitigation of thermal runaway caused by ion strike
when the device is under reverse bias. Schottky barrier materials with improved
thermal stability will be used. Successful implementation of the intended
approach will open the way for the integration of SiC Schottky diode devices in
space applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.