* 2304937
* Photophysics of Colloidal Semiconductor Nanoplatelets Relevant to Quantum Optics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2026
* USD 516,913.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Chemistry Division, Professor Todd Krauss and his students at the
University of Rochester will explore new ways to interface single photons of
light and matter, bringing chemistry into a field known as quantum optics. A
longstanding problem in quantum science concerns the requirement for systems to
operate at ultracold temperatures in order to maintain quantum behavior, which
is not generally practical. At room temperature, however, the random vibrations
arising from heat energy causes matter based quantum systems to get out of step
with each other, ruining the overall quantum state. Single photons of light have
significant potential for preserving the quantum nature of states at room
temperature because light is not affected by thermal effects. In practice,
unfortunately, it is not generally known how to use light in this manner to
preserve quantum states. This project will take on this challenge while also
helping to train the next generation of quantum information scientists,
including supporting the increase of racial and ethnic diversity of the STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce through a summer
undergraduate student research partnership program. The team is also generating
public excitement in quantum science through outreach efforts at the Rochester
Museum and Science Center. The overall goal of this project is to develop a
detailed and complete, fundamental understanding of the photophysical properties
of CdSe nanoplatelets (NPLs), such as exciton coherence, and the purity of
single photon emission, which are relevant for photonic applications in quantum
science. The giant absorption strength per nanoparticle, well defined surface
chemistry on the large area faces, atomically flat surfaces, and efficient
photoluminescence (PL) make CdSe NPLs very attractive for potential applications
in quantum optics. Two specific aims are being pursued with the aims of
advancing knowledge of NPL photophysical properties: 1) characterizing the
photophysical properties of core-crown CdSe NPLs relevant to single photon
quantum emission; and 2) establishing the relationship between physical
morphology and photon emission properties for individual CdSe NPLs doped with
Ag+ down to the single photon level. Through these studies, this project aims to
develop an understanding of how the physical, morphological, and chemical
properties of NPLs impact their single photon emission characteristics. In
successful, this project could provide the field with a roadmap for generating
bright and stable single photon emitters based on colloidal CdSe NPLs, which is
essential for the future development of room temperature quantum-based
technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.