* 2304988
* Conference: Advances in Mathematical Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Sabrina Streipert, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 21,790.00

This award will support a workshop on June 2-3, 2023, at the University of
Pittsburgh (https://www.mathematics.pitt.edu/eco23). The workshop will provide
an opportunity for junior researchers, including graduate and undergraduate
students, postdocs, early career faculty, as well as experienced mathematicians
and biologists to learn innovative research practices on advances in
mathematical ecology. Particularly, the workshop will be an interdisciplinary
event that brings together researchers from Mathematics and Ecology to discuss
the effects of ecological factors such as changes in environmental conditions on
species adaptation, migration, and coexistence. These topics will be addressed
via talks and poster presentations based on experimental data, modeling
approaches, and theoretical and computational mathematics. As such, the workshop
will promote connections across areas of mathematics and facilitate the exchange
of ideas between mathematics and other areas such as ecology, natural resource
management, evolutionary biology, and computer science. The workshop includes
activities for broadening participation of the underrepresented groups and
promoting equity and inclusion in the mathematical sciences. Specifically,
participants are selected to promote equity and diversity across participants
and include researchers and trainees from a diverse pool of career stages, both
from local and nationwide institutions. With the speaker's consent, slides and
recordings from conference talks will be posted on the conference webpage to
achieve an even broader dissemination of results and impact. All participants
will be encouraged to submit their work to the Journal of Biological Systems, an
open-access platform, which agreed to feature a special issue dedicated to this
workshop.

The workshop “Advances in Mathematical Ecology” aims to increase the research
activities and interdisciplinary collaborations between researchers from
mathematics, ecology, natural resource management, evolutionary biology, and
computer science. Although the mathematical analysis of ecological models often
neglects environmental variability to aid in the attainment of analytical
results, experimental data suggests that ecologically important traits can
evolve rapidly in response to environmental changes/variability. This may affect
species fitness, persistence, migration, and immune systems and highlights the
need to incorporate environmental fluctuations into efforts to predict how
species will respond to such environmental factors. Indeed, understanding how
species respond to changing environments is fundamental for the sustainable
management of species and their ecosystems. The workshop will highlight the
impact of environmental changes as measured from experimental and analyzed data,
techniques for the implementation of environmental fluctuations in ecological
and eco-evolutionary models, and methods to study the effects thereof on how
species evolve over time. The specific workshop topics will include: i) Methods
of implementing environmental fluctuations in spatio-temporal ecological models
with a comparison of seasonal forced model parameters and models including
probabilistic parameters. ii) The potential and limitations of data-driven
models in ecology, and their alignment with theoretical models. iii)
Experimentally observed and model-predicted effects of environmental changes on
the dispersal of species, on the interaction across species, and on how species
respond to diseases. These topics involve links across the areas of Mathematical
Modeling, Ecology, Evolution, Nonlinear Dynamical Systems, Stochastic Dynamics,
Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, Calculus of Variations, and
Statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.