* 2304999
* CAS: Template Directed Synthesis of Earth Abundant Metal Oxide and Chalcogenide Nanoshells
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jingyi Chen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 493,595.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Jingyi Chen of the University
of Arkansas will study synthetic approaches to new nanostructures made of non-
precious metals, and their oxides or chalcogenides. These studies aim to offer
accessibility to multifunctional nanocomposite materials of earth abundant
metals as alternatives to costly noble metals in various applications. The
targeted nanostructures composed of earth abundant elements have the potential
to be deployed in key technologies related to energy conversion, energy storage,
chemical sensing, and water treatment. As part of this project, Professor Chen
and her research team will provide opportunities to research students from
underrepresented groups, to contribute to the training of a diverse, globally-
competitive future workforce. The results from this project will be converted to
educational videos for educational outreach through the “Chemistry_Rules”
YouTube channel, the “Nanochemistry 101 Boot Camp,” and the annual “Science Day”
event at the local Scott Family Amazeum.

Hollow nanostructures have become an emerging topic of study because they
outperform their solid counterparts in various applications. Their superior
physicochemical properties stem from their low mass density, high porosity and
large reaction surface-to-volume ratio. The proposed research aims to bridge the
gap in the template-directed synthesis of earth abundant metal oxide and
chalcogenide nanoshells by developing approaches to precisely control their
morphology and composition at the nanoscale. The template-directed synthesis
being conducted here involves a deposition-etching process using Cu
nanostructures with well-defined morphology as templates. The conformational
deposition of non-precious metal oxide/chalcogenide shells of 3d transition
metals will be achieved through reduction-oxidation/chalcogenidation steps under
temperature modulation. The control of shell composition will be accomplished by
using molecular bimetallic single-source precursors. The use of Cu as templates
allows it to be removed by selective etching, leaving the well-defined metal
oxide/chalcogenide nanoshells. Such templated directed synthesis offers a facile
means to control the thickness, shape, and composition of the nanoshells of
earth abundant metal oxides and chalcogenides. In the longer term, the resulting
hollow structures obtained have the potential for use in energy
conversion/storage, sensing, and environmental remediation applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.