* 2304570
* CAS: Dual-Mode Operando Nanothermometry and Reaction Monitoring for Probing Photochemical and Photothermal Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrea Pickel, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Andrea Pickel of the University of Rochester is
developing a combined nanoscale thermometry and chemical reaction monitoring
technique to study thermal contributions to plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis. In
plasmon-driven photocatalysis, the collective oscillation of free electrons
drives chemical reactions on the surfaces of metal nanostructures, but the
relative contributions of non-thermal plasmonic effects versus surface heating
to the observed enhancement are debated. The Pickel group will develop a
spectroscopic technique that employs the temperature-dependent luminescence of
individual upconverting nanoparticles for thermometry while simultaneously
monitoring the chemical reaction via enhanced Raman scattering from the reacting
molecules. Their discoveries could lead to a better understanding of whether
heating plays an important role in catalyzing plasmon-enhanced reactions. Dr.
Pickel will also develop an undergraduate lab course based on luminescence
thermometry and an educational activity focused on plasmonic sensing for local
elementary school students.

Current approaches for isolating thermal contributions to plasmonic
photocatalysis measure temperature via the same surface-enhanced Raman
scattering spectra used to monitor the chemical reactions. These spectra,
however, depend on local chemical and electromagnetic effects that can vary
through a measurement, which makes elucidation of plasmonic heating difficult to
separate. To provide high-fidelity operando thermometry during plasmonic
photocatalysis, a single laser will be used to both excite upconverting
nanoparticle (UCNP) thermometers and photocatalyze a chemical reaction. The
thermometry and reaction monitoring signals naturally separate in the spectral
domain due to the large anti-Stokes shift of the UCNP luminescence. Several
objectives will be investigated including understanding how different the
plasmonic environment affects the temperature-dependent UCNP luminescence,
fabricating substrates with different thermal properties yet near-identical
plasmonic properties, and using nanomanipulation to place UCNP thermometers with
spectrally distinct emission at strategic locations on plasmonic nanostructures.
These studies have the potential to elucidate the importance of thermal
contributions to plasmonic photocatalysis as well as have broad applications in
chemistry for systems in which the intrinsic spectral separation of the UCNP
emission and Raman spectra originating from analytes or biomolecules is likewise
advantageous.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.