* 2304936
* Harnessing the Advantages of Dark Exciton in Perovskite Nanostructures as the Quantum Emitter and the Source of Charge Carriers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2026
* USD 489,703.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Chemistry Division, Professor Dong Hee Son at Texas A&M University will
investigate the role of dark excitons in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals for
generating light and charges with controlled quantum properties. Lead halide
perovskite materials are recognized as efficient sources of light and charges
for various applications such as photonics and solar cells. Professor Son's
research team is studying lead halide perovskite materials at the few-nanometer
size scale where a special excited state called the dark exciton becomes readily
accessible. Dark excitons can have lifetimes a thousand-fold longer than the
typical excited state in these materials. Additionally, dark excitons have the
ability to generate light with properties that differ from those derived from
the usual excited states. Professor Son's team is exploring effective ways of
utilizing the dark excitons to produce light and charges with new properties
that were previously unavailable, benefiting from the unique properties of the
dark exciton. In addition to the scientific activities, this project will
contribute to the training of graduate students in cutting edge experimental
physical chemistry; this includes studies from groups underrepresented in the
chemical sciences. Professor Son's team also plans to engage in outreach to K-12
students and to the local community through University-run public events.

The Son research team is investigating the role of the dark exciton and its
advantages in generating photons and charges with controllable quantum
properties that cannot be readily obtained from the bright exciton. This project
is focusing specifically on the energy and relaxation dynamics of single- and
bi-exciton states formed from dark excitons, as well as the emissions of
correlated photon pairs from dark excitons and spin-polarized states. These
photon emission processes are enhanced by dark state longevity as well as new
coupling pathways afforded by the dark excitons in lead halide perovskite
nanocrystals. This research will leverage recent success by the Son group in
accessing and probing the energetics and dynamics of the dark excitons
separately from the bright excitons. This separate characterization of dark
excitons is enabled by the confinement-enhanced bright-dark energy splitting in
strongly quantum-confined perovskite nanocrystals. The research team combines
the controllable magnetic doping and flexible ligand passivation in these
nanocrystals, in conjunction with the high Q-factor microcavity, to provide
enhanced interaction of light and nanocrystals, thereby exploring the advantages
of the dark exciton in creating photons and charges with controllable
characteristics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.