* 2304119
* SBIR Phase I:  Liquid-Enabled Advanced Pitch (LEAP) Semiconductor Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Phil Hustad, GEMINATIO
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the development of materials and processes for semiconductor
manufacturing that will enable the progression of Mooreâ€™s Law and help to
strengthen domestic semiconductor manufacturing capacity and capability. Recent
supply chain issues have plagued the semiconductor industry, and this has had
ripple effects throughout the American economy. The majority of advanced
semiconductor manufacturing capacity is outside of the U.S. and this recent
shortage has highlighted the need for domestic foundries both for economic
vitality in the U.S. as well as national security and supply chain resiliency.
In 2019, American semiconductor foundries directly employed 184,600 workers,
down from 292,100 (-37%) in 2001. The main loss of manufacturing jobs was
attributed to the utilization of offshore foundries. Currently, U.S.
semiconductor manufacturing represents just 1% of global capacity and 80% of
U.S. semiconductor manufacturing capacity is in the 200 mm (8-inch) format,
which is not compatible with the most advanced, high-performance processes,
limiting production to >65 nm nodes. This project will increase the
competitiveness of currently established U.S.-based foundries as well as
increase the performance of foundries that are under construction.

This project seeks to develop and validate the performance of several required
materials to enable the integration of a novel semiconductor manufacturing
process that has the capability to double the density of features in current
cutting-edge semiconductor chip manufacturing processes. This solution may also
simplify the overall manufacturing process, without the need for intensive
capital expenditures. At the conclusion of this project, the performance of the
developed materials and the resulting manufacturing improvement will be
demonstrated on both 8-inch and 12-inch formats. The process begins with
conventional photolithography on a chemically amplified resist to define a
relief pattern. A Trencher material is then coated on top of and diffused into
the pattern, creating a self-aligned layer of polarity-switched material at the
sidewalls of the resist. A Masker is then applied to fill the openings in the
pattern, and the final pitch-doubled pattern is revealed. The diffusion-
controlled process achieves a similar result to alternative processes without
the need for expensive tool upgrades. The technology can extend canonical
lithography methods by up to 2 nodes, reduce production costs by more than 80%,
and reduce patterning errors to improve yield. Importantly, the process is
applicable to 8-inch wafers, bringing advanced node dimensionality to older
fabs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.