* 2304821
* Controlling the Electronic Structure of Metallic Nanoparticles using Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Benjamin Lear, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2026
* USD 406,230.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Benjamin Lear of Pennsylvania State
University is combining surface chemical synthesis and advanced chemical
analysis tools to study how the electronic properties of metal nanoparticles are
altered by molecules at their surfaces. Metal nanoparticles provide unique
electronic properties that form the basis of new medical treatments, manufacture
of high value chemicals, and energy conversion processes. However, there are
currently limited means by which to control the underlying electronic properties
and, thereby, control the efficiency and power of their use. The Lear research
team is working to develop new chemical means to control and tune these
electronic properties, utilizing the molecules often present at the surface of
these particles. They focus on controlling the number of ways that electrons can
be held on the metal. This fundamental property underpins familiar behaviors
like electrical conduction, thermal conduction, and luster. Measuring the
magnetic behavior of metal nanoparticles provides quantitative insight into this
fundamental property. In addition to the technical impacts expected from this
work, Dr. Lear and his students will be creating a website that provides clear
design rules for communication through visualization of data. Because the
preponderance of scientific communication relies on such visualizations,
increasing the effectiveness and clarity of presentation will benefit fellow
scientists, policy makers, and the general public.

Under this award, the research team led by Benjamin Lear at Pennsylvania State
University seeks to develop a framework for ligand control over the electronic
structure of metallic nanoparticles. The underlying hypothesis is that the
nature of the ligand-metal interface influences the position of the Fermi energy
of the metal as well as the density of states at the Fermi energy. These
properties are extracted from measurements of the Pauli paramagnetism of the
particles and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra. The team
specifically seeks to understand how the influence of the ligands changes with
binding mode, composition of the ligand layer, and size of the metallic
nanoparticles. The team also seeks to understand the nature of the coupling
between metallic electronic states and ligand electronic states, using pulse
EPR. By systematically varying the ligands at nanoparticle surfaces, and
measuring accompanying changes in magnetic properties, the Lear group is
developing a framework that could enable other scientists and engineers to
rationally control the behaviors of metal nanoparticles, increasing their
utility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.