* 2304436
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI) chatbot providing flare-up support for patients with endometriosis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Christopher Fortuna, AMIE HEALTH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel chatbot that provides support to
endometriosis patients. Endometriosis is a debilitating chronic pain disorder
that impacts approximately one in ten women in the United States - resulting in
significant loss of productivity, low quality of life, and greater than $80
billion annual economic burden. This artificial intelligence (AI) chatbot aims
to conversationally educate users regarding clinically accepted paradigms of
care and options during scenarios including painful endometriosis flare-ups.
This project ultimately aims to improve patients' self-knowledge and quality of
life, expand access to patients in rural communities to improve endometriosis
patient recovery, and reduce the burden of the disease due to lack of knowledge
or hesitancy for proper self-care.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
on-demand endometriosis flare-up management chatbot using advanced Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and Understanding (NLU). Many endometriosis patients
experience pain or symptoms on a daily basis but symptoms can become unbearable
during flare-ups, causing patients with little support to seek emergency room
care. The conversational chatbot will be trained to answer userâ€™s questions,
guide them through pain-reducing exercises such as pelvic floor therapy, and
provide direction to professional resources. This framework uses an internal
Natural Language Understanding unit to create user intents, variable entities,
conversation context, and conversation resuming slot filling. The technology
incorporates emotional understanding and empathetic mirroring allowing the
chatbot to have a natural freeform text conversation with the user to encourage
them to freely express themselves and feel understood during moments of crisis.
This chatbot will serve as a digital companion for patients, acting as both a
supportive friend (listening and validating) and as a virtual coach (guiding the
patient through exercises to alleviate symptoms). This technology project will
design, develop and validate the chatbot in a limited patient pilot.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.