* 2304787
* Development and Optimization of a Digital AC-DC Electropenetrograph for Real-Time Recording of On-host Tick Feeding
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zachary Dodds, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 279,724.00

An award is made to Kansas State University (in collaboration with USDA
Agricultural Research Service and Harvey Mudd College) to design, build, and
test a digital AC-DC electropenetrograph to study the real-time feeding
behaviors of blood-feeding arthropods, using ticks as the model system. Ticks
and other blood-feeding arthropods transmit a wide array of medically- and
veterinary-important pathogens, many of these increasingly exacerbated by
climate change. An important obstacle to basic research on tick feeding behavior
is the inability to capture observations and statistically analyze details of
tick feeding behavior because it is masked below the surface of the host’s skin.
The challenge is further compounded by the incredibly long durations over which
ticks feed (~7 to 10 days for adult ticks). To address this methodological
deficit, this project will develop a user- and application-friendly digital AC-
DC electropenetrograph which will enable researchers to readily investigate
these hidden behaviors in unprecedented detail. This project brings together a
transdisciplinary team of scientists that will collectively support the training
of 12 to 20 undergraduates and a postdoctoral researcher, giving them
opportunities to explore this burgeoning area of research interest from diverse
perspectives of engineering, computer science, and biology. Project
undergraduates and the postdoctoral researcher will work in teams mentored and
guided by project scientists. Trainees, recruited as broadly as possible, will
interact with scientists from academia, government, and industry, affording them
opportunities to investigate future career paths. Trainees will be involved in
both intellectual and physical aspects of this research and will participate in
the iterative evaluation of their designs tested using a combination of
arthropod species: ticks (project model blood-feeding arthropod) and aphids
(gold standard insect for electropenetrography research). Project scientists and
trainees will also have opportunity to share project goals with broader
audiences through development and delivery of related content and experiential
opportunities through community and science communication engagement platforms
and events (e.g. Kansas Science Fair).

Electropenetrography (EPG) is a transformational technology that has been used
for nearly 65 years to study the masked feeding behaviors of piercing-sucking,
plant-feeding insects. However, such a means of studying the basic behaviors of
blood-feeding arthropods in real time, including ticks that feed for extreme
durations (days to weeks), has eluded biologists for decades. Despite initial
success with tick and mosquito feeding recordings using the existing analog AC-
DC electropenetrograph, this instrumentation presents notable physical
limitations for working with blood-feeding arthropods on vertebrate hosts.
Developing a more user- and application-friendly digital AC-DC
electropenetrograph will solve this challenge and enable ground-breaking
investigations to detect, characterize, and quantify the progressive and highly
coordinated feeding behaviors performed by ticks and other blood-feeding
arthropods. Hypothesis-driven studies can then be performed to study basic
feeding biology and investigate how host factors, vector characteristics,
pathogens, and chemical interventions specifically modify hidden arthropod
blood-feeding behaviors. In this project, the digital AC-DC electropenetrograph
will be evaluated over the course of three scientific objectives: (i) Design and
build a prototype digital AC-DC electropenetrograph and associated software to
record tick feeding on an unsedated live host; (ii) Iteratively evaluate
versions of the prototype instrument with live ticks and live host, and modify
prototype as needed; and, (iii) Demonstrate the usability of the digital AC-DC
electropenetrograph to record and statistically compare tick feeding behaviors
upon applications of a behavior-interdicting compound. Successful completion of
this research will deliver a user-friendly, commercializable instrument and
associated software that will: 1) accelerate expansion of electropenetrography
from plant-feeding insects into blood-feeding arthropods, 2) ensure the
continued availability of this crucial infrastructure through an evolved digital
instrument design, and 3) allow faster high-throughput uses through development-
associated machine learning software. Project outcomes will include development
of a user-friendly, digital AC-DC electropenetrograph and supporting ‘arthropod
species flexible’ software. This novel research instrument will spur new
opportunity for a broad community of researchers interested in improving the
resiliency of animal and plant agriculture from blood-feeding and plant feeding
arthropods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.