* 2304943
* Pressure-induced Breathing in Microporous Coordination Polymer Thin Films: A Mechanism for Gas Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gregory Szulczewski, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Gregory Szulczewski and his group at
the University of Alabama - Tuscaloosa are designing and characterizing special
polymers intended for use in thin-film sensors for detection and quantitation of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The work seeks better understanding of how
the polymer swelling process differs from that in bulk solids. These insights in
turn will be applied to the development of a new type of gas sensor technology,
that, if successful, has potential for applications in the environmental,
industrial, and agricultural sectors. The project will engage K-12 students,
seeking to motivate them to consider studying science; activities will include
scientific demonstrations and hands-on activities conducted at a local science
museum and schools. Summer research projects are planned to engage students from
HBCUs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities) who seek careers in
science, technology, engineering and math.

Microporous coordination polymers, or MCPs, have emerged as potential materials
for catalysis, gas storage, gas separations, and chemical sensing. Critical to
these applications is the well-defined porosity of the material. In some
instances the structure is rigid, but some MCPs exhibit a breathing phenomenon,
wherein lattice expansion can occur above a certain pressure of a given VOC,
allowing rapid diffusion of the guest into the newly modified microporous host.
The Szulczewski group aims to identify key design parameters for the synthesis
of breathing MCP thin films and to establish the key structure-function
relationships that will advance the basic understanding of lattice expansion.
Specifically, the team will measure adsorption/desorption isotherms of VOCs in
thin films of “breathing” MCPs to identify the “gate-opening” pressure. They
will further probe the impact of varying MCP building blocks (i.e., metal ions
and organic linkers) as well as the role of defects, film thickness, and general
morphology on the mechanism of lattice expansion. Using parallel impedance
measurements and an iterative feedback loop, these fundamental studies are
targeting development of a new type of gas sensor technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.