* 2304636
* Deformation spaces of geometric structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 405,998.00

The PI will investigate deformation spaces of geometric structures on
n-dimensional manifolds. A manifold is a mathematical object which looks locally
like ordinary Euclidean space, but can have higher or lower dimension. Two-
dimensional manifolds are called surfaces (e.g., the surface of a football, a
donut or a pretzel), while our universe is an example of a 3-dimensional
manifold. The study of deformations of possible geometric structures on
manifolds arises naturally in many fields of mathematics as well as in physics.
The PI will also contribute to the mathematical community through involvement in
the Inquiry Based Learning Center at the University of Michigan, his involvement
in the formation of the MACSS scholars program which is designed to support low-
income students majoring in Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics,
curriculum development for undergraduate courses, serving as editor of
mathematical journals, organizing conferences, and mentoring undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdoctoral assistant professors.

Specifically, the project focuses on the study of the Hitchin component of
higher rank structures on surfaces and on space of hyperbolic structures on
3-manifolds. The Hitchin component is the pre-eminent example of a Higher
Teichmuller space of representations of a closed surface group into a semi-
simple Lie group. Striking analogies with classical Teichmuller theory have been
discovered, including pressure metrics which generalize the Weil-Petersson
metric from classical Teichmuller theory. The metric completion of the
Teichmuller space of a closed surface, with respect to the Weil-Petersson
metric, is the augmented Teichmuller space, which one may view as the orbifold
universal cover of moduli space. PI will study the metric completion of the
Hitchin component with respect to a pressure metric and to develop a geometric
theory of the augmented Hitchin component which parallels the classical theory.
The proof of Thurstonâ€™s Ending Lamination Conjecture developed many new tools
for the study of hyperbolic 3-manifolds and their deformation spaces. In the
original proof of the Ending Lam- ination Conjecture one obtains uniform
bilipschitz models for hyperbolic 3-manifolds homotopy equivalent to an
orientable closed surface. PI will develop uniformly bilipschitz combinatorial
models for any hyperbolic 3-manifold with finitely generated, freely
indecomposable fundamental group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.