* 2304741
* Equipment: Helium Recovery Equipment: to Expand the LSU Liquefaction Center
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Philip Adams, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2026
* USD 422,075.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry (CHE), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Professor Richard Kurtz and his multidisciplinary
team at Louisiana State University are developing the capability to recover and
reuse the boil-off gas from liquid helium, a non-renewable resource. Liquid
helium enables a broad range of low temperature technologies and is crucial to
superconducting instrumentation. It is essential that the community move to
conserve and recycle helium from the boil-off of these instruments so that new
discoveries to improve the intellectual and physical wellbeing of society can
continue. This project will allow recovery of helium from the LSU Chemistry
Department’s Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) facility as well as the Center for
Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) synchrotron light source. The boil-
off helium gas from these facilities will be collected, compressed, and
transported to the LSU’s existing Physics Department Helium Recovery and
Liquefaction Center to be re-liquefied and returned for re-use.

The superconducting magnets in the LSU NMR facility and the two superconducting
insertion devices at the LSU CAMD synchrotron collectively consume a significant
volume of liquid helium per year, all of which is currently lost to boil-off.
This helium recovery project involves the installation of equipment at each site
consisting of gas collection bags, compressors, and recovery gas manifolds to
capture this helium boil-off for reliquefaction and re-use. The high rate of
recovery expected will be monitored and reported back to NSF. This project will
significantly improve our stewardship of this limited resource and the
anticipated savings will support multiple NSF-funded programs impacted by the
cost and availability of liquid helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.