* 2304303
* STTR Phase I:  Subcanopy 3D forest mapping by uncrewed aerial vehicle
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,11/30/2023
* George Kantor, MORPHOBOTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 274,929.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is a tool to help mitigate the wildfire crisis in the western
United States. Prescribed burns are one of the most effective ways to prevent
the uncontrolled, large-scale wildfires that devastate entire ecosystems,
communities, and economies, but the environmental assessment required for burns
may delay the burn by months or years due to overburdened agencies. The
innovation addresses this pain point with an automated survey solution, reducing
both the paperwork burden and the potential for error in burn area vegetation
mapping and spatial fire modeling. The solution ensures that prescribed burn
plans use the best available vegetation data, providing fire managers with an
accurate prediction of expected fire behavior for determining control strategy,
staffing, and resources. This innovation would be the first automated prescribed
burn spatial fire modeling solution using an autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV). This innovation meets the STTR programâ€™s focus on unproven, high-impact
innovations because sub-canopy mapping by UAV is a cutting-edge application of
autonomous flight, with challenges in optimization and decision-making. The
application of UAV technology to prescribed burn environmental assessments will
help to address the growing wildfire crisis in the United States by reducing the
delay between the decision to burn at a selected site and the execution of the
burn.

The technical hurdles to be addressed by the proposed project include both real-
time, sub-canopy 3D mapping and optimization for constraints across sensor
requirements, cluttered environment exploration, and SWAP (size, weight, and
power) limitations. The goals are to produce a high-fidelity, open-source. UAV
exploration environment, to implement 3D mapping on a resource-constrained
computer that meets UAV payload requirements, to incorporate species-specific
decision-making criteria into the UAV exploration algorithm, and to conduct
validation testing to verify technical and early commercial feasibility. To
achieve these goals, the development plan includes a series of milestones
following a test-driven, development project management strategy, including
simulation testing (software in the loop), tabletop testing (hardware in the
loop), and field tests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.