* 2304528
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanocellulose-based Adjuvant Formulation for the Reduction of Agrochemical Drift and Volatilization
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Joseph Batta-Mpouma, CELLUDOT LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 959,510.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to provide an ecofriendly, efficient, and cost affordable
adjuvant product to solve the pressing problem of herbicide drift. For years,
farmers growing organic, non-genetically modified (non-GM) and specialty crops
have incurred financial losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars due to
drift of volatile herbicides such as dicamba, a highly volatile and efficient
herbicide that is used to get rid of weeds. The devastation of dicamba on non-GM
crops and the natural landscape has been a widespread issue. In 2021, about
4,000 dicamba-related herbicide misuse complaints were reported across 27
states. If successfully commercialized, the new adjuvant will help all key
stakeholders, including farmers who grow GM crops and use dicamba, and those who
grow non-GM crops and do not want drift of dicamba. The award reflects NSFâ€™s
statutory mission of promoting and improving national economy and health, as
well as protecting the environment for the well-being of U.S. citizens.

The innovation proposed in this SBIR Phase II project is a bio-based emulsion
adjuvant, derived from renewable resources, with the combined functionality of a
volatility and drift reducing agent and surfactant that will be used to reduce
the volatility and off-target movement of herbicides and improve their
spreading. The adjuvant has environmental and financial benefits that give it a
competitive edge over commercially available but less efficient petroleum-based
and synthetic adjuvants on the market. The patent-pending technology is a
platform technology that can be applied to other industries from paints and
coatings to pharmaceuticals. The project sets the following technical objectives
to evaluate and demonstrate the commercial feasibility of the innovation: 1)
assess droplet dynamics of several drift-prone herbicides when used in
conjunction with the adjuvant at different use rates, 2) complete the
registration of the adjuvant, 3) conduct field trials to evaluate particle drift
of dicamba and dicamba-glyphosate tank mixes when used in conjunction with the
adjuvant, 4) low tunnel field test to assess volatility of tank mixes on
different surfaces, 5) evaluate the effects of the adjuvant on dicamba efficacy
that are common in the South and Mid-West, and 6) scale up the production of the
minimally viable product.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.