* 2304197
* NSF INCLUDES Collaborative Change Consortia: Association of Collaborative Communities Ensuring Equity in Youth STEM+C Success (ACCEYSS)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Shetay Ashford-Hanserd, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,961,570.00

During the Civil Rights Era, faith-based and grassroots organizations served as
functional centers and community hubs intervening in social and political
matters to assure and protect the civil rights of people of color. Since
institutionalized racism and inequitable access to quality education still
exists among historically underrepresented minorities (HURM) and women, faith-
based and grassroots organizations can play a significant role in improving
educational equity (access, participation, outcomes) for youth and girls of
color in K-16 STEM and computing (STEM+C) education. The Association of
Collaborative Communities ensuring Equity in Youth STEM+C Success (ACCEYSS) is
an NSF INCLUDES Collaborative Change Consortia project led by Texas State
University (TXST) in collaboration with the National Black Church Initiative
(NBCI). The consortium leverages NBCI’s national network of 150,000 faith-based
institutions and its population of 6 million children to broaden participation
of youth and girls of color in underserved communities in two states, Texas and
Florida. Both are considered U.S. mega states as they educate nearly 15% of all
historically marginalized students enrolled in U.S. public schools and have the
highest percentages of low-income and diverse learners in the nation. ACCEYSS is
well positioned to improve low-income Black and Hispanic (BH) youth and girls’
access and participation in the K-12 STEM+C education pipeline while in middle
school (grades 6-8) and entry into postsecondary STEM+C degree programs in Texas
and Florida. This work informs best practice interventions to increase HURM
access, and participation in rigorous course-taking in middle school, high
school, and postsecondary STEM+C degree programs across the U.S.

This project builds upon the NSF INCLUDES DDLP: ACCEYSS - Association of
Collaborative Communities Equipping Youth for STEM Success (1764404) and NSF
CAREER: Effects of Community Cultural Wealth on Black and Hispanic Women in the
P-20 Computing Workforce Pipeline in Texas (2046079). ACCEYSS is grounded in
evidence that faith-based institutions are critical assets for broadening
participation of youth and girls of color. Since the Civil Rights Era, faith-
based institutions have been uniquely poised to motivate and galvanize their
congregations and constituents to drive action towards economic and social
change in communities of color. Community-engaged institutions of higher
education, such as TXST, have also served as conduits of change since the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. Most notably, TXST alumnus President Lyndon B. Johnson
signed the hallmark Higher Education Act of 1965 at his alma mater, which
increased educational access for low-income students of color. ACCYESS adapts
and integrates these models to advance STEM diversity. ACCYESS leverages faith-
based institutions as historically significant structures to drive collaborative
systems change in the U.S. K-16 STEM+C education pipeline. Complementing work
traditionally done in formal educational settings, the new understandings gained
through ACCYESS’ research will inform on the social processes through which BH
experience and persist in STEM+C contexts and the role that modern religious
entities can play in STEM+C education for BH youth.

This project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the
Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering
and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate
collaborative infrastructure building to advance and sustain systemic change to
broaden participation in STEM at scale.    This award is also supported by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI)
program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity
at HSIs.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.