* 2304291
* NNA Research: The Greenland Hazards Project
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Michael Willis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,822,510.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among the natural environment, social
systems, and the built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic
Residents, Data and Observation, Education, and Resilient Infrastructure.

As the Arctic warms, the environment is rapidly changing; ice sheets, ice caps,
and glaciers are thinning and receding; and permafrost is degrading. In some
areas, such as southeastern Alaska and Greenland, these changes can trigger
landslides, which in turn can generate localized tsunami-like waves when the
landslides flow into fjords and other coastal waters. Since 1995, several
coastal landslides have triggered tsunami-like waves, tragically resulting in
the loss of lives, damage to infrastructure, and the abandonment of communities
in western Greenland. This project is carefully mapping how Greenland is
changing in response to ice thinning and is exploring the developing risk of
landslides and other hazards. The research integrates local observations made by
Greenlandic people in their communities with data collected through advanced
remote sensing to learn how hazards evolve over time. The collaboration between
US and Greenlandic scientists and Greenlandic residents will be critical to
ensure that the research addresses community needs. This project is providing
the first Greenland-wide analysis of unstable land and how hazards affect
infrastructure and society, while prototyping a monitoring system that could
provide warning of approaching large waves.

Researchers are examining and modeling high energy events such as rockslides and
avalanches to ascertain their potential tsunami threats to communities around
the country. The project team hypothesizes that the known distribution of
recorded landslides is controlled by rock type, slope and aspect and then by
proximity to retreating glaciers, changing permafrost, temperatures and
precipitation. Satellite radar, optical imagery and topographic differencing are
being used to investigate geophysical changes and how they alter hazards on
regional scales. On local scales, drone surveys are examining permafrost changes
and rock instabilities on seasonal to sub-daily timescales. Machine learning and
modeling are being applied at all scales to identify patterns of change. In
addition, a qualitative study is advancing our understanding of the
communication processes through which scientific and Greenlandic communities
give meaning to environmental changes and hazards through diverse ways of
knowing and multiple forms of expertise. The project is building capacity for
geodesy, remote sensing, and machine learning through a series of workshops in
Greenland. A multilingual website is providing a source of open, intuitively
understandable, and easily accessible information that municipalities can use to
inform decision making and policy. The project is developing a communication-
theory based virtual workshop on community engagement at annual NNA meetings
that is being shared with program managers at NSF. The project data are useful
to a wide range of disciplines, with work relevant to solid earth geophysics,
glaciology, oceanography, natural hazards, and the field of communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.