* 2304207
* Collaborative Research: Floer Theory and Topological Entropy
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Basak Gurel, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 247,552.00

Hamiltonian systems constitute a broad class of dynamical systems where energy
dissipation can be neglected. For example, the planetary motion in celestial
mechanics, the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid and the motion of a charged
particle in an electro-magnetic field are usually treated as Hamiltonian
dynamical systems. Topological entropy is an important invariant of a dynamical
system, measuring its complexity and originating in physics and information
theory. The PIs will develop new methods and tools to study topological entropy
of Hamiltonian dynamical systems, utilizing ideas from topological data
analysis. Conversely, this research has a potential to contribute to the field
of topological data analysis and applied questions including image and pattern
recognition. The work involves integration of research, education and training
young scientists. It will have impact in the areas of higher education and
dissemination of knowledge, within the field and to a wider scientific
community, and it will increase participation of individuals from
underrepresented groups in mathematics.

On a more technical level, the main theme of the project is the interaction
between Floer theory and symplectic topology on one side and Hamiltonian
dynamics and, in particular, topological entropy on the other. The PIs will
study topological entropy of compactly supported Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms and
certain Reeb flows from the perspective of Floer theory. The project builds on
the PIs’ recent work and focuses on barcode entropy introduced by the PIs, which
is a Floer theoretic counterpart of topological entropy and is closely related
to it. The key new and distinguishing feature of the PIs’ approach to Floer
theoretic aspects of topological entropy is that barcode entropy is based on
neither exponential growth of Floer homology – there is no growth in the
Hamiltonian setting – nor on topological properties of the map such as the
growth of free homotopy classes of periodic orbits. The PIs will also study the
behavior of the gamma-norm under iterations in the Hamiltonian or contact
setting. Most of the projects will require developing new techniques applicable
to other questions, and interactions with areas outside symplectic geometry and
dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.