* 2304081
* SBIR Phase II:  Creating high-quality, lower-cost soil maps using machine learning algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Yones Khaledian, SOILSERDEM LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will be to produce high-quality (accurate/high-resolution) soil
maps for agronomists and farmers at scale. Accurate soil information is a
fundamental driver of better, more-efficient crop/soil management. This new
branch of technology will deliver developed map products across various cropping
systems that exist in the continental U.S., intersecting economic and
environmental sustainability. Making site-specific soil fertility mapping
information accessible to a diversity of land stewards is the goal of this
project. Expected outcomes include more environmentally responsible farm
management and manure and nutrient-management planning, precision farming, land
use planning, planting decisions, evaluating stressors on plants, field
conditioning, crop rotation, and prediction/interpretation of yields. Other
benefits are increased farm profitability and increased soil health. This
technology will result in increased crop yield while allowing for decreased
input costs, leading to higher profitability in an industry that chronically
suffers from low profit margins. The anticipated project outcomes meet NSF goals
by advancing science, improving the lives and health of U.S. citizens, and
potentially generating increased tax revenues and jobs via increased farm
success.

This innovative technology has three components that differentiate it from the
best current technologies used to produce maps of essential soil nutrients. The
first is applying generalized landscape quantification to drive optimal soil
sample collection accommodating landscape variability, thereby eliminating the
need to collect unnecessary soil samples. The second component leverages
advanced machine-learning algorithms that are able to use the small number of
uniquely collected soil samples to produce accurate predictions. Finally, the
technology is a transferable model that does not necessitate additional hardware
to achieve its results. As envisioned, this technology can select appropriate
covariate mosaics to capture relevant soil variability irrespective of cropping
system and management practices. The scope of this project will be beneficial to
row cropping system across the U.S., specifically targeting corn-soy, potatoes,
wheat, and cotton production. Unlike currently available methods that produce
inadequate data for challenging (cost-prohibitive) mapping targets, this new
technology will render those targets accessible and cost-effective with reliable
accuracies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.