* 2304093
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: WiSEN - Supporting Minoritized Women Students in STEM, Cultivating Pathways Using Mentoring Networks
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Ke Wu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,994.00

The Women in STEM Education Network (WiSEN) is a co-mentoring network for
historically underrepresented and marginalized graduate and undergraduate women
students in STEM. This INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project
engages students in structured conversations, identifies mentoring needs, and
explores the systemic barriers that hinder women’s participation in STEM. The
project goal is to expand upon best practices in STEM mentoring, while building
a national networked community for minoritized women students. The initial phase
of the project is design, development, and launch of the WiSEN project among
four higher education institutions- Rochester Institute of Technology,
University of Montana, Washington State University, and Gonzaga University.

The WiSEN project functions as a Networked Improvement Community (NIC). NIC
models have demonstrated effectiveness when researchers, students, and
institutional leaders collaborate to develop solutions for institutional and
systemic change. This NIC model provides the basis for the WiSEN co-mentoring
infrastructure, which operates in virtual and in-person hybrid spaces. WiSEN
participants engage in critical and courageous dialogue centering on: 1)
Understanding Institutional Power and Navigating Systemic Barriers; 2)
Leveraging Cultural Wealth and Intersectional Identities; 3) Networking for
Systemic Change; and 4) Co-mentoring Future Leaders. Research insights fill
important knowledge gaps regarding best practices for mentoring women and
provide a platform for this scalable network that can be implemented beyond the
initial four university partners. This project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice
Johnson Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative,
which seeks to motivate and accelerate collaborative infrastructure building to
advance and sustain systemic change to broaden participation in STEM at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.