* 2304318
* STTR Phase II:  Body fluid identification for forensic purposes using Raman spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Alexis Weber, SUPREMETRIC LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project contributes to
broader societal and commercial impacts by enabling crime labs to better utilize
overstretched resources by ensuring only relevant crime scene samples undergo
DNA analysis. Currently, the large number of irrelevant samples submitted for
testing contributes to a massive backlog that clogs up crime lab workflows and
delays the timely delivery of critical information to investigators and
prosecutors. This technology will allow real-time identification of body fluids
at the crime scene, streamlining the collection-testing pipeline. DNA analysis
has great potential to lead investigators to suspects. By expediting the DNA
analysis process, investigators will more quickly apprehend criminal offenders,
who otherwise could remain free to commit other crimes. DNA also has the ability
to exonerate suspects who have falsely fallen under suspicion, protecting them
from experiencing such burdens as arrest, pre-trial detention, criminal
conviction, and the social and economic consequences of being labeled a
criminal. The critical data provided by this technology will lower court costs
while increasing the speed of investigations, increasing the accuracy of testing
results, and improving court outcomes, all to the benefit of society.

This project develops software that performs nondestructive body fluid
identification, confirming the presence or absence of specific body fluid types.
Biological stains are present in many crime scenes and provide critical data to
investigators. However, testing capabilities for these stains are currently
insufficient. Forensic scientists often proceed to DNA analysis without first
establishing the nature of the stain when small amounts are present, resulting
in unnecessary DNA testing of samples with no relevant fluids. This team will
work with a proprietary algorithm that recognizes trace signals on interfering
substrates and confirms the contents of the sample without destroying the
evidence. Previous Phase I efforts established proof-of-feasibility of the
statistical model. This Phase II project will develop a fully functional working
prototype of the software and validate it in both inter-laboratory and real-
world settings. The first-generation technology will be integrated with benchtop
instruments for applications in crime laboratories, while the second-generation
technology will enable the use of portable instruments for on-site body fluid
identification. Ultimately the technology will include additional features such
as phenotypic analysis of biological stains, including the determination of sex
and age of donor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.