* 2304905
* Ultrafast Dephasing of Strongly Coupled Plasmon-Exciton States
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Gregory Hartland, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2026
* USD 625,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Gregory Hartland and Masaru
Kuno of the University of Notre Dame are using optical microscopy to study the
propagation of exciton-plasmon polaritons in individual semiconductor-metal
nanostructures. Polaritons are unusual states that are produced by coupling the
surface plasmons created by optical excitation in metals to the excited states
of molecules or semiconductors. Polaritons have very short lifetimes and move
very quickly, making them difficult to study using conventional techniques.
Professors Hartland, Kuno and their students will use sophisticated light
scattering and ultrafast microscopy techniques to measure the lifetimes of
exciton-plasmon polaritons, as well as the distances they travel along
individual semiconductor-metal nanostructures. Discoveries from this project
could lead to a better understanding of the properties of polaritons in
nanomaterials, and new strategies for solar energy generation. High school
teachers and students will be recruited for this project from the Penn-Harris-
Madison School Corporation, a local school district with a population of
approximately 12,000 students. They will participate in the light scattering
experiments, as well as a proect to develop a low-cost microscope for detecting
and characterizing microplastics in the environment. The project will contribute
to the development of the Nation's scientific workforce in this way as well as
by providing research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.

To understand the properties of exciton-plasmon polaritons, and whether they can
be used for applications such as solar energy conversion, it is important to
understand their dynamics. Because the lifetimes of these states are typically
very short (<100 fs), they are challenging to measure. In this project the
lifetimes of polariton states created by coupling propagating surface plasmons
(PSPs) of single metal nanostructures to the exciton transitions of
semiconductors will be investigated by light scattering and ultrafast transient
absorption microscopy. In the light scattering experiments a combination of real
space and back-focal plane imaging will be used to measure the propagation
lengths and group velocities, respectively, of the exciton-PSP polariton states.
These two quantities give the polariton lifetime. Importantly, these experiments
can be used to interrogate systems with very short lifetimes. For systems where
the dynamics are relatively slow (50-100 fs), the lifetimes will also be
directly measured by ultrafast single-particle transient absorption experiments.
Measurements will be performed for different semiconductors coupled to Ag or Au
nanostructures, as well as for non-traditional plasmonic systems, such as
titanium nitride (TiN). There are several technological broader impacts of the
proposed work. For example, the propagation lengths for SPPs (surface plasmon
polarities) are much longer than those for exciton states. Thus, coupling
excitons to SPPs can significantly increase their propagation lengths, and
potentially improve the performance of solar energy conversion devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.