* 2304777
* Development of Molecular Devices for the Study of Emerging Non-Covalent Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Ken Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 491,394.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ken Shimizu of the University of South
Carolina will lead a project to study and quantify weak non-covalent
interactions (NCIs) in solution. Using a combination of computational analyses
and experiments, this research aims to address fundamental questions about the
origins and stability trends of these NCIs. The results will contribute to the
development of predictive models for practical applications such as drug design,
materials engineering, and catalysis. In addition to research training of
graduate students, this project will provide research opportunity to
undergraduate students, in particular female students at local undergraduate
institutions. The development of online educational resources for organic
chemistry students will also be supported.

Under this award, Professor Ken Shimizu of the University of South Carolina and
his team of graduate and undergraduate students will measure and study weak
NCIs, including n to sigma-hole interactions, pnictogen, chalcogen, and halogen
bonding interactions, as well as organic solvophobic and dispersion interactions
in solution. The approach involves designing N-phenylimide-based molecular
balances and molecular rotors to accurately measure the interaction strengths
and their effects on thermodynamic equilibria and kinetic processes. The
experimental studies will be complemented by computational modeling to identify
and assess the magnitude of the underlying components. Molecular recognition in
solution lies at the heart of chemistry. These studies are expected to provide
fundamental information on weak non-covalent interactions that must be taken
into account to accurately design systems to achieve effective molecular
recognition across a wide range of applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.