* 2304991
* CAS-MNP: Degradation of Plastics in the Environment: Decoupling the Roles of Polymer Type, Material Attributes, and Chemical Additives
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Margaret SobkowiczKline, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 128,319.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Weile Yan and Margaret SobkowiczKline from the University
of Massachusetts Lowell will investigate the environmental degradation behavior
of plastics. In particular, the causal links between polymer properties,
additive formulations, and their degradation will be investigated. This project
will apply interdisciplinary approaches to study the transformation of plastic
pollutants in the environment. The project aims to enable assessment of the
long-term fate of the existing plastic pollutants, and also to inform future
plastics design and processing strategies to minimize environmental
accumulation. The PIs will engage a diverse student body at the institution
through dedicated scholar and training programs and integrated lab and field
learning experiences. The project will also lead to a community service project
to increase public awareness of the local and regional sources of plastic
pollutants in the Merrimack River watershed and the adjoining coastal
environment.

Existing studies on microplastics have revealed the importance of plastics
fragmentation in the natural environment. However, the effects of the properties
of different plastic materials and their processing history, including the
presence of common additives such as antioxidants and UV stabilizers, on plastic
degradation and fragmentation are largely unexplored. Plastic materials with
well-controlled characteristics and additive formulations will be prepared in
order to carry out systematic investigations to study the effects of polymer
type, particle size and shape, and additive chemistry on plastic weathering and
fragmentation. Characterizations of laboratory and field-collected samples to
identify changes in polymer and surface chemistry, mechanical strength, and
additive loss, in conjunction with quantitative analysis of fragmentation
potential, are expected to generate new mechanistic insight into the formation
of micro- and nano-plastics (MNPs) in the environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.