* 2304983
* Hydrazone-Based Feedback Loops
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ivan Aprahamian, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 520,267.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ivan Aprahamian of Dartmouth College
will study how molecular switches can be made to communicate with each other.
These studies aim to result in a deeper fundamental understanding of how to
control an ensemble of molecules using molecular switches, which in turn will
facilitate the understanding of the basic science required to engineer reactions
cascades and ensembles, where catalysis, out-of-equilibrium self-assemblies,
oscillating systems, among other processes, can be autonomously regulated. The
multidisciplinary nature of the project will enable the training and retention
of students at different levels of education from high school to undergraduate
to graduate students. The group’s public outreach and participation in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)-related events, such as the
annual Science Day at Dartmouth, will help disseminate the group’s work to
broader audiences. Moreover, these activities will strengthen and extend the
group’s informal and formal science education partnerships and networks with
local schools and science museums.

In this research, hydrazone-based switches and Zn(II)-initiated negative
feedback loops (NFLs) will be used to study how inter-switch communication can
be employed for controlling cascade reactions and result in functional products.
The straightforward synthesis and modularity of the hydrazone switches and NFL
components will allow structure-property analyses for determining the kinetic
and thermodynamic factors that control the NFL threshold. With this knowledge at
hand, the NFLs will be coupled together in such a way that they can either
compete or feed into each other, thus creating interdependency. The NFL will
then be used in the synthesis of precise amounts of coordination cages and
polymers. Photoreversible ligands will also be developed so light can be used in
controlling the concentration of Zn(II) in the solution, while photoacids/bases
will be used to tune the solution’s pH. These systems are expected to allow for
the clean regulation, using light, of an entire cascade process, thus bringing
the approach a step closer to automation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.