* 2304368
* STTR Phase I:  Single-Chip Microfluidic Platform for Finely Controlled In Vitro Fertilization Processes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Gianpiero Palermo, ZEALOUS RESEARCH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that by improving the success rate of in
vitro fertilization (IVF), this project will benefit assisted reproduction
technology (ART) providers, infertile couples, and insurance companies. With
infertility increasing globally, there is a huge potential market for ART
services. However, current IVF technologies provide inadequate results and come
with high costs that significantly impact both the minority of infertile couples
who can afford IVF and the majority for whom the technology is priced out of
reach. The successful development of a disposable, low-cost platform automating
all steps of IVF is expected to produce a manifold increase in the productivity
of ART clinics by reducing the processing time demands on andrologists and
embryologists as well as reducing the labor requirements for sperm separation.
This will, in turn, have the effect of increasing the efficiency, capacity and
profitability of ART clinics, while lowering overall costs of IVF. Lower prices
will reduce the burden on couples using ART and on their insurance companies,
while increasing access to ART for lower-income populations. The technology is
also expected to result in higher fertilization rates, enhancing successful IVF
conception outcomes.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
IVF-on-a-chip platform in response to the need for a cost-effective and highly
controlled IVF process. Variance in operator skill levels and damage to gametes
due to handling contribute to significant variability in IVF performance, with
success rates averaging only around 37%. The new technology aims to remove this
inconsistency by using a microfluidic platform to perform the entire IVF process
in a single-chip workflow, automating and optimizing sperm selection, sperm
capacitation, and egg fertilization. The proposed platform includes a region for
sperm selection, a reservoir for sperm capacitation, and a segment for egg
fertilization. This project will develop a single user-friendly commercial
device and optimize conditions for each step of the IVF process with bovine
gametes, through rigorous analysis and optimization of the timing, flow,
incubation, and media conditions. The device will be tested in mice and bovine
models as a precursor to human treatment and its performance compared to
traditional IVF. If successful, the fully developed platform system will fulfill
the need for a simple-to-use, affordable, robust, and high-throughput sperm
sample preparation for medical treatments and clinical applications, resulting
in higher fertilization rates and enhanced patient outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.