* 2304861
* Collaborative Research: Overlooked Oxidation of Aqueous Alcohols: Kinetics, Mechanism, and Relevance to Water Reuse
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel McCurry, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 78,931.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Emily Marron at the University of Utah and Daniel McCurry at the
University of Southern California and their students will study chemical
processes occurring in wastewater treatment, specifically, when chlorine is
added to water to remove harmful bacteria and viruses. However, the addition of
chlorine to wastewater also results in the production of unintended chemical
byproducts that may be toxic. This project will characterize the reaction of
chlorine with alcohols, such as methanol (wood alcohol) and ethanol, which are
present in wastewater, to produce aldehydes, such as formaldehyde and
acetaldehyde, reactive compounds that can have deleterious biological
properties, particularly in adducting biomolecules, including nucleic acids and
proteins. Understanding the chemistry of aldehyde production from alcohols and
chlorine is important to minimize the formation of these chemicals during
wastewater treatment. In the face of climate change and drought, communities
across the United States lack reliable sources of drinking water. Re-using
wastewater (sewage) is an option to increase water supply in areas facing water
stress. Wastewater reuse involves many treatment steps to ensure the water is
safe to drink. Undergraduate researchers from both institutions will contribute
to the work and inform the scientific community about the project findings
through social media.

During wastewater reuse, oxidation with ozone or chlorine to inactivate
pathogens and transform chemical contaminants can form toxic low molecular
weight compounds including aldehydes. While aldehyde generation from ozonation
of wastewater is well understood, the kinetics, mechanism of formation, and
potential precursors during chlorination are largely unknown. This project will
investigate the formation of aldehydes from the chlorination of an overlooked
group of precursors: alcohols. Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that
methanol can be oxidized to formaldehyde by chlorine under conditions relevant
to water treatment. Alcohols such as methanol and ethanol are frequently used as
a supplemental carbon source during conventional wastewater treatment, and are
likely present in water reuse operations. Additionally, alcohols are routinely
used in environmental chemical research for stock solution preparation under the
assumption that they are inert with respect to chlorine. The goals of this
project include determining the kinetics, products, and mechanism of aqueous
alcohol oxidation by chlorine, the development of a new method for quantifying
trace alcohols in complex aqueous matrices, and its application to quantify
alcohols in wastewater effluent and their contribution to observed aldehyde
formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.