* 2304358
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing Artificial intelligence Models to Predict In-hospital Clinical Trajectories for Heart Failure Patients
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ruizhi Liao, EMPALLO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project includes improving cardiovascular management, personalized
medicine, inclusivity for historically underserved populations, and clinical
trial design. The project could improve the health and wellbeing of heart
failure (HF) patients while saving billions of dollars in HF hospitalization
costs. If the technology proves feasible, it could shift the paradigm of HF
management from reactive to proactive. The proposed machine learning model
extracts latent features and detects subtle patterns from clinical data, which
derives digital biomarkers that can potentially enable novel phenotype discovery
and eventually personalized medicine. The digital biomarkers derived from the
proposed innovation, when used in clinical trials, could also improve
inclusivity and greater generalizability of novel therapies when applied to
diverse populations. The proposed technology could enable clinical trial
sponsors to achieve the desired statistical power with smaller patient
populations. This, in turn, would enable faster, cheaper, and more effective
clinical trials.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project mitigates the
burden of heart failure (HF), which afflicts over 6.5 million Americans. As the
leading cause of hospitalization in the U.S., HF results in more than $29
billion in hospital charges and $11 billion in hospitalization costs, annually.
A large portion of hospitalization costs are driven by readmissions, with about
20% of heart failure patients readmitted within 30 days of discharge. The
fundamental challenge is the variability of this disease. A treatment regimen
that works for one patient might not work for another, even if they show similar
symptoms. Anticipating clinical trajectories, treatment response, and potential
complications, and translating those insights into actionable interventions is
key to improving outcomes for HF patients. To help clinicians anticipate a HF
patient’s response to treatment and adverse events during hospitalization and
enable personalized intervention planning, this project will develop explainable
and generalizable multimodal artificial intelligence (AI) models that predict a
HF patient’s clinical trajectory shortly after admission. This technology is a
methodological innovation grounded in large-scale, multi-center, clinical data.
The key milestone in Phase I is to yield a reasonably accurate predictive AI
model, cross-validated between the data of two large healthcare systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.