* 2304763
* Conductance Isotope Effect: A Chemical Tool to Explore the Microscopic Nature of Polarons in Pi-Conjugated Molecular Wires
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gang-Yu Liu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 520,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor C. Daniel Frisbie of the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and his students will explore the mechanisms
of electrical conduction in molecular organic semiconductors. Much is still not
understood about how organic semiconductors conduct electricity, and this
stifles efforts to synthesize new semiconducting materials with enhanced
performance. The research plan leverages a discovery – the intramolecular
conductance isotope effect – made under Professor Frisbie’s prior NSF support,
which offers exciting opportunities to understand polaron transport mechanisms
in much the same way the kinetic isotope effect is used in physical organic
chemistry to understand the mechanisms of chemical reactions. The project
involves organic synthesis, structure characterization, conductance measurements
and theoretical modeling. The objective is to understand how the chemical
structure of organic semiconductors influences and modulates their electrical
conductance. These materials are already commercialized in electronic devices
such as organic light emitting devices (OLED TVs) and mobile phone displays. In
carrying out the research plan, graduate students working on the project will
acquire the skills needed to enter the workforce in the semiconductor industry,
for example. Undergraduate students will be offered summer research experience.

The particular technical focus of this project is on understanding the nature of
polarons, the de facto charge carriers in molecular semiconductors, including
their size or delocalization length along pi-conjugated chains, their thermally
activated motion, their hopping transition states, and the sensitivity of all
these factors to molecular structure. The experimental approach focuses on the
synthesis of pi-conjugated molecular wires up to 10 nm in length from gold
surfaces. The key innovation to the overall synthesis strategy will be the
introduction of 13C and 15N isotopic labels to selected subunits of the wires.
The conductance of wires of length greater than 4-5 nm, where the charge
transport mechanism is thermally-activated polaron-hopping, will then be
measured using an established approach for making a second electrical contact to
produce metal-molecule-metal junctions. An overall objective of the experimental
design is to combine conductance measurements on molecular length scales with
precise monomer-by-monomer control of molecular structure – augmented by
selective isotopic labeling – to relate conductance to structure. A second
objective is to better understand the conductance isotope effect phenomenon
itself; namely, its reproducibility and generality across different molecular
wire architectures. The experimental work will be enhanced by collaborations
with quantum chemists whose calculations will both guide experimental design and
aid in the interpretation of results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.