* 2304462
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel, Sprayable, Large Volume Hydrogel Delivery System Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Greg Grover, KARIOS TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,954.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a simplified system for applying compound in
situ to form biomaterials during surgical procedures. Controlled biomaterial
applications pose significant potential surgical advantages including for anti-
adhesion, tissue sealant, and drug delivery purposes. The proposed platform will
enable procedural consistency to provide new and improved ways to manage
bleeding and reduce scar tissue formation during surgical procedures. This
product aims to gain a share of the $1.5 billion adhesion prevention market and
$1.2 billion hemostat market, and enable eventual site-specific delivery cells
and drugs, depending on the biomaterial delivered. This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a ready-to-use, large
volume delivery system for in situ forming biomaterials. The scope of activities
includes transferring a novel, proprietary, in situ biomaterial with
applicability as a tissue sealant, scar tissue reductant, and drug/cell delivery
vehicle, into a novel single use applicator. The prepackaged delivery system
will formulate the suspended biomaterial with the resuspension solution using an
internal mechanical mechanism which delivers the biomaterial in a controlled
aerosolized manner suitable for clinical use. This Phase 1 project aims to
complete and validate prototypes with lyophilized biomaterials within good
manufacturing practices, engineer the design of the syringe barrel and delivery
tips/nozzles, and complete laboratory validation in a manner suitable for first
in human use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.