* 2304059
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing circular bioeconomy technologies in North San Joaquin Valley (CA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Paul Maglio, University of California - Merced
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,550.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on building
bioindustrial manufacturing capability in California's North San Joaquin Valley
(NSJV), an integrated economic region consisting of Merced, Stanislaus, and San
Joaquin Counties. NSJV is uniquely positioned to lead in bioindustrial
manufacturing due to an unparalleled combination of large-scale food and
agricultural activity, manufacturing capacity, and proximity to hubs of
biotechnology innovation. NSJV is a historically underserved region, with
poverty and unemployment rates well above the state average, low relative
educational attainment, and significant environmental justice and public health
challenges. By building regional specialization in bioindustrial manufacturing,
the NSJV can diversify and strengthen its regional economy by moving up the
value chain, generate higher-quality and accessible family-sustaining jobs for
local residents, advance the national bioeconomy and the transition to a net-
zero carbon economy, and promote a more sustainable food and agriculture system
that reduces environmental and public health harm to surrounding communities.

Biomanufacturing uses bioscience and biotechnology - especially the use of
fermentation - to create useful products, including chemicals, materials, and
fuels, from organic material. Yet there is a gap in translation of basic
discoveries into bioproduction and bioengineering applications with public
benefit, particularly translation into scalable solutions that meet the market
demands and the scope of global sustainability challenges. There are gaps in
areas of innovation related to feedstock diversification, advanced
biomanufacturing process optimization, and equipment of the future for producing
new bioproducts at scale. At the same time, there is a new opportunity for
growing thousands of high-quality jobs that offer economic mobility - including
for workers without a four-year degree - in a region where only one-third of
current jobs provide pathways to prosperity. With intentional policies and
coordination, bioindustrial manufacturing presents the opportunity to decrease
racial disparities, address environmental injustice, and build wealth by
integrating inclusion into this strategy through workforce development efforts.
This Development Award will enable a broad range of regional partners, along
with a network of strategic collaborators and advisors, to develop actionable
and strategic plans for this Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.