* 2304990
* Non-semisimple quantum invariants of three and four manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Shawn Cui, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 273,232.00

Quantum topology emerged from the interaction of classical topology and quantum
physics. As a foundation in modern physics, quantum field theory remains the
best experimentally-verified model of the real world. A topological quantum
field theory (TQFT) is a quantum field theory whose correlation functions do not
depend on the geometries of the spacetime. Hence it computes quantities which
are not sensitive to the shape of the spacetime; this is essentially what
topology is about. The quantities computed from a TQFT are called quantum
invariants. They provide powerful tools to understand curved spacetimes --
manifolds. Mathematically, TQFTs bridge several subjects including tensor
categories, low dimensional topology, and quantum computing. This project aims
to study quantum invariants of three- and four-dimensional manifolds. The PI
will use innovative methods to construct interesting quantum invariants. The
broader impacts of the project contain mentoring and outreach. The PI will
continue mentoring students and postdocs to work on topics related to the
project. The PI will also organize conferences as a platform to foster
collaboration and broaden participation of research.

The objective of the project is to investigate non-semisimple quantum invariants
of three and four manifolds. Previously, the PI initiated the program of
constructing Kuperberg-type invariants of 4-manifolds utilizing trisection
diagrams and Hopf triplets. The Hopf triplets, serving as the algebraic input to
the construction, were initially assumed to be semisimple and this was recently
generalized to the non-semisimple case, but specific examples of such triplets
have not been found. This project will continue the development of the program.
Firstly, the PI plans to systematically search for non-semisimple Hopf triplets
that produce invariants of 4-manifolds. Besides theoretical studies of its
properties, extensive computations will be conducted on exotic manifolds to
assess the strength of the invariant. Secondly, the PI will refine the procedure
to derive an invariant of complex spin structures of 4-manifolds by using Hopf
triplets consisting of Hopf superalgebras. Thirdly, the construction will be
extended to its full generality by introducing the notion of trialgebras. In
dimension three, the project aims to extend the Kuperberg invariant on the basis
of weak Hopf algebras, and thus provides a unification of various 3-dimensional
quantum invariants. Additionally, the PI will mathematically explore a novel
program of constructing modular tensor categories from 3-manifolds using
techniques from geometric topology. Specifically, the PI will develop methods to
produce the F- and R-matrices of the category which are currently not
achievable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.