* 2304544
* STTR Phase I:  Underground Live - an innovative, advanced analytical tool for characterizing the subsurface and reducing underground construction risk
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Jacob Grasmick, EMPRISE CONCEPTS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to reduce the cost of underground civil
infrastructure construction and make new infrastructure more sustainable by
developing a computational software-based tool to create and update ground
models in real time using data-driven advanced analytics. Civil infrastructure
is increasingly moving underground, including roadways, transit, utilities, and
facilities. However, risk in underground construction remains a critical barrier
to attracting investment. A significant risk in building underground is the high
uncertainty in ground conditions and physical properties influencing design and
construction, resulting in increased costs due to over-design and/or delays and
failures during construction. This project strives to improve the understanding
of ground conditions by providing a solution to update the ground models during
construction in a routine and autonomous manner, making full use of the wealth
of data collected during construction.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop a
technical solution that automates the process of back-analyzing ground
properties and updating ground models in real time. Several technical challenges
will be addressed. Current backanalyses practice is extraordinarily labor-
intensive and expensive in managing and integrating data from underground
infrastructure projects. The dynamic environment during construction requires 4D
inversion analysis on potentially hundreds of unique tunnel-structure
interactions. Furthermore, the efficacy of the inversion in estimating
geotechnical parameters, which has been demonstrated for only limited situations
during the fundamental development of the techniques, needs to be validated. The
goals of the proposed research are to (1) develop algorithms to automatically
integrate data from geotechnical instrumentation and monitoring, construction
process monitoring, existing infrastructure, apriori geostatistical model, etc.,
(2) develop algorithms to dynamically update the geotechnical parameter
inversion in spatial proximity of tunnel construction to adjacent structures,
sensors, and ground conditions, (3) characterize the geotechnical parameter
inversion efficacy across a broad variety of ground conditions and tunneling-
structure interactions, and (4) learn the influence of sensing layout and
optimized sensing on inversion efficacy. This Phase I work will lay the
foundation for the development of a ‘live’ ground modelling tool.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.