* 2304058
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing energy and decarbonization technologies in the Inland Northwest (WA, ID)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Kim Zentz, Urbanova
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2025
* USD 996,486.00

This Regional Innovation Engine Development Award aims to create a green and
equitable power grid for the Inland Northwest region across Washington and
Idaho. It will establish a cross-sector collaboration among land grant research
universities, an investor-owned utility, national labs, a regional workforce
council, a non-profit leading in energy equity, public and private universities,
public utility districts, angel investment groups, IP experts, state-level
entities, and several sector-leading for-profit companies. This collaboration
will build off prior clean energy projects to advance research innovations in
sustainable energy, accelerate the translation of research to impact through
support of start-ups and implementing equitable and sustainable improvements to
the region's power grid, and grow a regional workforce to support the innovation
ecosystem. The project focuses on finding equitable solutions to building a
carbon-free power grid and emphasizes community engagement in the planning
activities supported by this funding.

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on accelerating
the equitable decarbonization of the power grid and energy systems in the Inland
Northwest region by establishing INTENT, a cross-sector public-private
collaboration. INTENT aims to address the power grid's social, economic, and
environmental impacts and lead the transition to clean energy. INTENT's impact
will be measured through economic growth, sustainability, resource stewardship,
environmental equity, sustained workforce opportunity, and the ability to scale
to other regions. Cross-sector collaborations that have sustained the region and
solved clean energy technology challenges globally will be leveraged by
inspiring and growing talent, linking laboratory assets, and replicating
sustainability strategies to achieve measurably improved outcomes. The region
has long led the nation in clean energy and resource stewardship, including
hydroelectricity, atomic energy, grid-scale wind, solar, and storage. Likewise,
the region boasts a cluster of industry leaders, national labs, and universities
with premier power systems engineering and innovation from fundamental research
to commercial translation and innovative jobs programs. INTENT's work is
organized around four working groups: 1) Use-inspired Research: to advance
industry-informed fundamental and applied research through a network of
laboratories from idea to demonstration to production at scale; 2) Workforce: to
assess workforce skillsets and attributes required to sustain the regional
innovation engine vision (in all sizes of the community) through a reimagined
workforce training collaboration that begins in kindergarten and extends to
retraining the existing workforce; 3) Industry: to inform and inspire research,
workforce, and investment by defining requirements to meet existential
decarbonization goals; and 4) Investment: to enhance the ability to take an idea
to scale; incubate and spin-out more effectively; analyze funding mechanisms to
increase investment confidence for pre-seed, seed, pre-revenue, angel, and
series A fundraising. Develop investment strategies to support the INTENT long-
term sustainability plan. The NSF Regional Innovation Engines Development Award
catalyzes next-level alignment for the regional partners across R&D, Workforce,
Industry, and Innovation. The award further enables the development, tracking,
and maintenance of impactful performance measures for the health of the region's
communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.