* 2304408
* SBIR Phase I:  Hypervelocity Gradient Field Fusion
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Franklin Witherspoon, NEARSTAR FUSION INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 265,965.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a more rapid lower-cost development path to a
commercially attractive highly modular fusion power plant. Although early stage
in its conceptual development, this technology has the potential to leapfrog
past current fuel cycle models to provide cheaper, advanced aneutronic fuel
systems that reduce or eliminate neutron reaction products and may also
eliminate the need for tritium. The abundance of fusion fuel from seawater could
provide strategic energy security and economic security to the U.S. and allied
nations by phasing out need for hostile foreign fossil fuel suppliers. The
commercial impact of this project includes grid based clean fusion energy is
literally could extend to a $T+ market if expanded to meet global power demand,
with a market pull driven by the need for clean abundant inexpensive energy.
This technology will support a wide range of science and engineering jobs, and
manufacturing jobs in both the energy and aerospace industries. This project
will perform computational modeling and analytical calculations to show
scientific and engineering feasibility prior to a focused follow-on experimental
development program.

This SBIR Phase 1 project proposes to research and develop a new, simpler, and
cheaper approach to fusion energy for grid based electric power. In this
approach, a small fusion fuel capsule is accelerated to 10 km/s and injected
into the throat of a strong magnetic field coil where it is symmetrically
crushed to ignite and burn the gaseous fusion fuel contained within. While
conceptually appealing and straightforward, some key components are partially
unproven and require extensive research to show feasibility. First, the fuel
capsule implosion and resulting fusion burn are not yet studied in sufficient
detail to understand the potential plasma physics problems, including plasma-
wall interactions, end losses, preheat, and overall energy yield and gain.
Second, the novel railgun design needs development with a plasma armature and
distributed power input using mass-produced moderate voltage capacitors and
solid-state switches in order to achieve the estimated 10 km/s required to
induce fusion and long life-time components. Extensive computational modeling
and analytical calculations and design will be performed to de-risk the concept
and establish a point design for a Phase 2 experimental validation of the
concept.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.