* 2304949
* Structure-Optoelectronic Property Relationships in Homogeneous and Heterogeneous/Gradient Alloyed Colloidal I-(II)-III-VI Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert Coridan, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2026
* USD 535,560.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Colin Heyes and Robert Coridan of the University
of Arkansas are combining advanced chemical synthesis and analysis tools to
characterize the structural, optical and electronic properties of semiconducting
nanoparticles (2 â€“ 10 nanometers in diameter) composed of three or more
elements. These elements replace toxic elements that are commonly used in
semiconducting nanoparticles, such as cadmium, with more benign ones, such as
copper, indium and zinc. However, much less is known about how to control the
optical and electronic properties of nanoparticles incorporating these elements.
Heyes, Coridan and their students are addressing this lack of knowledge by
systematically varying the chemical synthesis of the nanoparticles and analyzing
how this affects the resulting atomic structure and, in turn, the optical and
electronic properties. These discoveries could lead to new materials for use in
light emitting diodes, lasers, solar energy conversion, catalysis,
chemical/biochemical sensors, and biomedical imaging. This support will also be
used to help recruit and train underrepresented and first generation
undergraduate students through summer workshops to be held at the University of
Arkansas.

Under this award, Drs. Heyes, Coridan and their students will study
copper-(zinc)-indium chalcogenide and silver-(zinc)-indium chalcogenide
nanoparticle quantum dots (QDs) in which the distribution and local environment
of the CuInE2 or AgInE2 (E = S, Se, Te) emitting sites is varied by the
synthesis conditions. Zinc is known to ion exchange with copper and indium in
the CuInE2 lattice to form alloyed Cu(Zn)InE2 QDs or with silver and indium in
the AgInE2 lattice to form alloyed Ag(Zn)InE2 QDs. Two important gaps in our
understanding of these types of QDs are (i) What is the mechanism underlying
this ion-exchange/alloying and (ii) what is the relationship between the
structure resulting from the specific reaction conditions and the electronic
structure/exciton decay pathways. This research will set out to examine these
knowledge gaps by systematically synthesizing homogeneously alloyed and
heterogeneous/gradient alloyed QDs. Particular attention will be paid to the
heterogeneity in optical emission properties at the single nanoparticle level
and in correlating these properties to atomic level structural information
obtained using X-ray diffraction and spectroscopy techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.