* 2304707
* Advancing Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry to Study Complex Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Miklos Guttman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 449,997.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI), Miklos
Guttman and his group at the University of Washington are working to advance
hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) for
characterizing protein structure. Proteins are the cornerstone of biology as
they carry out nearly all biological processes essential for life. Beyond
characterizing their structures, it is important to understand their behavior in
solution. Often proteins will adopt and transition between different structures
through the course of their function. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to
mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) is one of the few established methods that is capable
of monitoring changes in protein structure. For decades HDX-MS studies have
provided massive insight into how proteins function, but an ongoing shortcoming
of HDX-MS is that it is highly susceptible to variations and two different
laboratories can easily get different results when studying the same protein. By
developing internal standards for these experiments this project seeks to
standardize HDX-MS measurements so all researchers can make reliable comparisons
among their data. One key strength of HDX-MS is that it can monitor
subpopulations of protein structures, but in lieu of adequate software for data
analysis, these subpopulations often go unnoticed. This work will also develop
software tools for robust analysis of HDX-MS data so these subpopulations, which
are often highly relevant to understanding protein function, are accurately
detected. The team will also provide outreach opportunities for K-12 students to
be introduced to the power of cutting-edge analytical technologies.

The Guttman group uses HDX-MS to study many classes of proteins. HDX-MS has
become a widespread approach for studying protein interfaces, directly measuring
protein dynamics, and characterizing transient conformations that are often
invisible to other techniques. Among the strengths of HDX-MS is the ability to
analyze a broad range of protein systems including glycoproteins, membrane
proteins, and large protein complexes that are often challenging, if not
impossible, for most structural techniques. Notably, HDX-MS is proficient at
detecting and characterizing when multiple conformations of a protein coexist.
However, there remain some challenges that often limit the scope of information
that is reliably obtained from HDX-MS studies including poor reproducibility,
misinterpretation of apparent multiple conformational populations, and technical
limitations with sample clean up. This project aims to address these challenges
and expand the level of information and limits on complexity of systems amenable
to HDX-MS through: 1) development of imidazolium-based small molecules to serve
as robust internal standards to accurately measure solution exchange conditions;
2) development of an internal standard to accurately report percentage of
deuterium content in a reaction; 3) establishment of a computation tool for
accurately detecting and analyzing bimodal mass envelopes in samples containing
multiple conformations. Overall, these developments are expected to make HDX-MS
studies significantly more reproducible and informative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.