* 2304621
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast and low-energy manufacturing of high-performance, fiber-reinforced composites
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Daniel Lee, PERSEUS MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2024
* USD 265,072.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will establish the thermal and mechanical limits
of novel, fiber-reinforced, plastic composite materials (FRPs) and pioneer a
fast-manufacturing process for these FRPs. FRPs have the potential to achieve
significant lightweighting and subsequent greenhouse gas emissions reductions by
displacing steel and aluminum in many industries including aerospace,
automotive, construction, infrastructure, marine, and wind energy. However,
difficulties in their processing and slow production have made FRPs too
expensive for widespread adoption. If successful, the proposed project will
enable FRP adoption in more price-sensitive industries such as automotive and
infrastructure for widespread greenhouse gas emissions reductions. A shorter-
term market that can be addressed with this technology is the FRP mold market.
FRP molds are used to make FRPs but are also themselves made of FRPs. Cheaper
FRP molds with shorter lead times are a major need for manufacturers. The
domestic market for mold making was estimated to be $21.6 billion in 2020. As
the FRP market continues to grow, the mold making market is expected to grow in
kind.

The intellectual merit of this project includes new, fiber-reinforced, plastic
composite materials (FRPs), associated manufacturing processes, and methods of
optimization thereof. The core innovation is resin chemistry with a unique form
of low energy, rapid curing. This project will be the first critical step in
developing new manufacturing processes that exploit this curing phenomenon for
faster, cheaper FRP fabrication. This Phase I research is split into three
stages. In stage 1, the effect of different resin components on the final
thermal and mechanical properties of the FRP parts will be evaluated. In stage
2, a prototype system will be developed for fast fabrication of large test
specimens. Common failure modes will be understood, and optimal processing
conditions will be determined. In stage 3, different form factors of fiber
fillers will be used. This project will establish the fundamentals and common
failure modes of a novel, more efficient FRP manufacturing process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.