* 2304448
* SBIR Phase I:  A unique aerogel-based separator technology for safety and ultrafast charging of batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Onur Ergen, NEXT-ION ENERGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,537.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will improve battery market and contribute towards the shift to
affordable and clean energy solutions. The company’s novel aerogel membrane
separator exhibits performance characteristics that address the major
limitations of existing batteries. The enhanced durability and stability
provided by the membrane make batteries highly suitable for electric vehicles
(EVs) and other applications, such as mobile phones, tablets, drones, cordless
power tools, and e-bikes. Electric vehicles offer the most likely solution to
reduce the environmental impact of transport in the US by contributing towards a
significant reduction in the usage of fossil fuels and the subsequent emissions
of greenhouse gases. This technology seeks to improve the overall lifespan of
batteries and ensure that they can endure rigorous usage conditions, thereby
increasing the reliability and range of EVs, while decreasing the frequency and
time of charging and battery replacement. Similarly, in the realm of
electronics, the extended battery life translates into enhanced device
performance, reduced downtime, and ultimately improved user experience.

This SBIR Phase I project examines the technical feasibility of the company’s
aerogel technology as a separator membrane. This membrane is formed by a unique
3-dimensional orientation and functionalization of hexagonal boron nitride
sheets (h-BN) combined with boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs). Current separators
are limited by poor thermal stability, subsequently causing the battery industry
to face challenges such as long charging times, safety risks associated with
high heat generation rates, and low battery performance due to the lack of
enough energy capacity. This solution allows for ultra-fast charging (extending
the battery rating to 10C) and improved safely (allowing batteries to operate up
to 200 °C), while enhancing cyclability, capacity, and power density. The
research activities that will allow characterization of the aerogel are
functionalization of the membrane with various chemical moieties to enhance ion
conductivity, internal series resistance, and lithium plating resistance and
investigation and testing of the aerogel pore size formation for a uniform size
distribution to prevent lithium plating and penetration of active particles,
while maximizing ionic conductivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.