* 2304871
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Exploring the significance of the spatial field from integrated DInSAR+GNSS time series for machine learning and volcano early warning applications
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Brianna Corsa, Corsa, Brianna Durelle
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Leading up to volcanic eruptions, the ground deforms in response to the movement
of magma or hydrothermal fluids at depth. These surface motion patterns are
recorded using high-resolution satellite remote sensing techniques such as
Differential Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (DInSAR), Digital
Elevation Models (DEMs), and Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS).
Advanced computational models can then harness this data to determine volcanic
source parameters and eruptive thresholds, track magmatic transport behavior,
and create additional synthetic time series data for training machine learning
algorithms. Furthermore, DInSAR, DEMs, and GNSS may be integrated to form a
three-dimensional (east, north, up) time series with enhanced ground motion
measurements. Integrated results are delivered either as a plotted time series
at a single pixel location or as deformation maps over large regions. The
plotted time series only contain a temporal component, while the deformation
maps contain both temporal and spatial elements. Machine learning algorithms
will first be trained using only the time-sensitive input, then compared to
algorithms trained with integrated deformation maps consisting of both spatial
and temporal properties. Analyzing the effects of spatial information within the
machine learning algorithm’s training data will lead to essential awareness of
crustal to subsurface dynamics, help classify each stage of a volcanic eruption,
more accurately estimate locations and geometries of magmatic storage reservoirs
or transport pathways, and better characterize or forecast environmental changes
through time. This project contributes towards NSF’s mission to promote the
progress of science, prosperity, and welfare. Societally relevant outcomes will
include but are not limited to the development of enhanced processing frameworks
for hazard early warning and volcanic research, the potential to save human life
or protect community infrastructure due to natural hazards, and to increase
public awareness and knowledge of scientific methods.

The greatest challenges in the field of volcanic observation research involve
how to prepare for, or when and where to anticipate eruptive or high-magnitude
events. To better understand magmatic structure, eruptive behavior, and to
improve hazard early warning systems, this project will support the development
of a standard workflow in which machine learning approaches are used to model
geodetic deformation data. Multi-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), and high-resolution Digital Elevation Model
(DEM) data collected over eruptive volcanoes in Iceland, Hawaii, and the Canary
Islands will be integrated to generate novel, high-resolution, three-dimensional
(east, north, up) time series containing surface deformation measurements with
improved precision. This project will provide researchers with free, complex
geodetic products and processing routines, and will expand on existing volcanic
models by merging various source geometries and locations to better constrain
the physical parameters unique to each volcanic system. Advanced numerical and
physical models from collaborators at the USGS Volcano Observatories, University
of Iceland, and the Spanish National Research Council (IPNA-CSIC and IGEO-CSIC),
will use the satellite observations to quantify volcanic composition, resolve
magmatic transport behavior over local to regional scales, invert for subsurface
structures such as pressure bodies or sources of dislocation, and generate
synthetic training data. Machine learning algorithms will be trained to detect
anomalous motions, or gradients, between remote sensing images and time series
for volcanic monitoring and forecasting applications. Plotted time series will
be streamed through Long-Term-Short-Memory (LSTM) algorithms to predict the
next, most-likely position of a ground point. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
image classification algorithms will be trained using 3D, high-resolution,
cumulative ground deformation maps, which involve dual spatiotemporal
components. These methods will determine how interacting surface signals may be
used to evaluate volcanic unrest, how topographic change from neighboring pixels
affects the ways in which machine learning algorithms consume or process
knowledge, and how efficient and reliable they are at forecasting various phases
of an eruption. Ultimately, the end goal of this research is to build a scalable
system capable of ingesting datasets from disparate sources and domains (i.e.,
seismic, gas emission, surface temperature, tide gauge, tiltmeters, thermal,
etc.), and recognizing patterns across all signals to alert scientists to major
natural hazard events. Doing so will advance geodetic technology and processing
methods, support scientific analyses regarding the onset of hazardous events,
and contribute towards eruption early warning for the safety of nearby
communities.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.