* 2304420
* SBIR Phase I:  Creation of antimicrobial MyoMatrix for functional muscle regeneration in a porcine model of volumetric muscle loss
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Gabriel Haas, GENASSIST INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an antimicrobial muscle-
regenerating biomaterial into a commercial-ready product and address volumetric
muscle loss injuries. In the context of defense medicine, severe muscle trauma
often occurs in environments where external factors such as sterility are not
well-controlled. This project is expected to demonstrate antimicrobial
properties of this novel muscle-regenerating biomaterial to enable use in these
environments. If successful, the broader societal and economic impacts of
antimicrobial muscle-regenerating biomaterials are staggering. Volumetric muscle
loss affects tens of millions of victims each year. Sixty percent of patients
are left untreated, 30% receive a muscle flap transplant, and 10% of injured
limbs are amputated. Total average lifetime costs for amputation now total over
$700,000. Improved clinical outcomes resulting from the implementation of this
technology could lead to hundreds of thousands of dollars in savings over the
course of each recipient's lifetime.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates
significant advances over the existing standard of care for the treatment of
volumetric muscle loss, for which no treatment currently exists. The joint loss
of cells and extracellular matrix creates an environment where muscle
regeneration cannot occur, leading to muscle collapse and atrophy over time.
This project effectively replaces the extracellular matrix lost in volumetric
muscle loss and creates an environment where satellite cells may proliferate and
differentiate into new muscle tissue. A technical concern raised by clinicians,
especially those who work in austere environments in military medicine, is the
risk of infection caused by implanting a foreign substance into a wound bed. To
address this, Technical Objective 1 will focus on incorporating antibacterial
agents to optimize the scaffold’s ability to promote muscle regeneration while
also having an antibacterial effect. Structural and mechanical properties will
be assessed, cellular viability ensured, muscle cell quality evaluated, and
antibacterial properties measured. Technical Objective 2 aims to investigate
these outcomes with a pilot porcine model of muscle trauma. It is anticipated
that the proposed antimicrobial biomaterial will both combat the risk of
infection and effectively regenerate functional muscle in traumatic muscle
injuries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.