* 2304562
* I-Corps:  Using a digital audio signal to measure heart rate with a smartphone
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Tae Hong Park, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software that calculates heart rate and variability statistics
from traditional phone calls, without the need for patients to possess or
install any software or hardware. The proposed technology may be used to assess
the severity of illnesses remotely and route patients to the appropriate care
facility. Industry experts estimate that more than 30% of all emergency
admissions are unnecessary and could be reduced by better and easier to access
remote physiological monitoring systems. A record of heart rate and heart rate
variability using real-time telemetry may help to effectively triage and
proactively manage patient conditions before they are escalated to emergency
rooms. In addition, the proposed technology may be a step towards bridging
socioeconomic gaps and advancing healthcare equity.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a deviceless software that
will allow clinicians to assess and monitor patientsâ€™ current status from
conventional phone calls. The proposed technology adds an additional layer to
existing phone calls that uses voice input to capture vital signs such as heart
rate and heart rate variability, sharing them with a clinician in real-time. The
proposed technology is designed to allow an outpatient to call a hotline where
the software is used to analyze vitals prior to speaking with a clinician and be
routed accordingly, i.e., Emergency Room, Urgent Care, or in-home treatment. In
addition, the proposed technology may be used for post-hospital event monitoring
purposes where the patient receives a daily phone call to record vitals and
answer a series of questions for doctors to review weekly as part of current
physiological status assessment. With a 92% accuracy level, the proposed
technology promises a streamlined method for clinicians to track vitals and
manage health conditions at home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.