* 2305812
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Was there a Tropical Forest in North America after the end-Cretaceous Extinction?
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Gabriella Harris, Harris, Gabriella Rossetto
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The project
will examine a 63.8 million year old fossil plant deposit from Castle Rock,
Colorado, USA, which was previously identified as the first tropical rainforest
after the last mass extinction that killed the dinosaurs. The Fellow will
determine whether the Castle Rock flora should be classified as an actual
tropical rainforest or a temperate forest by analyzing the plant lineages
present and their reproductive methods. The research will advance scientific
knowledge of how flowering plants evolved and forests recovered after the last
mass extinction, leading to the emergence of the prominent plant families living
today. Understanding the origins of modern rainforests is significant because
comparable modern habitats are threatened by extinction due to present-day
climate change and human impacts. This project will also broaden participation
with the training of the Fellow to implement bilingual science communication and
public outreach and mentor high school and undergraduate students of diverse
backgrounds.

The research will involve an in-depth study of well-preserved fossil leaves and
reproductive remains from Castle Rock to determine the composition of the flora,
its biogeographic and structural analogs, and fruit and seed dispersal
strategies. The Fellow will analyze fossil leaf architecture and cuticles from
extensive existing collections (n=~5000) at the Denver Museum of Nature &
Science alongside comprehensive tropical collections at the Field Museum
Herbarium to make taxonomic identifications. The distribution of nearest living
relatives and extant rainforest reference plot data will be used to better
determine what biogeographic region is the modern analog for the Castle Rock
forest, i.e., living low-latitude Old World or Neotropical rainforests or warm-
temperate rainforests more similar to those in East Asia and eastern North
America. The morphology and dispersal types of fossil reproductive structures
will be evaluated using CT scans and comparisons to modern rainforests and other
fossil forests to assess plant adaptations. Training objectives will involve
learning additional skills in angiosperm systematics, cuticle preparation, and
reproductive morphology. The Fellow will also train and mentor other students
from underrepresented groups in STEM. The results of the work will be shared
with museum visitors, remotely to underserved schools, and globally with a
bilingual YouTube video.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.