* 2305961
* NSF PRFB FY23: Effects of bioengineering on community assembly and ecosystem functioning in a soil microbial community
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2024,08/31/2027
* Callie Chappell, Chappell, Callie Rodgers
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Current trends in the development of new
products and technologies may lead to the release of bioengineered organisms
into the environment. While much work is done to develop such technologies,
their environmental effects get less attention. More work is needed to
understand and predict the impacts of bioengineered organisms. In this proposal,
the Fellow will study how bioengineered organisms affect the environment by
studying their DNA, traits, and interactions with other organisms. This research
will involve high school interns, agricultural laborers, and artists. The
purpose of the work is to develop a fairer approach to bioengineering, making
sure that the development of such technology considers both people and the
planet.

The fellow will use a combination of engineering, experimental, and
observational approaches to describe the effects of introduced genetic variation
on population-level traits, community stability, and ecosystem functioning. This
project investigates a Rule of Life (RoL) by connecting the mechanistic
relationships between genomes and phenomes of bioengineered organisms to
ecological processes such as community assembly and ecosystem functioning. Using
a system of plant-associated soil microbes, the fellow will use genetic
engineering to create microbial consortia and study its effects on community and
ecosystem processes. The research will show whether individual genetic changes
affect community assembly and ecosystem functioning in this system. Results will
advance theoretical predictions about the effects of extreme trait variation on
ecological and evolutionary processes. The fellow seeks to expand participation
in STEM research and education through collaborating with youth interns and
working with local non-profits in the greater Bay Area of California.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.