* 2305505
* NSF Engines Development Award: Building a climate-smart bioeconomy in upstate New York (NY)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Jillian Goldfarb, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on transitioning
upstate New York from a fossil-fuel-dependent, economically declining region to
a sustainable climate-smart bioeconomy. The current New York State legislative
environment creates a timely opportunity to develop a climate-smart bioeconomy.
Leveraging policies like the New York State Climate Act, the project will expand
the bioeconomy in Upstate NY, a predominantly rural region with several urban
centers of limited economic growth for over 30 years. The project will develop
technological solutions to global sustainability challenges and a workforce
ready to implement solutions. The climate-smart bioeconomy will foster a
resilient supply chain via sustainable biomass management, grow the regional
economy, address national competitiveness and security by reducing fossil carbon
use, and support the state and nation's goal of creating a net-zero carbon
economy. The climate-smart bioeconomy will become a model for how rural regions
nationwide can build an ecosystem of partners and stakeholders to transform
their economy by sustainably using locally available biomass and talent
resources. The research, education, and entrepreneurial expertise of partner
institutions - Cornell University and State University of New York College of
Environmental Science and Forestry - leveraged alongside the Cornell Cooperative
Extension network, Cornell's Center for Regional Economic Advancement, the
recently established NSF I-Corps Hub, and strategic partnerships among
innovators, industry, entrepreneurs, job creators, policymakers, and community
members, will drive use-inspired research to realize this goal.

The project will develop a sustainable climate-smart bioeconomy by supporting
interdisciplinary, convergent, use-inspired research across three target Areas:
(1) sustainable agri-food and forestry systems; (2) climate beneficial
technology and nature-based innovation; (3) bio-based industrial processes and
products. This award supports two activities: site visits to regional industries
(e.g., agro-industrial producers, robotics manufacturers, forestry services,
training programs) and workshops with stakeholders (e.g., researchers, industry
leaders, investors, government, educators, and economic developers). The goals
of these activities are to identify areas of critical innovation to advance the
Climate Smart Bioeconomy, training, and educational needs to grow a workforce
prepared to implement sustainable climate-smart solutions, challenges faced by
entrepreneurs, in particular those from underrepresented groups, and how
synergistic policy advances can support the climate-smart bioeconomy. This
Regional Innovation Engines Development Award will enable the team to prepare
for an Engine by engaging stakeholders across the region to identify critical
research, training, and innovation infrastructure needs to design an inclusive
ecosystem to enable sustainable growth of the climate-smart bioeconomy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.