* 2305527
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Methods for Virus-based Plant Genome Editing
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chandler Meyer, Meyer, Chandler Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Chandler Meyer is “Methods for Virus-based Plant Genome Editing” The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Minnesota and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Daniel Voytas.

Precision editing of plant genomes has the potential to accelerate crop
improvement and advance functional genomics. Considerable progress has been made
in this area, however, the most commonly used methods for gene editing in plants
often require the use of tissue culture. The drawback of tissue culture is that
it requires technical expertise, it is time intensive, and success is limited to
a few genotypes. This project aims to develop a viral-based method of genome
editing in plants that offers the potential to significantly reduce the need for
tissue culture. If successful, the methods developed could be applied to crop
species and greatly accelerate the ease of gene editing in crop plants,
improving the ability of breeders to create new traits. The results from this
work could also have a broad impact on plant biology by streamlining methods for
generating mutants for gene function studies. Training objectives include
outreach activities to promote community engagement in plant gene editing and
plant science, mentoring undergraduate students, and dissemination of plant gene
editing techniques by participation in the NSF-funded Plant Genetic Engineering
Network (PlantGENE).

The most commonly used methods to deliver gene editing reagents to plant cells
are Agrobacterium-mediated transformation and biolistic bombardment. To recover
a gene-editing plant, tissue culture techniques are needed to regenerate a plant
from the edited somatic cells. This is challenging for a few reasons. First, it
often requires months of training and development of technical expertise.
Second, successful regeneration is often limited to a few genotypes. Lastly, the
tissue culture process can result in somaclonal variation. The use of viruses
for genome modification in plants offers the potential to ease the tissue
culture and reagent delivery bottlenecks. The research objectives of this
project are to (1) improve the cargo capacity of TRV-based vectors so that TRV
can deliver CRISPR-Cas nucleases to meristematic cells, (2) test the use of
miniature CRISPR-Cas nucleases to overcome TRV-based vector cargo capacity
limitations, and (3) identify RNA sequences that increase cell-to-cell mobility
of sgRNAs and nucleases to promote delivery to the germline. This research will
generate knowledge of methods for genomic modification of plants that can be
used by plant breeders and researchers to develop novel traits and study gene
function. Data generated will be released to the community through submission to
public repositories, project web pages, and publications as well as
presentations at scientific conferences, seminars, and workshops. Germplasm will
be available upon request.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.