* 2305782
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Identifying and Validating Missing Links in the Global Bat-Virus Network
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Briana Betke, Betke, Briana
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. There is a
pressing need to identify unobserved host-virus associations, as many infectious
diseases of concern in humans, domestic animals, and wildlife are caused by
viruses. However, predicting these interactions is challenged by a sparsity of
information on known associations due to high logistical costs. Developing
computer-based models to identify likely associations can cut costs by focusing
field research efforts to test predicted interactions. This project will use
predictive models to identify associations between bats and viruses, which will
then be tested by field research. The research results will provide confirmation
(or not) of bat-virus associations that will improve the predictive model. The
fellow will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in biology through
mentorship, a series of graduate school preparation workshops, and community
outreach.

The fellow will combine machine learning and systematic validation field and
laboratory studies to expand the global batâ€“virus network and test the
importance of bat roosting ecology relative to other bat and virus traits. Bats
are of particular interest because they are known to host many viruses of
zoonotic potential, leading to increased pathogen surveillance, and show
intraspecific variation in roost preference for anthropogenic structures that
could increase spillover opportunities to or from humans. The fellow will
quantify the probability of interactions between bat species and virus families
with link prediction models and then test these predictions as well as assess
intraspecific variation in associations across roost structure type
(anthropogenic or natural) in bats sampled in Oklahoma and Texas. Creating an
iterative loop of model prediction, validation, and improvement is often a
neglected step to accurate and adaptive modeling. To address this, the link
prediction model will be run again with an updated dataset containing the
validated predictions, and changes in model performance will be evaluated. To
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in biology, the fellow will
mentor students and present a series of workshops about undergraduate research,
the graduate student experience, and career exploration at the University of
Oklahoma. Additionally, the fellow will engage in community outreach through
education of community volunteers on bat roosting ecology, wildlife disease
ecology, and/or urban mammals. This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.