* 2305129
* Rules for Ion Pairing in Aqueous Interfacial Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Cremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 531,235.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Paul S. Cremer of Pennsylvania
State University will explore the rules for ion pairing at chemically treated
interfaces. The surfaces of many organic-based substances are charged in water.
Examples include everything from colloids in water-based paints to proteins
residing in cell membranes. Negatively charged surfaces attract positively
charged metal ions from the adjacent solution. This study will help determine
how metal ions from salts interact with negatively charged surfaces. The answers
to this question have relevance in the biological and environmental sciences on
the one hand, and materials science and engineering problems on the other. This
research will also train a new generation of students using a combination of
experimental physical chemistry techniques that involve laser light. The
students will also get experience from working with theoretical collaborators
who will help model ion-pairing data. The results are expected to provide
information not only on how tightly ions bind to charged surfaces but also give
important details on how the chemical composition of a surface influences ion
binding. The results will be applicable to a wide range of practical problems
ranging from the most effective way to soften drinking water to the guidance of
pharmaceutical drug manufacturing. Work will also be conducted in association
with high school chemistry teachers to develop new week-long laboratories for
high school students that take advantage of ion pairing to partition food
coloring into salt rich liquid phases. The goal will be to create experiments
that can be conducted without the need for complex equipment or expensive
chemicals.

Experiments will be performed using infrared-visible sum frequency vibrational
spectroscopy (SFVS) to probe the interactions of Hofmeister ions with Langmuir
monolayers of long chain surfactants at the air/water interface. The vibrational
spectra should contain information on interfacial water structure, alkyl chain
ordering and headgroup hydration. In these experiments, both positively and
negatively charged headgroups will be employed. This will include studies of
carboxylate, sulfate, sulfonate, phosphate, and phosphate anionic headgroups as
well as amine and trimethylamine cationic headgroups. A key feature of these
experiments will be to conduct measurements as a function of interfacial charge
density. This will be accomplished by using long chain fatty alcohols as filler
surfactants to tune the mole fraction of charged headgroups. The order of
binding for counterions will be noted and equilibrium binding constants will be
measured for each counterion that is employed. Special attention will also be
paid to conditions that lead to contact ion pair formation as opposed to
solvent-shared ion pairing. Where appropriate, complementary data in bulk
solution on ion pairing will be obtained by using multicurve resolution Raman
spectroscopy. These types of systematic measurements should enable the
elucidation of a set of rules that govern counterion pairing at macromolecular
interfaces as a function of chemical identity and interfacial structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.