* 2305517
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing autonomous technologies for advanced manufacturing (MS)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Julie Jordan, MISSISSIPPI STATE UNIVERSITY ASSURE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT CORPO
* Cooperative Agreement
* Florence Rabanal
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,997.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on catalyzing
efforts among industrial, academic, economic development, state, and community
organizations to accelerate the integration of intelligent technologies
throughout north Mississippi's diverse manufacturing sector. The project team,
nicknamed Engine 662, is a coalition of the region's research universities,
community colleges, and industry partners, all focused on improving efficiency
and productivity, developing new technologies, upskilling the workforce, fueling
startups, attracting new industries, and helping existing industries grow. This
initiative represents a significant opportunity to improve economic outcomes
throughout the region. At the project's core are stakeholders who understand all
parties' inherent connections and roles in driving a vibrant economy for all
Mississippians. North Mississippi relies heavily on manufacturing across
multiple sectors and is poised for rapid growth. Engine 662 supports heightened
coordination among partners to leverage resources and innovate solutions to
drive and sustain growth. Engine 662 will promote an advanced manufacturing
ecosystem, positioning Mississippi for a more significant share of the
technological revolution and enhancing U.S. industrial competitiveness. To
actualize use-inspired research in advanced manufacturing, Engine 662 will pilot
New Product Blueprinting (NPB) and Competitiveness Reviews (CR) to identify gaps
and commonalities to define initial research thrusts. Engine 662 will address
gaps in technologies, products, workforce training, ecosystem coordination, and
translation of new technologies to commercialization. Based on data from the NPB
and CR, the project will prioritize resources and connect problems with teams
trained to develop solutions rapidly. As barriers to employment are uncovered,
the project will work with community colleges, K-12 schools, and regional
economic development associations to replicate what works or design new
solutions. Central to Engine 662's success is understanding the challenges
shared by industries (use-inspired R&D), leveraging stakeholders' capacities,
and enhancing regional coordination (ecosystem development). Engine 662 provides
a platform and vehicle for coordination among project leadership and regional
stakeholders to organize an effective, inclusive, diverse, and committed team
that understands how to maximize and deploy all available resources and pilot
new approaches to use-inspired research that prioritize regional R&D needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.