* 2305204
* CAS: Autoxidation of Oxygenated Volatile Chemical Products in the Atmosphere
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Paul Wennberg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 749,453.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Drs. Paul Wennberg, Brian Stoltz, and John Crounse at the California
Institute of Technology will study atmospheric reactions of volatile chemical
products (VCPs). VCPs are oxygen-containing hydrocarbons (such as glycol ethers
and esters) that are common solvents used in a array of products, including
paints, cleaning agents and liquid soaps, herbicides, hydraulic fracturing
fluids, and dyes for fabrics. When they are used, large quantities of these
compounds vaporize and become a major, if not the dominant, contributor to the
photochemistry producing ozone and small particles (aerosols) that contribute to
poor air quality in many cities. The importance of VCPs is also growing because
of decreasing vehicle emissions. Accurate knowledge of how much ozone and
aerosols are produced is important to understand air quality. Ozone is broadly
toxic to plants and animals, including humans because it causes inflammation of
the lungs and bronchia. Aerosols make the air hazy, reduce visibility and are
associated with respiratory and other illnesses. Through a collaboration with
the University of Copenhagen and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
modeling studies will be carried on the oxidative chemistry of VCPs to learn how
they contribute to the formation of ozone and particles in air. In addition to
training of students, the team will engage in outreach both at their campus and
at local schools, addressing air quality as a topic of high interest to the
community.

A major uncertainty in understanding the impacts of VCPs on air quality is
whether their oxidation results in formation of low volatility compounds. In
particular, radical autoxidation may be active in their degradation.
Autoxidation via H-shift reactions of organic peroxy radicals can rapidly
produce highly oxygenated organic compounds from much more volatile precursors.
These highly oxygenated compounds have a much lower vapor pressure and condense
to form aerosol. This laboratory and computational investigation will examine
the hypothesis that the ether moiety, common in many oxygenated VCPs, enhances
the rate of these H-shifts making autoxidation an essential part of accurately
describing their atmospheric degradation and thus their impact on air pollution.
In this project, the investigators will study the rates of these oxidative
reactions for a diverse set of organic substrates that include those that
dominate the emissions of oxygenated VCPs to the atmosphere. There are
potentially important long range scientific implications of this work for the
understanding of the genesis of oxidized organics in the atmosphere, while at
the same time mapping out mechanism and product distribution for a wide spectrum
of relevant volatile organic compounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.