* 2305141
* Electrokinetic Biodegradation of Glyphosate: Feasibility, Mechanism, and Transport Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Qiaoli Liang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,361.00

Glyphosate is the most widely employed herbicide in the United States and
globally. Approximately, 800,000 tons of glyphosate are utilized worldwide every
year. Although the impact of glyphosate (GLYP) on human health is still the
subject of ongoing debate, exposure to high concentrations of GLYP has been
shown to 1) adversely impact ecosystem health including toxicity to several
species in aquatic ecosystems and 2) contribute to the emergence of glyphosate-
resistant crops, and herbicide resistance in weed populations. GLYP may also
adversely impact soil quality and fertility, either through direct mechanisms
such as complexation with metal ions that are essential to plant growth in
soils, or through indirect mechanisms such as adversely affecting the growth and
metabolism of mycorrhizae and earthworms, which can adversely impact plant
access to nutrients and water infiltration in soils. In addition, GLYP
accumulates in soils with limited (bio)degradation and mineralization through
natural attenuation. Given the widespread use of GLYP, its potential ecosystem
toxicity, and the limitations of natural attenuation, there is a critical need
for more efficient and cost-effective remediation technologies for GLYP
contaminated soils. The overarching goal of this project is to explore and
investigate the utilization of electrokinetic biodegradation (EK-Bio) as an
effective remediation technology for GLYP contaminated soils. The proposed EK-
Bio remediation technology utilizes an electric field to enhance the
biodegradation of contaminants in soils. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental
knowledge, data, and modeling tools to advance the design and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective technologies for the remediation of soils
contaminated with GLYP to enable its safe and sustainable use in agriculture and
farming. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of a post-doctoral research
fellow, one graduate student, and one undergraduate student at the University of
Alabama.

As a potential glyphosate (GLYP) soil remediation technology, electrokinetic
biodegradation (EK-Bio) has several advantages. First, EK-Bio is an in-situ
technology that utilizes an electric field to enhance the biodegradation of
contaminants in soils including low-permeability soils. Second, EK-Bio can
enhance the degradation of recalcitrant organic contaminants by enhancing ion
movement (e.g., contaminants, nutrients, and electron donors/acceptors) and/or
by increasing the activity of redox enzymes to enhance GLYP biodegradation in
soils. Third, EK-Bio can easily be integrated with other technologies (e.g.,
soil flushing) to broaden its applicability and enhance its effectiveness. In
this project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to evaluate the
hypothesis that EK-Bio has the potential to become an effective technology for
the remediation of GLYP contaminated soils. To test this hypothesis, the PIs
propose to carry out an integrated experimental and modeling research program.
The specific objectives of the research are to 1) characterize GLYP degradation
during EK-Bio under varying environmental and operating conditions in three
model and representative soils; 2) probe and unravel the chemical and biological
mechanisms of GLYP degradation using advanced analytical chemistry tools and
molecular biology techniques; and 3) develop and validate a nonlocal reactive-
transport model to simulate GLY fate and transport during an EK-Bio process. To
implement the education and training goals of this project, the PIs plan to
leverage existing programs at the University of Alabama (UA) to recruit and
mentor undergraduate students to work on the project research activities. In
addition, the PIs propose to partner with the University of Alabama Regional In-
Service Education Center to deliver two annual education activities consisting
of immersive lab demonstrations for high school students and teachers selected
from over 120 schools in Western Alabama including a “Scientist for Day” program
(Fall Semester) and a “Honor Day” program (Spring Semester).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.