* 2305883
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Mutualistic Cyber-Physical Interaction for Self-Adaptive Multi-Damage Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vikram Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 07/31/2026
* USD 505,999.00

This project aims to enable mutualistic interaction of cyber damage prognostics
and physical reconfigurable sensing for mutualistic and self-adaptive cyber-
physical systems (CPS). Drawing inspiration from mutualism in biology where two
species interact in a way that benefits both, the cyber and the physical
interact in a way that they simultaneously benefit from and contribute to each
other to enhance the ability of the CPS to predict, reconfigure, and adapt. Such
interaction is generalizable, allowing it to enhance CPS applications in various
domains. In the civil infrastructure systems domain, the mutualistic
interaction-enabled CPS will allow for reconfiguring a single type of sensor,
adaptively based on damage prognostics, to monitor multiple classes of
infrastructure damages – thereby improving the cost-effectiveness of multi-
damage infrastructure monitoring by reducing the types and number of sensors
needed and maximizing the timeliness and accuracy of damage assessment and
prediction at the same time. Enabling cost-effective multi-damage monitoring is
promising to leapfrog the development of safer, more resilient, and sustainable
infrastructure, which would stimulate economic growth and social welfare for the
benefit of the nation and its people. This project will also contribute to NSF’s
commitment to broadening participation in engineering (BPE) by developing
innovative, interdisciplinary, and inclusive BPE programs to attract, train, and
reward the next-generation engineering researchers and practitioners who are
capable creators of CPS technology and not only passive consumers, thereby
enhancing the U.S. economy, security, and well-being.

The envisioned CPS includes three integrated components: (1) data-driven,
knowledge-informed deep learning methods for generalizable damage prognostics to
predict the onset and propagation of infrastructure damages, providing
information about target damages to inform reconfigurable sensing, (2) signal
difference maximization theory-based reconfigurable sensing methods to optimize
and physically control the configurations of the sensors to actively seek to
monitor each of the predicted target damages, providing damage-seeking feedback
to inform damage prognostics, and (3) quality-aware edge cloud computing methods
for efficient and effective damage information extraction from raw sensing
signals, serving as the bridge between damage prognostics and reconfigurable
sensing. The proposed CPS will be tested in multi-damage monitoring of bridges
using simulation-based and actual CPS prototypes, and would be generalized to
monitoring other civil infrastructure in the future. The proposed CPS methods
have the potential to transform the way we design, create, and operate CPS to
enable the next-generation CPS that have greater predictive ability,
reconfigurability, and adaptability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.