* 2305446
* Research: Characterizing Gendered Socialization of Early Career Civil Engineers to Promote Inclusive Practices and Retention of a Diverse Workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kacey Beddoes, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2026
* USD 346,910.00

There is a pressing need to better understand the high rates of attrition from
engineering careers, particularly within their first decade on the job.
Therefore, this project will examine the organizational socialization of
newcomer civil engineers and will focus specifically on how the socialization
process is gendered in ways that contribute to attrition from the profession. It
will build on a previous longitudinal study on the same topic and will continue
the long-term work of developing processes of acculturation to the engineering
profession that are compatible with intersecting non-normative identities by
refining and expanding an empirically-supported and engineering-specific model
of gendered socialization. The integrated education and research plan will yield
a dramatic impact on the field of engineering education by prioritizing the
importance of underutilized gender theories, enrolling men in gender research
and systems change, and addressing the gap in research on engineering
workplaces. Other than the original study that this project builds on, no
existing research has systematically examined the gendered organizational
socialization experiences of newcomer men and women engineers. Ultimately, this
project will facilitate greater equity in the socialization of newcomer
engineers in order to decrease attrition from engineering careers and broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering. Furthermore, this
project will contribute simultaneously to the fields of engineering education,
engineering studies, organizational studies, and gender studies, among others.

The objectives of this project will be to refine and expand a theoretical model
of gendered socialization in civil engineering workplaces and to create
research-based interventions for more inclusive socialization. The study will
involve two groups of participants. Group 1 will be early career civil engineers
from around the country who have been participating in a similar study since
2018. They work in engineering firms, as well as in governmental organizations
at the federal, state, and county levels. When the project begins, they will be
in the fifth and sixth years of their careers. For this group, mixed-methods
data will be collected longitudinally for three years through bi-monthly
Individual Socialization Logs (an instrument developed during the course of the
previous project) and twice-yearly in-depth interviews. The survey and
interviews will explore their experiences in the workplace, including their
biggest challenges, the most important things they are learning, their most
memorable interactions, and their relationships with co-workers. Findings will
be used to refine and expand the model that was created based on the first few
years of their careers. Group 2 will be former early career civil engineers who
left the engineering profession for a non-engineering career. They will
participate in a one-time interview that will explore the reasons they left
engineering, thought processes and timelines leading to that decision, what they
think about their decisions now, workplace experiences that could have made a
difference, and ways university could have better prepared them. From this data,
a typology of the reasons for leaving and organizational socialization factors
that played a role will be created. That typology will then be compared to the
existing theoretical model and survey instrument to determine what additions
need to be made to both in light of the experiences of those who have left civil
engineering. Project outcomes will include identification and characterization
of facets of organizational socialization (e.g., practices, processes,
relationships and social networks) that are gendered, including how they are
gendered intersectionally. Research findings and the model based on them will be
utilized to create professional formation materials for civil engineering
professionals. The professional formation materials will be implemented
nationally and locally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.