* 2305106
* CDS&amp;E: ECCS: Accurate and Efficient Uncertainty Quantification and Reliability Assessment for Computational Electromagnetics and Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Branislav Notaros, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) permits analyses of sensitivity and reliability,
which is of critical importance in all areas of engineering. Indeed, uncertainty
is unavoidable in all engineering applications. Just as one example, UQ in
biomedical computational electromagnetics (CEM) applications involves studies of
electromagnetic field’s sensitivity to uncertainties in position and orientation
of field exciters as well as dimensions and materials of biological objects.
Through rigorous UQ, the effectiveness and reliability of analyses and designs
may be improved drastically. With the growing demand for high-precision
components, devices, and systems for consumer use (e.g., cellphones) or national
security (e.g., stealth technology), the analysis of uncertainty is extremely
important. In fact, in the design of practical systems and methods, the low-
probability but high-risk events often dominate design concerns. To achieve
these critical objectives, this project will conduct a cohesive analysis and
treatment of deterministic and statistical errors to enhance engineering designs
through automatic and rigorous techniques. The proposed methodology for error
control and UQ in CEM and computational engineering enhances both quality and
confidence in designs and simulation data while also increasing efficiency.
Although the project focuses on safety-critical and mission-critical
applications requiring high-quality rigorous UQ, the proposed new approach can
also provide significant advantages in other CEM and numerical modeling
applications. Compared to existing techniques facing challenges of severe
limitations in the dimension of uncertain parameter space, the computational
expense, and the ability to reliably and accurately model and calculate failure
probabilities, particularly for high-risk events, the proposed approach has
advantages of extensive adaptivity, achieving accuracy for high-dimensional
problems, and computing the probabilities of arbitrary events rapidly. The
project’s educational activities include advising and training of graduate
students, recruiting students from underrepresented minority groups in STEM,
developing new educational and course materials, and participating in various
retention/outreach programs.

The principal objective of this project is to formulate, develop, analyze, and
demonstrate a novel synergistic approach of fully adaptive error control (both
deterministic and statistical) and uncertainty quantification to greatly enhance
the efficiency, accuracy, and usability of reliability assessment for
engineering applications including electromagnetic systems and devices. The
project develops a comprehensive approach to constrain deterministic error (to
eliminate significant error propagation effects) and statistical error (to
ensure high-quality resolution of success and failure probabilities). The novel
approach promises significant savings in computational resources and enhanced
performance for high-dimensional uncertainty. The approach will significantly
improve the analysis of safety-critical and mission-critical problems demanding
high-quality UQ. The analysis of uncertain events, particularly those with low-
probability and high-risk, is untenable in practical applications through
existing UQ approaches. Compared to existing methods, the proposed novel
adaptive local resolution with dimension reduction UQ method has several unique
features: (A) comprehensive deterministic and statistical error control synergy,
as opposed to independent processes, to efficiently drive local resolution
enhancements; (B) integral support for multiple objectives in the automated UQ
processes with accelerated convergence to specified error tolerances; (C) novel
adjoint-based similarity indicators to conduct significant efficiency
enhancements through quantity of interest clustering; (D) high-resiliency to
high-dimensional uncertainty while supporting multiple objectives and providing
significantly enhanced convergence rates; (E) failure-probability-aware
dimension reduction techniques through adjoint data indicators and parametric
sensitivity metrics; and (F) identification of critical points in the parameter
space to drive intelligent resource allocations and identify unstable regions.
Overall, the proposed approach has a strong potential to fulfill the needs of
rigorous, automatic, and efficient uncertainty quantification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.