* 2305797
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: The evolution and ecological drivers of retinal specializations in fish
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Emily Kopania, Kopania, Emily Emiko Konishi
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Vision is necessary for survival in many
species, but species can have very different visual requirements based on their
environment, and we do not fully understand how species adapt to these different
visual environments. Many animals have specialized regions in the retina, such
as an area centralis (region of high cell density), a horizontal streak
(elongated region of high cell density stretching across the retina), or a fovea
(physical indentation in the retina). These specializations may help animals see
in different visual environments, but this has not been tested using comparisons
across multiple species, and the exact functions of these specializations are
unknown. The retina also continues to develop postnatally or post-hatching, but
this process is not well understood. Fish are excellent models for studying the
functions and development of retinal specializations because they have evolved
these specializations multiple times, and they experience many different visual
environments, from the deep sea to bright and structurally complex coral reefs.
The proposed project will combine evolutionary genomics with developmental
biology in fish to study the evolution and development of retinal
specializations. This will address fundamental questions about how the
environment and development shape the biology and evolution of the eye.

The fellow will complete two aims: (1) Investigate the ecological significance
and genetic basis of retinal specializations in a phylogenetic comparative
framework; (2) Test the prediction that greater ecological changes across life
stages lead to greater molecular divergence in fish retinas. In Aim 1, the
fellow will use cell biology and microscopy techniques to collect data on
retinal specializations from a large sample of fish species, then test if
different retinal specializations are associated with different ecological
traits in ray-finned fish after controlling for shared evolutionary history. Aim
2 will involve collecting single-cell sequencing data from multiple species and
developmental time points to compare relative rates of divergence at different
stages of development. The fellow will also mentor undergraduates, do outreach
in public schools, present work at conferences, and publish in peer-reviewed
journals. These research and professional development activities will provide
training for the fellow to become an independent researcher and will contribute
to broader impacts by sharing the work with the scientific community and the
general public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.