* 2305856
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Investigating proximate mechanisms and ultimate drivers of temperature-dependent development of male:female ratios in reptiles
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Anthony Breitenbach, Breitenbach, Anthony
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 09/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In many reptiles, whether an individual
develops as a male or a female depends upon the temperatures that they
experienced while developing inside the egg. There is increased urgency to
understand the biological mechanisms of this process, as a warming climate will
likely influence these processes at both individual and population levels. Even
though this developmental system has been studied since the 1960s, we still know
very little about how exactly temperature influences this development and the
survival of these species. It remains unknown 1) how the same temperature
produces opposite outcomes across different species and 2) how temperatures
experienced while developing in the egg affect the probability of survival. This
research will directly advance our understanding of mechanisms regulating the
development of male and female reptiles and will inform conservation efforts
aimed at vulnerable populations and species. The fellow will be trained in
genomic techniques and modeling and will also broaden participation in science
by presenting the research to local schools in an economically disadvantaged
area.

The temperature-dependence of female or male phenotype represents a
straightforward case of developmental plasticity, in which the temperature
experienced during discrete developmental windows dictates this development.
Whereas the molecular and genetic responses to similar thermal cues appear to be
conserved, the resultant developmental outcomes vary across species. For
example, cool temperatures lead to the upregulation of conserved chromatin
modifiers in the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta) and the American
Alligator (Alligator mississippiensis), but these temperatures produce males in
T. scripta and females in A. mississippiensis. The first objective of this
research will use ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq approaches to test the hypothesis that
chromatin modifiers interact with different genetic loci across the turtle and
crocodilian genome to produce species-specific reaction norms. Second, recent
theoretical and empirical data support the idea that incubation temperature-
mediated effects on male vs female survival to maturity underlie the adaptive
value of developmental plasticity. Using recapture efforts after incubating A.
mississippiensis eggs in the lab at different fluctuating temperatures
representing future warming scenarios, the second objective of this research is
aimed at addressing how increasingly warm climates will affect crocodilian male:
female ratios, attendant population structures, and, ultimately the adaptive
value of this temperature-dependent developmental plasticity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.