* 2305631
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Causal Induction in Sequential Decision Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Qing Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 81,153.00

Causal induction, i.e. learning the causal relations among a set of variables
from data, is a fundamental problem in scientific research and engineering. An
ideal approach to causal induction and inference is through experimental
interventions. In many applications, scholars are often interested in maximizing
certain outcome variables over a set of candidate experimental interventions, as
in the so-called causal bandit problem. Motivated by a few pressing challenges
faced by existing methods, namely unknown causality, data heterogeneity, and how
to design adaptive experimental interventions, the PI will develop novel
statistical methodology and theory for causal bandit and induction based on
directed acyclic graphs, a class of popular graphical models for representing
causality. Software packages will be released to provide efficient
implementation of these methods and algorithms. The research will be integrated
into education and research training at both undergraduate and graduate levels.
Open-source software with detailed documentation will increase the visibility
and the practical application of the research project.

This project investigates the causal induction problem under the framework of a
sequential decision process. To handle unknown causality, the PI plans to
develop a bandit algorithm with causal parent identification and a Bayesian
backdoor bandit methodology that averages over parent set uncertainty. Both
methods make efficient use of observational data to complement experimental data
generated during sequential interventions. This will substantially generalize
the causal bandit methodology and theoretical guarantees to the challenging
setting under unknown causality. Borrowing the principle of optimism in the face
of uncertainty, the PI further develops novel data-adaptive intervention
procedures that directly target causal induction, to achieve active learning of
the underlying causal graphical model. Since data generated under different
experimental interventions do not follow an identical distribution, the PI will
develop a new method to learn the interventional equivalence class on such
heterogeneous experimental data. The PI will develop theoretical results to
establish upper bounds on the cumulative regret in the causal bandit methods and
the consistency of the structure learning algorithms. The sequential
intervention design for active causal learning is adaptive to finite-size data
and can be applied to a general underlying causal graph.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.