* 2305992
* NSF PRFB FY23: Temperature effects on community assembly: a case study in nectar microbes of a western north American native plant
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rosa McGuire, McGuire, Rosa M
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 09/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Despite the threat of climate change, the
effects of temperature on major ecological processes are still not well
understood. Community assembly is a process in which biotic and abiotic factors
interact, giving rise to the group of species that make up a community. This
research aims to understand the link between temperature and community assembly.
The project will combine experimental and theoretical methods. The model system
consists of the native North American plant Pedicularis densiflora and its
nectar microbes. Flowers and their nectar begin as a sterile environment. Over
time, microorganisms arrive, transported by pollinators like insects and birds.
The first goal of this project is to measure the temperature responses of nectar
microbes. Then, community assembly in the laboratory and the field will be
studied. The project will also develop new theory for the effects of temperature
on community assembly. The temperature responses of life history traits are
conserved among many life forms. Therefore, studies on nectar microbes can
provide insights about the effects of climate change in other communities.
Nectar microbe communities consist of a small set of bacteria and yeast species.
They can be cultured, and their populations quantified in laboratory settings.
This makes them an ideal system to disentangle the effects of climate change on
community assembly. The project will first measure thermal reaction norms of
growth rate. Growth rate will be quantified in terms of death and birth with the
goal of building a parameterized model for each species. The second phase of
this project involves studying the outcomes of assembly by building experimental
communities in the lab and in the field subject to different temperature
regimes. The experimental data will be used to calculate interaction strengths
between species and build a theoretical model for community assembly that
incorporates temperature. Finally, the consequences of different nectar
communities on pollination preference and fecundity of P. densiflora will be
studied. The fellow will gain expertise in bacterial methods, molecular
techniques, and mathematical modeling. Broader impacts of this project include
facilitating research experiences for undergraduates and developing workshops on
the use of simulations in R to learn ecological models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.