* 2305938
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Multi-omics Assessment of Translocation Impacts on Sonoran Pronghorn
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Natalie Payne, Payne, Natalie
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 02/28/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Biological responses of individuals to
changing environments are not due exclusively to individual genetic factors.
Rather, an organism represents a complex ecosystem, and responses arise partly
due to interactions among populations or communities microorganisms that exist
within that organism. Furthermore, composition and function of these
microorganism communities are dynamic and reflect the broader environmental
context of hosts. This research seeks to clarify how wildlife and their gut-
associated bacterial, viral, and parasite communities respond to changing
environments and interact with each other. Specifically, the fellow will study
these relationships within Sonoran pronghorn (Antilocapra americana
sonoriensis), an endangered hoofed-mammal found only in the Sonoran Desert
region of Arizona and Mexico. The Sonoran pronghorn is an ideal species for this
study because captive individuals undergo annual releases to their wild habitat
as part of their recovery efforts, and additional translocations are planned to
introduce pronghorn to new habitats in California. Studying how wildlife respond
to such translocations is crucial to improving success and long-term health of
other species in need of these conservation measures. The project will also
broaden participation in science through incorporating immersive field,
laboratory, and computational research experiences for traditionally
underrepresented groups, from high school to graduate students.

The fellow will use a multi-omics approach to address the following objectives:
1) investigate the genomic and environmental drivers of gut microbiome and
virome composition, and 2) assess host and microbial responses to translocation.
Genome, virome, and microbiome amplicon sequencing will be conducted using
paired blood and fecal samples from captive Sonoran pronghorn. Pronghorn will be
sampled pre- and post-release in Arizona and California for microbiome/virome
characterization and metatranscriptomic sequencing to assess host and microbial
transcriptional responses. The fellow will examine relationships among host
genomic variation, environmental and immunological factors, and diversity of
microbial communities, and datasets will be combined to develop predictive
models for translocation impacts on Sonoran pronghorn and ecosystem health. The
project will expand the fellow’s research skillset in microbiome
characterization and integration of diverse datasets for predictive modeling
with machine learning approaches, providing mentorship opportunities (four
student interns per year, as well as a PhD student from Mexico) in addressing
independent research questions using data generated by the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.