* 2305152
* Understanding Carrier Delocalization and Transport in Micelle Forming Amphiphilic Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Sarah H Tolbert, Benjamin J Schwartz
and Yves Rubin of the University of California at Los Angeles are systematically
studying assemblies of semiconducting polymers in aqueous solutions in order to
seek more favorable geometries for electrical conductivity. Semiconducting
polymers are an exciting class of optoelectronic materials because of their
solution processability, low cost, and structural tunability. These
characteristics make them useful in a range of organic electronic devices,
including photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, light-emitting diodes, and
transistors. However, the conformational freedom of conjugated polymers leads to
intrinsic disorder that can result in poor electrical conductivity and hence
limited commercial applicability. This research will address these issues and
use organic synthesis, structural studies, and modern spectroscopy to explore
water-soluble amphiphilic semiconducting polymers that self-assemble into
cylindrical micelles as a way to straighten polymer chains and reduce defects
without the need for a crystalline network. The efforts toward controlling
polymer self-assembly while interrogating chain conformation with respect to
carrier mobility have the potential for broad impact in the field of organic
electronics and could lead to a development of new and low-cost polymeric
systems for a variety of applications in which temperature and/or light are
converted to electricity and vice versa. The project will provide opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students to be involved in cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research. In an effort to bring the ideas of nanostructured
materials, organic electronics, and self-assembly to a broader audience,
experiments related to this work will be brought to secondary school classrooms
throughout the greater Los Angeles area via a series of graduate-student run
workshops for teachers.

This research will focus on the synthesis of micelle-forming amphiphilic
conjugated polymers based on poly(cyclopentadithiophene)-alt-thiophene (PCT)
backbones, and will investigate of how their assembled structure controls charge
mobility upon doping. In the first objective, organic synthesis and amphiphilic
assembly will be used to precisely control the position of charge-balancing
counterions in chemically-doped PCT polymers. PCT-based polymers with cationic,
anionic, non-ionic, and zwitterionic size chains will be prepared and solution-
phase small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) will be used to characterize micelle
formation. Doping will be achieved with iron(III) salts in water and the number
and nature of charge carriers will be probed using steady-state and transient
IR/visible absorption spectroscopy. Based on theoretical calculations and
modeling, doubly charged side chains and/or divalent solution-phase counterions
will be employed to control polaron pairing into bipolarons at high doping
densities. In order to create systems where the anionic side chains serve as
counterions for the polarons, copolymers of anionic and either zwitterionic or
non-ionic polymers will be applied. Such an approach will eliminate the need for
additional ions in solution. The second objective will target new polymer
backbones that are easier to chemically dope. The final goal will seek to
develop methods to transition optimized assemblies from aqueous solutions into
the solid state to create new materials with improved conductivity. The
comprehensive approach for controlling polymer conformation and charge
localization associated with this research has the potential to provide
important strategies to further understand fundamental charge carrier dynamics
in conjugated polymers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.