* 2305953
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Disentangling convergent evolutionary color patterns from underlying ecological processes in the clownfish-sea anemone symbiosis.
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Catheline Froehlich, Froehlich, Catheline Yasmin-Magali
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 09/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports the research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the
area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow will study what ecological
conditions gave rise to the color patterns of clownfish. There are 28 species of
clownfish, but only three distinct color patterns. These color patterns did not
evolve from a common ancestor and instead converged on the species of anemones
they live in. Although scientists have been studying the rule of life governing
convergent evolution for over 100 years, we have yet to understand what
ecological processes underlie the convergence of color patterns. The clownfish-
anemone symbiosis provides an iconic model to test how clownfish behavior, diet,
microbial community, and geographic distributions influence the convergence of
their color patterns from their anemone hosts. Color patterns are compelling
traits that are recognized in all ecosystems, and the project will provide the
context necessary for understanding how animals evolve different color patterns.
The project will broaden participation in science through public engagement and
training opportunities on cutting-edge research.

The clownfish-anemone symbiosis provides a unique model for color pattern
convergence as their lifestyle is primarily site attached and tailored to their
environment. The symbiosis has radiated broadly, which provides opportunities
for testing whether there is a geographical context that influences the color
patterns of clownfish. Since clownfish are site attached, their behavior, diet,
and microbiome may vary based on the species of anemones that host them and
influence their color pattern convergence. Accordingly, the fellow will
investigate the ecological context of color pattern convergence in clownfish
using an integrative approach. The fellow will combine video analyses for
behavior, stable isotope analyses for diet and trophic level, and microbiome
analyses for skin, gill, and gut microbial genetics at geographically distinct
areas throughout the range of clownfish-anemone symbioses. The fellow will be
trained in each analysis and will pass on this invaluable training via NSF
Research Experience for Undergraduate programs. Educational material will be
provided to students in underrepresented and underfunded communities. The fellow
will engage the public via virtual displays and ‘Meet the Scientist’
presentations at the Alabama Aquarium, schools, and other public settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.