* 2305503
* RUI: Printable Metal Contacts to Realize Fully Printable All-Inorganic CdTe Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Troy Townsend, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2026
* USD 185,304.00

Photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion can provide more power than we use globally;
however, this renewable energy source still only contributes to 3% of our energy
portfolio largely due to the prohibitive cost of material processing via high
temperature or vacuum-based deposition. In response to this, a variety of low
cost and rapid Roll-to-Roll (R2R) printing techniques that were invented for
printing media are now being revived and adapted to deposit nanoscale electronic
inks to build lightweight and flexible electronic devices at rapid production
speeds. Solid state PV devices are deposited layer-by-layer and contain
semiconducting light absorbing materials sandwiched between two metal contacts.
The chemical composition and processing conditions of each layer can be tuned to
adjust the device properties, which are dramatically affected by the alignment
of the electron energy levels at the interfaces between layers. As charge flows
through the device circuit, noble metal contacts with low electron energies are
chosen for the anode whereas reactive metals make suitable contact at the
cathode.¬¬ Energy mismatch between the light harvesting semiconductor and the
metal contact can lead to significant loss of generated charge and restrict
device performance. Despite this, printable metals are currently limited to
nanomaterials of gold, silver and carbon, and printable cathode metals are
absent from the literature because of the air-sensitivity of their precursor
inks. This proposed study addresses the need for low-cost printable anode
me¬¬tal alternatives and novel printable cathode electrodes to achieve higher
efficiency devices at a fraction of the cost of conventional PV. Additionally,
this research will demonstrate the first fully printed all-inorganic PV devices
including optimization through composition and interface engineering of the
printable materials and their interfaces. This project will be conducted at a
primarily undergraduate institution and will provide nanoscience research
experience opportunities for underrepresented groups while preparing students
for materials science career pathways. Undergraduate research students will also
participate in public outreach chemistry demonstrations with local schools and
STEM camps.

This project directly addresses a major limitation in the field of printable
electronics by investigating printable metal contacts with a specific focus on
high throughput Roll-to-Roll (R2R) production of low-cost solar photovoltaics
(PV). The electronic properties of metal contacts have a major influence on band
bending, and this dramatically affects device efficiency. Specifically for
solution processed CdTe/ZnO nanocrystal PV, high work function and low work
function metals are required to make ohmic contact with p-type CdTe and n-type
ZnO, respectively. Currently, however, demonstrated printable high work function
metals are limited to nanoparticles of silver, gold and carbon, and printable
low work function metals are absent from the literature due to the air-
sensitivity of their precursor inks. For this reason, researchers investigating
printable PV materials typically start with vacuum-deposited ITO for the bottom
contact, despite Fermi level pinning with the p-type material in the case of
CdTe, followed by vacuum-deposited aluminum on the n-type layer for the top
contact. To address the discrepancy between pairing low cost R2R compatible ink-
based materials with size/speed restricted vacuum-based contacts, we will use
composition and interface engineering of transparent and opaque printable low
and high work function contacts to realize and optimize fully printed robust
all-inorganic CdTe PV devices. Changes in work function will be measured with a
Kelvin Probe, and printed films will be characterized with UV/Vis and X-ray
fluorescence spectroscopy, Hall effect measurements, atomic force microscopy and
X-ray diffraction. Completed devices will be printed with research grade InkJet
and R2R compatible rotogravure printers followed by 1 sun illumination
measurements. Applying these engineered materials to printed CdTe PV will
uncover their effects on band energy alignments and their resulting device
properties to advance the field of printable electronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.