* 2305971
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Investigating environmental and genomic regulation of molt in birds
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Paul Dougherty, Dougherty, Paul
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will focus on molt, the annual
process by which birds lose their old feathers and replace them with new ones.
Molt is an essential event in the birdâ€™s annual cycle because feathers wear down
over time. To meet the high metabolic demands of feather growth, bird
populations have evolved to molt at times and in locations with abundant
resources. If, for whatever reason, birds are unable to access sufficient
resources during the molting period, they will grow poor quality feathers and
have an elevated risk of mortality in the following year. Unfortunately, bird
populations may soon face mismatches between periods of feather growth and
resource availability as climate change alters patterns of precipitation. In
this study, the researcher will assess the extent to which ongoing changes in
precipitation challenge bird populations during molt. By describing individual
variation and flexibility in molting behavior and the potential for molting
behavior to evolve in response to changing conditions, the researcher will help
update current climate change risk assessments for bird species in western North
America and improve conservation strategies. Additionally, this project will
generate outreach materials communicating the importance of studying molt to
community scientists across the country and provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students, thereby broadening participation in the scientific and
birding communities.

The researcher will first describe intraspecific variation in molting behavior
in a wide-ranging passerine species, the Lazuli Bunting (Passerina amoena), by
examining occurrence records and deploying miniature tracking devices. He will
then take individuals from populations with the most divergent molting locations
and phenologies into captivity and expose them to different environmental cues
that could trigger molt. Following the onset of molting behavior in each captive
individual, the researcher will then generate transcriptomic sequences to
identify loci associated with molting behavior. By determining the environmental
and genomic mechanisms that regulate molt in different populations, the
researcher will be able to understand plasticity in molting behavior and the
evolutionary potential for populations to shift molting behavior. In all stages
of this research, there will be many opportunities to involve undergraduate
researchers from underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.