* 2305798
* NSF PRFB FY23: Host-pathogen dynamics in response to resource pulses: nutrients, immunity and disease transmission
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julie Davis, Davis, Julie
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Globally, disease and habitat loss lead to
biodiversity loss. In agricultural landscapes, bees sometimes have less food
from flowering plants and can be exposed to more disease. However, mass blooming
cover crops that produce large amounts of flowers could improve conditions for
bees. For example, increased food supply from mass blooming crops may improve
bee nutrition and disease resistance. Additionally, mass blooms could either
reduce or increase chances for bees to spread diseases at shared flowers, likely
depending on the amount of other, non-crop flowers in the surrounding landscape.
Identifying the contexts in which different farming practices can support
pollinators improves conservation efforts. This project asks how non-crop flower
abundance affects the extent to which mass blooming cover crops affect bee
disease resistance and spread.

This research will use an agriculturally important native bee, Osmia lignaria,
and its associated pathogens to evaluate how resource pulses from a cover crop
(vetch, Vicia villosa) interact with the surrounding landscape (abundance of
non-mass bloom floral resources, NMBR) to affect bee immunity, pathogen
infection, and pathogen transmission. The fellow will place Osmia lignaria nests
at sites manipulated to either have or not have mass blooming vetch. Sites in
the mass bloom and control treatments will each exist along a gradient of NMBR.
To assess how mass bloom affects pathogen infection, adult bees will be sampled
throughout bloom, and larvae and pollen provisions will be sampled at the end of
bloom to quantify pathogens and nutrients. To assess how mass bloom affects
opportunities for disease transmission, total and infected bee and flower
density will be quantified in vetch and NMBR patches. To assess whether mass
bloom and NMBR affect immunity, the fellow will conduct an immune challenge and
measure immune gene expression in bees fed pollen from diets that mimic the
quality and quantity of floral resources at each site, in laboratory
experiments. By disentangling landscape- versus molecular-scale drivers of host-
pathogen dynamics, this work will improve predictive power of when pathogens
affect populations and communities. The fellow will extend the impact of their
work by 1) training two undergraduate students, 2) conducting trainings on
inclusive teaching in Biology, and 3) communicating results and investigating
applications with conservation and agricultural professionals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.