* 2305860
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Resilience of animal social systems to environmental and demographic disturbances
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Anastasia Madsen, Madsen, Anastasia
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Social behaviors interact with multiple facets
of an animal’s life, including space use, survival, and reproduction. In a world
of accelerating change, it is critical to understand how social behaviors can
help animals adapt to changing environments and when social behaviors restrict
animals from adapting to new conditions. This project uses theoretical models
and long-term observations from wild Asian elephant populations to ask 1) how
genetic and environmental factors influence the structure of animal social
systems and 2) how social systems change in response to habitat degradation and
population turnover. The outcomes of this research inform conservation policy to
protect endangered Asian elephant populations and mitigate human-elephant
conflict across South and Southeast Asia. Additionally, teaching materials and
outreach activities developed by the fellow for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students directly contribute to education and recruitment in STEM.

The fellow investigates factors altering social behavior using mathematical
models and existing behavioral observations from three geographically and
genetically isolated island populations of Asian elephant, encompassing the
three sister species: Sri Lankan, Sumatran, and Bornean Asian elephants. The
project develops theoretical models to assess the role of genetic and
environmental factors on social phenotypes using multiagent simulations and
social network analysis. Models are used to predict social dynamics and
population persistence under different land use scenarios and variable turnover
rates to provide informative projections for land use management. Training
activities include gaining skills in 1) quantitative research methods from the
research itself, 2) conservation policy and community engagement through
collaborations with the UC San Diego School of Global Policy & Strategy and the
non-profit organization Trunk & Leaves, and 3) teaching and mentorship through
developing materials for a UC San Diego undergraduate field methods course, a
graduate/young professionals workshop at the Society for Conservation Biology
annual meeting, and outreach events for K-12 students in collaboration with the
UC San Diego education programs, CREATE and Library NExT.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.