* 2305325
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Taxon-Specific Cross-Scale Responses to Aridity Gradients through Time and across Space in the NW Great Basin of the United States
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Sean Hixon, Hixon, Sean W
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Biodiversity supports human livelihoods and health by providing clean air,
natural resources, and food security. Small mammals in particular help maintain
healthy soils, spread seeds and ensure they germinate, and feed predators (for
example, owls that eat mice). As humans use natural resources and contribute to
climate change, we need to identify ways to conserve small mammal diversity.
This project will help us understand how some small mammals, like woodrats and
ground squirrels, in the Great Basin of the western U.S. responded to past
changes in vegetation and episodes of climate drying that are in some ways
similar to whatâ€™s happening now. Specifically, by analyzing small mammal bones
deposited in caves over the past 16,000 years, we will test ideas about 1) which
types of small mammals are particularly sensitive to climate drying and 2)
whether ongoing changes in climate or land use are a greater threat to these
animals today. Results from this research will help people make decisions about
biodiversity conservation and land use planning. Findings will also be shared
with the general public so that everyone can learn how understanding the past
can help us do a better job of caring for our planet today.

Despite clear evidence that climate disruption and human activities threaten
biodiversity, ecological studies typically fall short of identifying the cross-
scale responses of species and their communities to accelerating environmental
change. Integrating geohistorical data spanning long temporal scales with modern
data arrayed across environmental gradients in space can help us understand
shifting ecological communities as products of both modern and historical
processes. This project combines taxon-specific stable isotope and AMS 14C
chronologies with existing paleoenvironmental proxies to characterize the
divergent responses of specialist and generalist small mammals in the Great
Basin to aridification over multiple spatial and temporal scales. Study of mesic
and xeric-adapted pairs of species belonging to both woodrats (Neotoma spp.) and
ground squirrels (Urocitellus spp.) will test the extent to which
paleoecological patterns can predict the habitat use of modern populations. This
work involves multiple cave sites spanning the last ~16,000 years thar are
arrayed across a modern latitudinal aridity gradient in the understudied
northwestern Great Basin and integration with data from modern sites arrayed
along a nearby elevation gradient from the Alvord Desert up Steens Mountain in
southeastern Oregon. The project involves multiple forms of student mentorship
and the design of a paleoecology-focused interactive museum display and video,
in collaboration with the University of Oregon Museum of Natural and Cultural
History.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.