* 2305572
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Reconstructing the role of beavers in driving Holocene landscape evolution and resilience in the Sierra Nevada range, California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Dorothy Baker, Baker, Dorothy N
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. D. Nev√© Baker has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities under the
mentorship of Dr. Emily Fairfax at the University of Minnesota and Dr. Ellen
Wohl at Colorado State University. Environmental engineering by beavers can
profoundly alter a local landscape and provide resilience to drought and
wildfire, which are of increasing concern in California. There is recent
interest in beaver reintroduction as a low-cost method to restore degraded
watersheds and buffer the local effects of climate change, however little is
known about the historical distribution of beavers and their impact on the
landscape over long time scales. This project aims to fill this gap by
investigating the interaction between beavers, vegetation, and sedimentation
over the last 12 thousand years in the Sierra Nevada mountain range. The study
employs a combination of sedimentary analyses and DNA of plants and animals
isolated from ancient sediments (sedaDNA) to understand how beaver engineering
contributed to landscape evolution, ecosystem characteristics, and environmental
resilience over century to millennial timescales. The results of this study will
provide a critical basis for restoring beavers to California and validate a
useful sedaDNA tool for identifying the past presence of beavers. This project
will provide critical data for managers and policy makers interested in
restoring beavers to California and validate a useful sedaDNA tool for
identifying the past presence of beavers that can be widely applied for future
restoration efforts. Furthermore, this project will broaden participation in the
Earth sciences by providing field and lab work opportunities for undergraduate
students from backgrounds historically excluded from the geosciences. The
natural appeal of beavers as a charismatic megafauna and their wide-ranging
environmental effects will provide an excellent framework for engagement of K-12
students and the general public to learn about ecological and geomorphological
interactions. Baker will collaborate with the University of Minnesota SciSpark
Scholars program to develop a hands-on learning module on beavers in the
environment for young learners, conduct bioblitzes at beaver pond sites for
public engagement, and share her research through public presentations.

The goal of this project is to apply sedaDNA and sedimentary analyses to
understand the role of beavers as drivers of coupled ecological and geomorphic
processes across the Holocene in the Sierra Nevada mountains in California. This
research will analyze catchment lake cores over the last 12 ka in order to test
the central hypothesis that continuous environmental engineering by beavers over
hundreds to thousands of years created characteristic ecogeomorphic stable
states within watersheds in the Sierra Nevada that were resilient to
environmental disturbance. This study will provide direct evidence of past
presence of beavers without relying on physical remains, allowing for the
investigation of how beavers contributed to geomorphic dynamics and landscape
resilience. By coupling sedimentary analyses with vegetation data (via sedaDNA),
the study will investigate the effects of beaver engineering both directly and
indirectly through their role in structuring the ecological community, providing
a comprehensive picture of how beaver-engineered landscapes may have evolved
over thousands of years. The results of this project will contribute to a
fundamental understanding of Holocene landscape dynamics and provide timely
evidence of how beavers may help buffer the effects of drought and wildfire,
informing future restoration efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.