* 2305735
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Understanding the role of dietary toxins in shaping microbial community dynamics in the gut
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Jessica Aguilar, Aguilar, Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Communities of
microbes that live in and on animals provide essential functions to one another
and their hosts. Community structure (the types and abundances of microbes
present) and function are shaped by interactions between the microbes themselves
and also between microbes and their hosts. Diet, especially dietary toxins like
caffeine, also contribute to differential community structures, but the ways
microbial interactions and dietary toxins act together in shaping communities is
not well understood. These studies will contribute to the general body of work
describing the dynamic interactions between gut microbiomes and their hosts, and
add a new layer (the effects of dietary toxins) to our understanding of the
interaction outcomes. This new knowledge can be applied in human health
contexts, where gut microbial community dynamics are known to have varied
impacts on health, and has a clear application in biocontrol of the coffee berry
borer, which contributes to the loss of ~$500 million in revenue in coffee
growing regions. This project will also broaden participation and inclusion of
underrepresented groups in biology through scientific and professional training
of early career scientists and facilitating training on conflict resolution
using restorative justice techniques.

This project will combine observational and experimental studies to better
understand the dynamics of the microbial community and dietary toxins on
community structure and function in the gut microbiome of the coffee pest,
Hypothenemus hampei. The bacterial community of this beetle’s gut has been well
characterized, and is known to play a critical role in dietary toxin (caffeine)
metabolism. The three synergistic aims of this project will advance the field’s
understanding of the ecological and evolutionary contexts that shape
interactions with the gut microbiome. Aim 1 will characterize the gut microbiome
of H. hampei (including phage) using whole genome metagenomics complemented with
culture based techniques. Aims 2 and 3 will use experimental evolution to
disentangle the roles of microbial community, dietary toxins and insect host in
shaping the structure and function of the gut microbiome. This project also aims
to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in biology through goals
that start at the individual level and expand to the broader scientific
community, including scientific and professional training of early career
scientists with underrepresented identities and facilitating training on
conflict resolution using restorative justice techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.