* 2305449
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Evaluating spatiotemporal dependence in groundwater-dependent ecosystem processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Matthew Lurtz, Lurtz, Matthew R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Matthew Lurtz has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities at Colorado State
University under the mentorship of Dr. Michael Ronayne and at the University of
Technology Sydney under the mentorship of Dr. Alfredo Huerte. Throughout the
western United States and elsewhere, inland groundwater dependent ecosystems
(GDEs) occur alongside many rivers and lakes where the water table is close to
the land surface. These ecosystems host a variety of native and nonnative
vegetation that provide benefits such as: reduce agricultural-borne pollutants,
protect species habitat, and stabilize stream sediment transport. The vegetation
communities utilize water (i.e., plant transpiration), representing an important
water budget component for the integrated surface-groundwater system. Therefore,
GDEs can be used to identify the groundwater supply connected to vulnerable
river systems. In this study, water uptake by GDEs in different climatic regions
will be quantified using a combination of site instrumentation, remote sensing
methods, and numerical groundwater modeling. By increasing the scientific
understanding on GDEs, it is possible to enhance the knowledge base surrounding
groundwater supply which is key to human and environmental sustainability. The
importance of this work will be realized by engaging with beneficiaries in the
water conservancy districts of southeastern Colorado and Arizona, where the
field research will be conducted. This project will benefit the next generation
of scientists by using place-based education and synthesizing water conservation
strategies employed by inhabitants of American and Australian territories. The
project will rely on Colorado State Universityâ€™s (CSU) educational outreach
programs to communicate scientific findings and conservation methodologies,
including traditional indigenous methods. Data acquired, and models and mapped
products created during the fellowship will be shared on local-to-international
scales.

Groundwater dependent ecosystems play a dominant role in supporting flora and
fauna, but little information is available to help quantify GDE health (i.e.,
evapotranspiration) with varying time, space and climatic scales. The main goal
of the study is to uncover temporal and spatial dependence in GDEs using
remotely-sensed and numerical modeling methodologies. This study will utilize
hypothesis testing to investigate how small scale GDE processes translates to
larger spatial scales which will bolster predictive models used to address
national water challenges. On a temporal basis, the trend direction between GDE
health and groundwater availability will be investigated by collecting
environmetrics on plant functional groups found in GDEs under varying
groundwater and climatic conditions with data in the western United States. A
dimension reduction method will be applied to the environmetric data to infer
the trajectory of groundwater dependent ecosystems with reductions in
groundwater supply. From a spatial-scale perspective, this work will begin by
deriving the function form to describe the relationship between GDE health and
groundwater availability at the point scale using a Bayesian regression
framework. To examine spatial structure in GDEs beyond the point scale, this
work will use the derived function as a subroutine in a spatially distributed
parameter modeling scheme to build a scale-enlightened numerical model. This
project will result in a more accurate representation of GDEs in water resource
models using a research framework that is hypothesis-driven, based on the
current state of science, and informed by sustainable engineering concepts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.