* 2305370
* ADVANCE Adaptation: NYU InterScience-Systemic Changes in Leadership and Climate for Inclusive STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Antonio Merlo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,250,000.00

The New York University’s (NYU) ADVANCE Adaptation project, InterScience, will
focus on improving the workplace culture and climate at NYU for all STEM
faculty. The project aims to implement new policies and practices that will lead
to improved retention, success, satisfaction, and representation of women and
women of color who are underrepresented in STEM faculty careers. The
InterScience project has three main objectives (1) Develop STEM faculty for
leadership roles, in particular as department chairs; (2) Empower department
chairs, center leaders, and advocates with critical training; (3) Improve
retention, tenure success, satisfaction, and sense of belonging for all STEM
faculty. The ADVANCE project will partner with the existing NSF AGEP ELEVATE
program which is focused on junior faculty of color. to leverage the work done
by both projects.

Because department chairs play a crucial role in mentoring junior faculty, in
setting the department climate, in hiring, and in the tenure and promotion
process, this project will focus on improving the pathway to this leadership
role to ensure it is of interest to STEM faculty from underrepresented groups.
The project will develop and implement new policies to improve the
attractiveness of the role of chair, create new vice-chair roles, and improve
transparency and equity in the procedure to appoint faculty to leadership
positions. In addition, the project will provide regular training to Chairs,
Advocates, and center directors, create a formalized Diversity Advocates
program, and create a range of mentoring and networking programs. The proposed
InterScience Center and digital mentoring platform will evolve to include
faculty from other New York-area universities and can serve as a model for other
universities in the US.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic
institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies,
processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE
“Adaptation” awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-
based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as
well as non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.