* 2305282
* CAREER: Autonomous, Rapid Self-Healing and Ultra-Stretchable Electronic Polymer Research &amp; Education for Outreach and Student Success in STEM
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Evan Wujcik, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 04/30/2025
* USD 291,554.00

With recent developments in polymer science and conducting polymers, advances
are being made in stretchable electronic polymer systems for applications in
healthcare, robotics, and entertainment. These systems are attached to clothes
or worn directly on the skin for monitoring physical signals, biochemical
signals, and motion. Due to the soft, compliant, and complex nature of skin and
the natural bending and rotational motion associated with joints, the
stretchable electronic polymers should be soft and mechanically robust enough
for the wearer to comfortably perform motions such as bending, stretching, and
twisting. To prevent long-term performance decline it is desirable for the films
to continually heal themselves. Conventional semiconductors, like silicon, are
brittle and rigid. Since they are not self-healing, they are unsuitable for many
stretchable electronic polymer applications. This work investigates the
synthesis, internal structure, self-healing ability, and electrical properties
of these dynamic ultra-stretchable systems and utilizes them for wearable
electronics, such as sensors. This project's education and outreach activities
are combined with the research in a manner that impacts the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. This effort has three main foci:
the participation of underrepresented and multi-cultural student groups,
improving engineering education at both the undergraduate and graduate level,
and outreach to educators & future STEM students. The educational goal of this
proposal highlights the role stretchable electronic polymers play in everyday
life through the creation of educational YouTube videos reaching thousands of
potential STEM students and teachers.

Currently, there is no electronic material that possesses the properties of
skin—compliant, elastic, stretchable, and self-healable. This work investigates
stretchable electronic polymer systems and the underlying phenomena of these
advanced materials—for future applications in healthcare and engineering fields.
The fundamental goal of this work is to understand the relationship between
synthesis, internal structure, self-healing ability, and electrical properties
of dynamic polyaniline/acidic polyacrylamide/small molecule dopant stretchable
electronic polymer systems—to fully understand these stretchable electronic
polymer materials and apply them specifically to wearable sensor/electronic
functionalities. The technical merit of the work provides new insight into the
role of both small molecule dopants and polyacrylamides acidic group content and
the overall structure of stretchable, self-healable, conductive polyaniline
systems. This project elucidates current stretchable electronic polymer systems
by unraveling the electrical/self-healing activity in relation to the internal
film structure. This knowledge is cross-disciplinary and aids developments in
the fields of sensor/surface science, basic materials science and engineering,
etc. The research team investigates the effects of small molecule dopants and
acidic polyacrylamides on the synthesis/structure/electrical/self-healing
properties and working relationships of dynamic polyaniline systems and links
this activity to the internal film structure. Investigating the effects of
molecular weight, structure, as well as the number and class of the acidic
groups of the small molecule dopants allows the investigator to understand how
the intermolecular, thermal, morphological, self-healing, and electrical
properties depend on the electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding within
the material. The acidic groups of the polyacrylamides increase the
electrostatic interactions within the material and aid the doping of
polyaniline, the electrical properties, and the self-healing ability. Varying
the amount and type of acidic polyacrylamides enables the researchers to (i)
explore their function in the electrostatic interactions of the dynamic systems
and (ii) understand how the intermolecular, thermal, morphological, and
electrical properties depend on the internal film structure. This understanding
allows for a thorough investigation of the basic properties (gauge factor,
linearity of response, self-healing) of this class of polymer systems for
realizable wearable stretchable electronic polymers for medical diagnosis,
prosthetics, e-skins, etc. The research contributes to the current theory
relating these functional materials to the fundamental understanding of the
electrostatic interactions and internal film properties controlling these
autonomous self-healable and ultra-stretchable polymers. The education and
outreach components of this work integrate with the research through creative
and artistic online media and outreach, and illustrates the importance of
stretchable electronic polymers in everyday life to educators & future STEM
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.