* 2305321
* Conference: SMBE Satellite Meeting On De Novo Gene Birth
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Claudio Casola, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2023
* USD 27,619.00

This conference award provides partial support for The Society of Molecular
Biology and Evolution Satellite Meeting on De Novo Gene Birth, to be held in
College Station, TX on November 6-9, 2023. De novo gene birth is a recently
discovered genetic process responsible for generating new genes with important
biological roles, such as human brain function and pest resistance in crops.
Research on de novo genes is critical to our understanding of species evolution
and has a growing impact on medical sciences, including cancer biology. This
international meeting will stimulate sharing of new knowledge and foster
collaborative efforts across a variety of biological disciplines. The conference
will offer outstanding networking and training opportunities for young
researchers representing the future STEM workforce. De novo genes evolve from
ancestrally noncoding DNA sequences and are ubiquitous across the tree of life.
Research in this area encompasses a range of disciplines and has informed on
broader phenomena in biological sciences, including the evolution of cellular
networks, the emergence of new protein folds and domains, and the accuracy of
gene annotation. The rapid increase of genome sequences and high-throughput
proteomic datasets is providing the wealth of information necessary to address
fundamental issues in de novo gene origin and function. As the first large
scientific gathering on de novo gene birth, this conference will accelerate
advances in de novo gene evolution, function, and annotation, and enable
developing the conceptual and empirical frameworks that will guide
investigations in this area for the foreseeable future. The meeting will provide
opportunities for early-career researchers to present their work and establish a
broader professional network with internationally recognized scholars in
molecular evolution, genomics, proteomics, cell biology and bioinformatics. The
funding provided by NSF includes support to trainees from historically
underrepresented groups in science with the goal of broadening participation to
the meeting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.