* 2305089
* Deciphering Post-Translationally Modified Peptides with Arrayed Synthetic Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Wenwan Zhong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 510,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program and partial
co-funding from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) and the Chemical
Structures, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) programs in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Zhong's group and their collaborators at the University of
California-Riverside are developing and extending ways of characterizing
chemical modifications occurring in proteins and peptides after they are
synthesized. Such “post-translational modifications” (PTMs) greatly expand the
structural and functional diversity of proteins. Interaction among PTMs
(“crosstalk”) is also crucial for regulation of protein function and biological
processes. However, identification and detection of PTMs pose significant
challenges, because multiple types and numbers of PTMs often coexist on a single
peptide or protein and these are not easily separable. Some modifications
produce only small changes to the properties, making their sensing difficult.
The Zhong group is developing innovative tools for the analysis of important
classes of PTMs in peptides, aiming to enhance our understanding of protein
modifications and their functional implications. The research will be integrated
with on campus and outreach activities aiming to increase minority participation
in STEM fields, to improve the retention rates of underserved minorities in STEM
fields, and to provide teaching opportunities to students interested in
education as a career goal. It will provide interdisciplinary research training
to graduate students and undergraduates in areas that bridge chemistry, biology,
and materials science.

The Zhong group is developing flexible synthetic receptor hosts paired with
indicator dyes to study PTM crosstalk and identify isomeric peptides, two
challenging tasks not readily addressed by current measurement technologies.
Employing multiple orthogonal recognition mechanisms, arrays formed between the
self-folding cavitands with upper and lower rim functionality and their
fluorescent guests can selectively recognize different PTM peptide targets. The
developed arrays can then be employed to investigate how PTMs affect the
function of kinases, enzymes responsible for adding phosphate groups to
proteins, and to study PTM crosstalk, where nearby modifications influence the
properties of a target modification. Additionally, the arrays can be used to
detect the subtle structural differences among isomeric peptides and measure the
activities of isomerases. By leveraging multiple different self-folding deep
cavitands in an arrayed format, the work aims to advance our understanding of
PTM functions and regulation, through improvements in PTM detection and by
enabling the discovery of hosts with high affinity and selectivity for diverse
PTM types.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.