* 2305045
* CAS: Dithioacetal as a Highly Tunable and Versatile Bond for the Design of Chemically Recyclable and Dynamic Covalent Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ying Yang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 451,626.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Ying Yang of the University of Nevada at Reno is
using ring-opening and -closing polymerization strategies to prepare recyclable
polydithioacetals. Polydithioacetals are long chain macromolecules in which the
main polymer backbone contains chemical element sulfur in addition to carbon
commonly seen in commodity plastics. This class of polymers is chemically stable
and yet has highly modifiable backbones and side groups. As a result,
polydithioacetals are promising candidates for recyclable polymers with tunable
properties. Research associated with this project will develop an in-depth
understanding of the polymerization mechanisms of dithioacetal polymerization,
investigate how thermodynamics and kinetics of polymerization are affected by
the rich structural variations, and explore using these chemistries to enable
dynamic architectural transformations of thermoplastic and thermoset
polydithioacetals controlled by stimuli. The results from these fundamental
studies have the potential to lead to the development of novel recyclable
polymers which can be reprocessed at high temperatures and depolymerized on-
demand back into cyclic macrocycles. From the sustainability point of view, the
design principle associated with this project provides a very promising and
viable solution to the current challenges associated with the widespread usage
of non-degradable vinyl plastics. Hence, the developed methodology could be
utilized to build readily degradable and sustainable plastics that are amenable
to a circular economy life cycle. The research team will be actively involved in
disseminating the results via publications and presenting the work at
conferences and local events. Furthermore, community outreach will be conducted
by establishing close relationships with Hug High School which has a large
Hispanic student population. The project will also facilitate the research and
education of polymer science at the University of Nevada Reno by integrating
polymer chemistry modules into the large general chemistry classes.

This research will focus on studying polydithioacetals that are capable of
reversible entropy-driven ring-opening polymerization (ED-ROP) and ring-closing
depolymerization (RCD) as a versatile platform for the development of recyclable
polymers, as well as dynamic covalent systems. The dynamics will be enabled by
acid-catalyzed dithioacetal exchange reactions. Building on promising
preliminary results, the project aims to develop a detailed understanding of the
chemistry and thermodynamics of ED-ROP for dithioacetal macrocycles through
three interconnected objectives: (1) understand the polymerization mechanism
with different initiator/catalyst systems and obtain controlled “living”
cationic polymerization, (2) vary the structures of polydithioacetal backbones
and side groups/chains and study their effects on the monomer-polymer
equilibrium, and (3) develop reprocessable and depolymerizable polydithioacetal
thermosets with controlled degradation by light and mechanical force. These
research activities have a strong sustainability component and the potential to
generate fundamental chemistry knowledge of relevance to using ED-ROP for the
development of inherently practical, recyclable and functional polymers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.