* 2305550
* ADVANCE Partnership: Raising Equity Values with the Inclusive Professional Framework and the International Organization for Standardization Standards in Engineering Societies
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gretalyn Leibnitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,381.00

The significance of the global problems faced by the United States as a world
leader demand excellence in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Excellence is the result of teams of talented, diverse people working
together in an inclusive environment. Currently, the United States is struggling
to meet national demand for a greater number and more diverse engagement of STEM
academics and workforce professionals. Thanks to two decades of NSF ADVANCE-
funded research on organizational change strategies to promote comprehensive and
inclusive STEM disciplinary engagement, the struggle to achieve a diverse STEM
academic and professional workforce is not because we don’t have evidence-based
policies and practices for doing so, but rather the lack of nationally
recognized standards to promote the collective awareness, knowledge, and
application of these evidence-based policies and practices. However, as of May
2021, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Human Resource
Management released their Diversity and Inclusion Standard (ISO:30415; ANSI,
2021). The problem that remains is the mechanism by which awareness, knowledge,
and application of the newly released standard will be efficiently and
effectively achieved. Professional and disciplinary societies (collectively
referred to as “societies”) serve academic institutions and academic-influencing
organizations such as accrediting agencies, national laboratories, corporations,
and government, and are thus uniquely positioned to model and help facilitate
efficient and effective adoption of the ISO standard:30415. Further, because
engineers are especially attuned to standards, engineering societies are a
primary focus. Thus, this project aims to provide engineering society leaders
and stakeholders with ISO:30415 standardization resources and tools, which will
drive awareness, knowledge and application of evidence-based inclusive
organizational policies and practices. Ultimately, this project will enhance the
United States’ STEM excellence and means of addressing the complex problems
facing the nation, and the world.

The goal of this project is to enhance awareness and adoption of the ISO:30415
Diversity and Inclusion Standards by engineering professional societies which
will increase the awareness and adoption of evidence-based organizational
policies and practices promoting inclusive disciplinary excellence. The project
will engage three target audiences: (1) individuals, (2) organizations, and (3)
systems. The project aims to accomplish its goal through a two-phase approach.
Phase 1 involves the creation and piloting of a novel, web-based ISO:30415
platform tailored for engineering societies. Phase 2 includes developing and
deploying activities to standardize a change process for change leaders. The
Inclusive Professional Framework for Societies, a research-informed, evidence-
based framework, will be foundational to the standardization of the
organizational change process. Expected outcomes include: development of
ISO:30415 engineering society web-based platform; engagement of 2 cohorts (up to
15 societies); collection, development, and use of organizational change tools
and resources for engineering change leaders. Results will be disseminated
through websites, webinars, engineering journals, and society professional
conferences. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through
a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that
impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic
institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies,
processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE
"Partnership" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education and non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.