* 2305907
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Genes on the move: the evolution of horizontal transfer in bacteria
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Olivia Kosterlitz, Kosterlitz, Olivia
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will focus on bacterial
communities, which play crucial roles in maintaining the health of ecosystems,
as well as in human health and disease. Specifically, the research aims to
investigate how bacteria acquire new traits. The method that will be
investigated is called horizontal gene transfer, or HGT. This is an essential
yet overlooked aspect of bacteria. A well-known example of this process is the
spread of antibiotic resistance between different species of bacteria. Through
this work, the fellow will help to inform initiatives to combat the spread of
antibiotic resistance. In addition, the fellow will participate in activities to
inspire and engage the next generation of scientists through community outreach
and mentorship programs.

The fellow’s research program will use a combination of experiments and
mathematical modeling to uncover the evolutionary rules governing the movement
of genes between unrelated bacteria through HGT. In spite of the importance of
plasmid-encoded traits to human, animal, and environmental health, we know
little about how the spread of these important traits is affected by small
changes in the plasmid’s core genes that help the plasmid replicate and transfer
between bacteria by HGT. The fellow’s research program will focus on the
evolution of plasmid core genes in various environmental and community contexts.
Specifically, the project will create a detailed genotype to multi-dimensional
phenotype map for a portion of a conjugative plasmid. This systematic mapping
will explore how mutations in specific parts of the plasmid affect both its
ability to horizontally spread, and the fitness of its bacterial hosts. To
achieve this, the project will develop new methods for accurately and
simultaneously measuring HGT and growth rates in multiple species of bacteria
and use this data to build a mathematical model that can predict how plasmids
will evolve under different environmental conditions. By shedding light on the
complex interactions between genes, hosts, and environments in bacterial
communities, this research will advance our understanding of fundamental
biological concepts governing the ecology and evolution of bacterial communities
and aid in combating the spread of antibiotic resistance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.