* 2305574
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Impacts of animal aggregations on stream carbon cycles: Linking evolutionary history, species traits, and environmental context to predict ecosystem function
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jonathan Lopez, Lopez, Jonathan Williams
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change—driven largely by carbon
emissions to the atmosphere—and biodiversity loss are among the most difficult
problems in ecosystem science. This project aims to improve our understanding of
the link between climate change and biodiversity loss by predicting how animals
control carbon in freshwater ecosystems. Freshwater bivalve mussels are among
the most vulnerable species to climate change. Mussels also have calcium
carbonate shells which store carbon and can indirectly affect carbon cycles.
This project aims to identify biological traits in mussels that promote
freshwater carbon storage and help guide mussel management and conservation
initiatives that promote carbon storage, thus helping address climate and
biodiversity challenges. The Fellow will also integrate their research with
education by developing outreach programs intended to reach local underserved
communities and teach the next generation of scientific professionals about the
importance of freshwater biodiversity.

The goal of this project is to synthesize data on phylogenetic history,
functional trait phenotypes, and assemblage composition for freshwater mussels
(Bivalvia: Unionoida) to predict the Rules of Life that govern animal effects on
stream carbon cycles across the biomolecular, organismal, and ecosystem scales.
This research will (i) determine how much variability in mussel trait phenotypes
is explained by phylogenetic dissimilarity, (ii) calculate organism-level
impacts of dominant mussel species with varying phenotypes on carbon pools and
fluxes, and (iii) scale mussel-generated biogeochemical effects to the ecosystem
level under different environmental contexts. The Fellow will test for links
between phylogenetic identity and functional trait phenotypes using publicly
available gene fragment data and an extensive mussel trait dataset including
elemental composition, growth rates, thermal tolerances, and movement. The
Fellow will also combine the trait dataset with a field experiment using
metabolic incubation chambers to quantify how variation in mussels’ traits
impact carbon budgets under natural conditions, and scale mussel-driven impacts
to the ecosystem scale using geospatial models. The Fellow will receive training
in data synthesis and geospatial modelling, recruit and mentor undergraduate
researchers from diverse backgrounds, and conduct outreach for students of all
age ranges and the general public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.