* 2305630
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: To roll, flow, or fracture - that is the question: Investigating the mechanisms behind friction and the stability of faults
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Kristina Okamoto, Okamoto, Kristina
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Kristina Okamoto has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
conduct research at the University of Minnesota investigating the physics
governing the frictional behavior of fault gouge. Fault failure can occur at a
range of slip speeds varying from slow creep (cm/year) to fast earthquakes (m/s)
and this rate of failure depends on the friction (resistance to sliding) of the
fault. Therefore, understanding where and when earthquakes happen requires a
frictional model. The predominant model is a set of equations that fit
laboratory data called rate and state friction. While these equations have been
generally useful, they do not include any underlying physics of the system.
Because of this, scientists are unable to extrapolate results to pressure and
temperature conditions not directly explored in the lab. Due to experimental
constraints, many pressure and temperature conditions relevant to the earth are
not attainable. Recently, a new frictional model has been defined, where the
frictional state is governed by the permanent deformation of grains during
sliding. This permanent deformation is called plastic deformation, and adds
shear strength to the system, called backstress. While this model can fit
experiments similar to rate and state friction, the effect of backstress on
friction has not been investigated systematically in the laboratory. This
project will vary the amount of backstress in the starting grains and then
perform friction experiments on this material. Preliminary experiments at 550Â°C
and 100 MPa normal stress show that the amount of backstress in the starting
grains causes a large change in the amount of shear stress required to slide the
material at a steady state. Testing and enhancing this new model will allow for
better predictions of the conditions that allow for earthquakes versus slower
slip. Outside of this research, Dr. Okamoto will mentor students through the
Research Opportunities in Rock Deformation (RORD) REU at UMN and co-supervise an
undergraduate research project. Dr. Okamoto will also engage with and aid in
ongoing initiatives at UMN that aim to promote diversity and support
geoscientists from under-represented groups.

This work will further investigate this new model by determining the velocity
dependence of materials over a range of pressure and temperature conditions that
may span deformation mechanisms such as dilation, fracture, and plastic
deformation at grain contacts. At conditions relevant to plasticity, the steady-
state friction coefficient as well as the frictional rate-dependence will depend
on backstress, but when temperatures and pressures are low, the effect of
plasticity will be low, and friction should be a function of dilation rather
than backstress. When pressures are high and temperature is low, friction should
mostly depend on the ability of the grains to fracture. However, there is a
feedback between backstress and fracture that is currently unmapped. Backstress
is fundamentally caused by additions of small separations in the crystal lattice
called dislocations. The dependence of the ability for grains to fracture on
dislocation density will be explored through novel indentation techniques. This
will enable a better understanding of how the frictional system at low
temperatures and high pressures will behave. Overall, exploring whether friction
depends on backstress over a wide parameter range will be fundamental to
extrapolating laboratory friction to pressure/temperature conditions not
explored in the lab as well as to larger spatial and temporal scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.