* 2305941
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Pollinator Thermal Performance and Limitation in an Early-Blooming Crop
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nicole DesJardins, DesJardins, Nicole S
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Apple
production in the Midwestern US is limited by a lack of pollinators. Apples may
be particularly susceptible to pollinator limitation because they bloom in the
early spring, when it may sometimes be too cold for bees to fly. Under climate
change, weather conditions are likely to become increasingly unstable during the
early spring, possibly exacerbating the problem of pollinator limitation. This
project aims to determine the extent to which pollinator thermal performance is
linked to pollinator limitation. It will determine which of the groups involved
in apple pollination (honey bees, bumble bees, solitary bees, etc.) is the best
at performing under unstable weather conditions. This research will help to
ensure the security of the Midwestern apple crop in the face of a changing
climate, and will be able to direct mitigation strategies such as increasing
honey bee stocking densities or conserving wild bees. The Fellow will
disseminate this work to beekeepers and growers around the Midwestern US, and
will also undertake activities aimed at increasing the participation and
retention of neurodivergent individuals in biological research.

The Fellow will first determine whether orchard microclimate and timing of bloom
influence pollinator visitation, predicting that apple orchards with warmer
microclimates and later-blooming varieties will experience more pollinator
visitation. Next, the Fellow will experimentally induce pollinator limitation by
making flowers available for pollination only at select temperatures, predicting
that the flowers available at higher temperatures will be less pollinator-
limited. The Fellow will also look directly at pollinator thermal physiology,
matching bee performance in a lab-based assay with the temperatures at which
they are active in the field. Overall, the Fellow will seek to determine the
extent to which pollinator limitation in this early-blooming crop can be
explained by pollinator thermal performance. In addition to these research
activities, the Fellow will prepare for an academic career by developing and
teaching a module on sustainable food systems in an upper-level undergraduate
biology course. The Fellow will also develop programs aimed at supporting
neurodiversity in biology, including a mentorship network for graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.