* 2305056
* CAS: Electrochemical and Photochemical Methods for Precision Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nathan Romero, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Nathan Romero of the University of California at
San Diego is developing electrochemical and photochemical methods for precision
synthesis of conjugated polymers. Conjugated polymers carry significant
potential for applications as organic electronic materials owing to their
lightweight, flexible nature and diverse optoelectronic properties. However,
realization of advanced technologies necessitates a degree of structural control
beyond current synthetic capabilities. This work addresses this limitation and
will seek to achieve length- and sequence-controlled polymerization of
conjugated polymers using a combination of electrochemical and photochemical
tools to polymerize a broad range of simple arene substrates. The developed
methodology will be applied to the synthesis of novel polymers for organic
electronics and new methods for additive manufacturing. The synthetic
innovations associated with this research have the potential to create advanced
organic electronic devices with applications in sustainable energy, healthcare,
and communications. Furthermore, the designed photochemical reactivity of
monomers may be applicable to the upcycling of conjugated polymers once used
rather than discard these as waste. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research will provide educational and professional development opportunities for
student researchers. The research team will work to increase representation of
non-majority scholars through inclusive mentoring, teaching and service.
Outreach activities to local communities will focus on educational resources
related to electronic waste handling and disposal, sustainable polymer
feedstocks and biodegradable plastics.

This research will focus on developing the length- and sequence-controlled
polymerization of thiophene based monomers using a combination of
electrochemical and photochemical tools. The modular platform for precision
synthesis of conjugated polymers will utilize electrochemical C-H
functionalization to selectively couple an arene and a sulfide to form an
arylsulfonium salt, which will also serve as monomer in a novel photo-mediated
chain growth polymerization. By performing electrolysis and photolysis
simultaneously, the sulfide will essentially act as a catalyst to achieve
controlled oxidative polymerization. The developed direct method for the
preparation of arylsulfonium salts through C-H functionalization aims to improve
upon the atom economy of existing multi-step chemical methods. The
photopolymerization studies have the potential to provide fundamental knowledge
on the photochemical reactivity of conjugated polymers and introduce
conceptually novel mechanisms for controlling molecular weight through
wavelength modulation. Strategies that reduce the reliance on transition metals
for polymerizing aromatic units are important for improving the sustainability
of polymer science and technology. In general terms, this research has the
potential to provide a more universal approach to sequence-defined and
controlled polymerizations of conjugated polymers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.