* 2305462
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Establishing a new eruption classification with a multimethod approach
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Johanand Gilchrist, Gilchrist, Johanand Thiru
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions produce ground-hugging hot rock and gas avalanches
(pyroclastic density currents, PDCs) that devastate local communities and
umbrella-shaped ash and gas clouds (umbrella clouds) that threaten aviation and
can cause abrupt climate shifts lasting years. The severity and duration of
eruption hazards to society, which can last years and affect the entire globe,
depend on fluctuations in the rate at which erupted mass exits the volcano (mass
eruption rate) and micrometer scale processes. Current eruption classifications
do not consider the effects of varying mass eruption rate during an eruption nor
micrometer-scale processes on eruption hazards and are, therefore, ill-equipped
for informing eruption response plans. The advancements of satellite and ground-
based remote-sensing methods to monitor eruptions in real-time combined with
increasingly sophisticated eruption computer simulations provide exciting new
ways to classify eruption behavior and inform real-time eruption response.
However, leveraging these advances in eruption monitoring and modelling methods
requires development of basic multiphase fluid mechanics theory to simply
characterize the effects of variations in mass eruption rate and micrometer-
scale processes in governing eruption behavior. Dr. Johan Gilchrist proposes to
develop new fluid mechanics theory that will form the basis for a new “Eruption
Stability Diagram” classification that captures the effects of varying mass
eruption rate and micrometer-scale processes to predict the evolution of hazards
during an eruption. Dr. Gilchrist will conduct the next generation of laboratory
experiments and computer simulations and compare the results with remote-sensing
observations of eruptions to explore the full range of expected eruption
behaviors and hazards for historical, ancient, and future eruptions in the
Eruption Stability Diagram. The laboratory experiments will provide a rich
learning experience for a diverse group of employed undergraduate researchers.
The project includes a collaboration with the National Museum of Natural History
(Smithsonian Institute) to develop public-friendly versions of the Eruption
Stability Diagram to clearly communicate eruption behaviors, hazards, and
mitigation strategies to policymakers and the public.

During explosive volcanic eruptions rocks, ash and gases spreading in the
atmosphere as umbrella ash clouds and along the ground as deadly pyroclastic
density currents (PDCs) threaten people, infrastructure and drive major shifts
in climate. In large eruptions volcanic material is simultaneously partitioned
to spreading umbrella ash-clouds and PDCs. Furthermore, during individual
eruptive phases the rate at which erupted material is delivered to the
atmosphere from a volcano can vary significantly compared to time-averaged mean
rates (“unsteady eruption source parameters”, ESPs), causing mass partitioning
to be highly time-dependent. Popular eruption classifications neither consider
eruptive mass partitioning nor address the time-dependence that is inherent to
most eruptive phases. Dr. Gilchrist proposes to work with Dr. Josef Dufek
(University of Oregon; UO) and Dr. Benjamin Andrews (Smithsonian Institute; SI)
to develop in greater detail two new eruption source parameter metrics that Dr.
Gilchrist discovered during his PhD: the jet stability number to capture
multiphase jet strength and the source Pulsation number to capture source
unsteadiness, and combine them with the source particle volume fraction to form
a new three-dimensional (3D) “Eruption Stability Diagram” classification scheme.
At UO Drs. Gilchrist and Dufek will design, build and conduct the next
generation of analog experiments on multiphase jets to test the Eruption
Stability Diagram’s reliability for predicting mass partitioning in multiphase
jets between spreading clouds and ground-hugging gravity currents. Concurrently,
they will work with Dr. Eric Breard (U. of Edinburgh) to validate the next
generation of 3D multiphase flow (MFIX) computer simulations using the
experimental dataset. They will also collaborate with volcano radar expert Dr.
Franck Donnadieu (U. Clermont Auvergne, France) to use a Doppler radar-based
dataset of unsteady ESPs that were measured in-situ at Sabancaya volcano, Peru
(2018) to run and validate 3D MFIX eruption simulations. This research project
aligns with the study of volcanology in the Petrology and Geochemistry program
in the Earth Science division of NSF and the EAR research theme “issues related
to scales”. The Eruption Stability Diagram will be the first construct to
classify all eruption styles on the basis of mean or time-varying eruption
source parameters, predict erupted mass delivered to umbrella clouds and PDCs
and, in turn, improve forecasting of eruption hazards and volcano-climate
effects, generally. Moreover, characteristic evolutions of eruption source
parameters typical of many eruptive phases will trace unique paths through the
Eruption Stability Diagram allowing classes of eruptions to be understood
through their evolution, a novel new way to classify eruptions. This second way
of classifying eruptions may reveal eruptive evolutionary paths diagnostic of
specific volcanoes, types of volcanoes, or tectonic environments. The Eruption
Stability Diagram will replace the current most popular Volcanic Explosivity
Index classification used widely to understand the size and effects of volcanic
eruptions on Earth. This project will also advance the multimethod approach of
using complementary analog experiments and numerical simulations validated with
field data to investigate volcanic phenomena. The analog experiments will be the
first to facilitate dissection of the deposit constructed by multiphase jets
with varying source parameters to identify deposit features that are diagnostic
of eruption column regimes and regime transitions, which will guide eruption
deposit field studies. In parallel, the new 3D MFIX simulations will push the
limits of multiphase flow simulations by explicitly modeling centimeter-scale
particle inertial and buoyancy effects on the kilometer-scale bulk flow. Crucial
for eruption monitoring, the ESP and synthetic Doppler radar datasets produced
by MFIX simulations of eruptions will be publicly available to inform
interpretation of volcanic radar data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.