* 2305653
* NSF PRFB FY23: Heritable viruses as hidden drivers of host phenotypes: Densoviruses and aphid wing plasticity
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Paula Rozo-Lopez, Rozo-Lopez, Paula C
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Insects are the most abundant and diverse
animal group, and like all living organisms, they evolved around viral
infections. Understanding the impact viruses have on the lifecycles of insects
is critical to maintaining healthy ecosystems throughout wildlands, agriculture,
and urban environments. This project uses aphids, which are small insects that
feed on plants, as a model organism. Aphids are found throughout ecosystems on
many types of host plants and contain many different viruses. These viruses can
impact the health and activity of both the insect and the host plants in ways
that are still unknown. For this reason, this research aims to learn how
inherited aphid viruses are passed on through generations while influencing the
development of physical characteristics such as wings. This research also
improves our ability to lessen the negative impacts of insects on agriculture
while also promoting positive impacts on society. In addition, this project will
engage students and agricultural communities on how interactions between viruses
and insects contribute to healthy food webs and food security. This fellowship
further addresses the impacts that virus-host interactions have on society by
exploring the understudied role that viruses have in insect evolution.
Specifically, this project uses single-stranded DNA viruses (Densovirinae) and
viruses integrated into the aphid genomes (endogenous viral elements) as a
tractable model system to study heritable virus-host interactions. RNA
sequencing of field-collected aphids will be used to measure virus heritability,
viral diversity, and the extent to which viral infection correlated with aphid
wing production. CRISPR-targeted mutagenesis will be used to better understand
the role of viruses integrated into host genomes. This research develops a
comprehensive picture of the factors shaping heritable virus-host dynamics and
the potential links to wing development while potentially uncovering previously
unrecognized insect-specific viruses circulating in natural populations. This
project will also promote undergraduate engagement in scientific research and
generate outreach activities at local farm extension networks to improve the
understanding of aphid biology and insect agricultural impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.