* 2305367
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Thermoregulatory evolution of hummingbirds: Using urban heat islands as a globally replicated natural experiment
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2027
* Valentina Alaasam, Alaasam, Valentina
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 05/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Species are facing rapid changes in ambient
temperature due to changing climate. To survive, organisms will need to adjust
their physiology through a combination of phenotypic change and genetic change.
Whether the rate and magnitude of these responses can match changes across
environments with varying temperatures will determine whether populations
persist or go locally extinct. This fellowship uses cities to study evolutionary
responses to changing ambient temperatures on contemporary timescales.
Replacement of vegetation with paved surfaces creates an Urban Heat Island (UHI)
effect where mean and extreme temperatures are higher compared to undisturbed
surroundings. The UHI effect is a nearly universal characteristic of cities
worldwide, resulting in well-distributed, globally-replicated thermal gradients.
By linking environmental, phenotypic, and genetic variation, results will shed
light on the fundamental processes underlying the persistence, evolutionary
potential, and genetic divergence of endothermic species facing warmer climates.
By testing hypotheses in four cities across a latitudinal gradient, this project
will determine how environmental context will shape evolutionary outcomes.

The fellow will investigate how urban heat is affecting the evolution of complex
thermoregulatory traits and genetic divergence in hummingbirds, a model taxon
for detecting population-level responses to changing climate. Hummingbirds have
some of the highest mass-specific metabolisms of all endotherms and store very
little fat, making them particularly sensitive to changes in temperature and
instrumental for detecting population-level responses to changing climate. The
fellow will measure morphology, behavior (torpor use), thermal tolerance (using
respirometry), and daily energy expenditure (using doubly-labeled water) of
paired urban and non-urban hummingbird populations. Using next-generation
sequencing, the fellow will then conduct a genome-wide association study to
identify regions of the genome that may be under selection by urban heat.
Studies will be conducted in four cities across a latitudinal gradient to
describe how the flexibility of thermoregulatory traits and resulting
evolutionary potential may vary across latitudes. And by engaging with local
communities, the outcomes of this research will contribute to designing greener
cities that both promote biodiversity and reduce the negative impacts of urban
heat on underserved human communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.