* 2305853
* NSF PRFB FY23: Investigating the genomic consequences of hybridization in the Mimulus guttatus complex
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Megan Frayer, Frayer, Megan E
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports the research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the
area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. Speciation, the process by which new
species evolve, is a fundamental process of evolution that must be studied by
exploring the relationships between different groups of organisms. This is often
done with a focus on factors that keep groups separated, known as isolating
barriers. Research on isolating barriers is often approached through laboratory
experiments or surveys of natural variation. This project will unite these
approaches to investigate the progression of speciation in a group of
monkeyflowers that are known to have rapidly evolved such barriersâ€”in
particular, the inability to create healthy seeds when crossed. Genomic
investigations of monkeyflower plants from regions where two species meet and
produce progeny will be combined with greenhouse crosses to study naturally
occurring variation and its consequences. This work will also allow them to make
direct connections between barrier phenotypes and the flow of genetic
information between two young species.

The fellow will use accessions from 5 replicated hybrid zones to genomically
dissect the dynamics of introgression between recently diverged Mimiulus
guttatus and M. decorus. Patterns of ancestry will be used to identify the rate,
timing, and directionality of gene flow. Next, by assessing ancestry correlation
among sites in the genome (i.e. patterns of ancestry disequilibrium), the fellow
will identify putative incompatibility alleles. Lastly, the fellow will
resurrect inbred lines derived from the originally sequenced plants to assess
the phenotypes associated with putative incompatibility. The fellow will also
mentor undergraduate researchers and provide workshops for graduate students on
essential computational research skills. The fellow will also contribute to the
public understanding of speciation by developing educational modules that aim to
explain speciation research through gameplay.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.