* 2305741
* NSF PRFB FY23: How do endocrine-molecular mechanisms evolve when parental strategies diverge? Insights from stickleback fish ecotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Victoria Farrar, Farrar, Victoria S
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. Parental care is
critical for offspring survival, and thus, the parentsâ€™ reproductive success.
However, as animals form new populations, environmental pressures might change
in ways that also change parental strategies. For example, new populations may
no longer need to protect young as extensively from predators, or may have
access to new resources, such as nesting material that protects or nourishes
young. Most research on the evolution of parental behavior compares species that
split from each other millions of years ago. However, we know little about how
natural selection shapes parental behaviors when populations are just starting
to differentiate. This research will examine how parental care behaviors have
been evolutionarily lost in a new population of three-spined stickleback fish
(Gastereous aculeatus), a species in which fathers typically care for young.
Alogether, this project will provide insight into how environmental changes,
including those caused by humans such as climate change, may lead to changes in
parental behavior and animal reproductive strategies. This research will examine
how natural selection has shaped endocrine and behavioral phenotypes in
recently-diverged populations of stickleback by (1) comparing differences in
neural hormone sensitivity in the brain and (2) hormone production machinery in
the gonads (i.e., enzymatic pathways) across breeding stages, and (3) using
cutting-edge transgenic tools to functionally test links between genotype and
behavioral phenotype in both populations. With this integrative and comparative
approach, this research will uncover how novel behavioral strategies emerge both
within individuals and between populations at microevolutionary timescales. The
fellow will receive training in current bioinformatic analysis and functional
neurogenomics using transgenics. The fellow will also contribute to broadening
participation of underrepresented groups by cultivating support for
mothers/parents in science, including at scientific conferences. The fellow will
also mentor community college students, a population often excluded from
undergraduate research, through an established NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduate program. Finally, the fellow will contribute to infrastructure for
scientific research by leading community trainings in open science,
reproducibility and data management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.