* 2305923
* NSF PRFB FY23: Does bacterial endospore formation affect host-microbe codiversification?
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mark Swanson, Swanson, Mark T
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animals need microbes in their guts to digest
food, but it is unclear whether the same microbes live with the same animal
species over long time periods. It is also unknown what characteristics allow
some microbial lineages to live with the same animal species for a long time.
This study will use live microbes and microbial DNA from rodent feces to see if
certain microbial lineages stay with the same animal host species for many
generations. The project will also determine if this process occurs primarily in
microbes that lack structures that help them live outside the gut. Results of
this fellowship will enable predictions of which microbes live with the same
animal species for long time periods. The fellow will also make an online
tutorial for other scientists to learn how to use this method with other animal-
microbe systems. This project will test for codiversification of mammals and
microbes in two rodent systems using high-throughput culturing and computational
approaches. DNA will be extracted from museum fecal samples of Southeast Asian
and North American rodent species and sequenced to assemble bacterial
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). Bacterial phylogenies inferred from the
MAGs will be used to test for congruence with rodent host phylogenies,
indicating a long-term association between these organisms. Additionally,
bacteria will be cultured and isolated from the feces using a suite of diverse
growth media under anaerobic conditions. Bacterial isolates will be assayed for
endospore formation, and phylogenetic multilevel modeling will be used to test
for an association between endospore formation and codiversification with the
host. Identification of codiversifying microorganisms and mechanisms that affect
this pattern will provide insight into how vertebrate microbiomes are assembled.
The fellow will be trained in culturing, computational, and statistical
techniques while extending the use of museum specimens to mechanistic studies of
host-microbe ecology. Participation of underrepresented groups in STEM will be
broadened through working with the University of Chicagoâ€™s SACNAS chapter to
recruit 3 undergraduates to form a peer research community that will test their
own codiversification hypotheses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.