* 2305091
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Isotopic Composition as a Tracer of Atmospheric Peroxyacetyl Nitrate (PAN) Sources and Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Fischer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 178,684.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Jiajue Chai at the State University of New York - College of
Environmental Science and Forestry (SUNY ESF), Meredith Hastings at Brown
University, and Emily Fischer at Colorado State University along with students,
postdocs and research scientists will investigate peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), an
important secondary air pollutant. Nitrogen oxides (NOx) are key atmospheric
pollutants that determine formation of secondary pollutants such as ozone and
secondary aerosols, which can have an adverse impact on human health, ecosystems
and climate. In polluted air, PANs form as the most important temporary
reservoirs for NOx. PAN can be transported short and long distances in cold air
masses, and when the temperature warms, it decomposes to reform NO2 and an
acylperoxy radical, for example, thus influencing NOx budgets on a global scale.
This project aims to develop a new method to fingerprint peroxyacetyl nitrate
(PAN) from various sources and chemistry pathways and to improve the
understanding of PAN budget in the atmosphere and its influence on air quality
and climate. This project will also support graduate and undergraduate student
researchers and help to build their core skills necessary for work in the fields
of analytical and environmental chemistry. Results from this project will be
incorporated into several environmental science courses across the three
universities, as well as K-8 education in local communities.

An upgraded PAN generation system and gas chromatography technique will be used
with a new method for concentrating PAN in the laboratory for the purpose of
measuring the isotopic composition of PAN with a particular focus on oxygen and
nitrogen isotopes. The isotopic analysis of reactive nitrogen species in the
atmosphere has proven to give new insights into source apportionment and
chemical pathways. Additionally, interference of PAN with current NOx and NO2
collection techniques for isotopic analysis developed by the PIs will also be
investigated to better quantify these tracers in the atmosphere. This project
has the potential to make a significant contribution toward better
quantification of the reactive nitrogen budget in the atmosphere and toward the
establishment of improved field-ready techniques for future application in the
environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.