* 2305187
* Equipment: Helium Recovery Equipment: Acquisition of Helium Recovery and Liquefaction Hardware for the University of Kansas
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Justin Douglas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry and co-funding from the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research, Dr. Justin Douglas at the University
of Kansas is implementing a helium recovery system that will capture, purify,
and liquefy helium gas exhaust produced by the normal operation of nine
scientific instruments used in research with broad societal impacts in fields
such as chemistry, engineering, and pharmacy. For example, the superconducting
magnets of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometers need periodic refills
of liquid helium to maintain persistent magnetic fields. Severe shortages of
helium have forced the mothballing of some instruments, which adversely impacts
many NSF-funded and other projects throughout the region. Responsible resource
utilization that minimizes waste by recycling gaseous helium exhaust protects
present research activities and preserves this non-renewable resource, enabling
future generations to continue to advance national and global health,
prosperity, and welfare. Furthermore, information about the requested equipment
is being integrated into a comprehensive outreach effort to engage individuals
from underrepresented groups, recruit and retain faculty, staff and students,
and enhance the classroom and research environment at the University of Kansas.

The nine instruments being served by the helium recovery equipment are
distributed across four separate buildings. Successful execution of this project
demonstrates the feasibility of a hub-and-spoke model for other institutions
needing to recover helium from dispersed devices. This project involves 1)
fabrication of manifolds using off-the-shelf parts to collect helium exhaust
without disturbing instrument operation; 2) short-term storage of helium in
8500-liter bags; 3) compression of collected gas into high-pressure cylinders
for transport to a centralized facility on campus; 4) purification and
liquefaction of the gas; and 5) reuse of the resulting liquid helium in
scientific instruments. In one year of operation, it is estimated that ~2,400
liters of liquid helium will be recycled by this system. This recovered helium
will be used to refill superconducting NMR magnets and to supply the cryostats
of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance and Magnetic Circular Dichroism
spectrometers. This helium recovery system will secure essential supplies for
scientific instrumentation that plays a crucial role in NSF-funded and other
research projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.