* 2305178
* Nonlinear Optical Analysis of Molecular Composition and Dynamics within Heterogeneous Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Garth Simpson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 495,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Garth Simpson of Purdue University is
developing a new imaging tool to map the chemical composition of and dynamics in
heterogeneous assemblies. Understanding chemical complexity with high
sensitivity and sub-micrometer spatial resolution is important for understanding
the stability and bioavailability of chemical components in therapeutic
materials while the presence of trace species can influence crystallization and
phase transformations in two dimensional materials. Professor Simpson and his
group will develop a new imaging tool based on infrared spectroscopy and
molecular chirality to map the composition and translational dynamics within
structurally heterogeneous assemblies. Their discoveries could lead to new
approaches for extracting chemical information from images including how active
molecular components are distributed in pharmaceuticals. Professor Simpson will
also lead a short course on nonlinear optics and engage students in research
activities.

The measurement capabilities of photothermal infrared imaging will be enhanced
in the fingerprinting region of the spectrum through integration of chiral
spectroscopic contrast and the creation of photobleached gratings in samples.
This approach is expected to resolve inhomogeneities of diffusion in traditional
infrared imaging by improving both temporal and spatial resolution. By using
chiral-specific spectroscopies, molecular orientation and order within
microstructured assemblies will be interpreted and predicted using a
mathematical framework. Chiral-specific effects predicted in the mid-infrared
transmission measurements of ordered systems will then be extended to
microcrystals and tissues. Finally, a spatial Fourier transform approach for
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching will be used for construction of
spatially-resolved maps of molecular diffusivity within heterogeneous
assemblies. These local-viscosity maps have the potential to provide key details
about how composition and molecular transport govern the behavior of
biologically-active materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.