* 2305729
* ERASE-PFAS: Exploring efficient pilot-scale treatment of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and comingled chlorinated solvents in groundwater using magnetic nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jia Liu, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,988.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are fluorinated organic chemicals
that have been manufactured and used in numerous consumer products and
industrial applications since the 1940s. PFAS are commonly referred to as
“forever chemicals” due to their persistence, stability, and resistance to
natural environmental degradation processes. In addition, PFAS have been shown
to bioaccumulate in human tissues and aquatic organisms raising concerns about
their toxicity and adverse impact on human and ecosystem health. During the last
two decades, PFAS have been increasingly detected in groundwater aquifers which
serve as sources of drinking water for many communities throughout the United
States. In contaminated groundwater aquifers, PFAS are often found alongside
other toxic chemicals such as chlorinated solvents including trichloroethylene
(TCE) and tetrachloroethylene (PCE). The overarching goal of this project is to
design, evaluate, and optimize a novel two-phase dark-light reactor (DRL) for
the ex-situ treatment of groundwater contaminated by mixtures of PFAS and
chlorinated solvents using magnetic and photochemically active nanomaterials.
The successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of fundamental knowledge to advance the development and deployment of
efficient and sustainable technologies for the treatment and remediation of
groundwater aquifers contaminated by mixtures of PFAS and chlorinated solvents.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of three graduate students at Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale.

In groundwater aquifers and subsurface formations, PFAS contaminants are often
commingled with toxic chemicals such as chlorinated solvents including
trichloroethylene (TCE) and tetrachloroethylene (PCE). However, to date, limited
research has been devoted to the treatment and remediation of groundwater
aquifers contaminated by mixtures of PFAS and chlorinated solvents. In addition,
there is a critical need for pilot-scale studies to demonstrate and validate the
feasibility and field-scale applicability of promising PFAS groundwater
remediation technologies that are being investigated in bench scale laboratory
studies. The goal of this research is to develop, evaluate, and validate the
field-scale applicability of an integrated sorption-photocatalytic process for
the ex-situ treatment and remediation of groundwater contaminated by mixtures of
PFAS and TCE/PCE. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) and
research team propose to design, evaluate, and optimize a two-phase dark-light
reactor (DRL) that will utilize nanomaterials under darkness to sorb PFAS and
partially destroy TCE/PCE followed by exposure of the nanomaterials to UV light
to destroy the remaining sorbed PFS and TCE/PCE contaminants. The specific
objectives of the research are to 1) synthesize and characterize nanoscale zero-
valent iron/reduced graphene oxide nanohybrids using an innovative and scalable
process ; 2) conduct bench scale lab studies to assess the impacts of
environmental factors on the efficiency of the DLR to remove PFAS and TCE/PCE in
contaminated groundwater using the nanomaterials that are synthesized in
Objective 1, and 3) conduct pilot field studies to evaluate and optimize the
effectiveness of the new DRL and nanomaterials for the ex-situ treatment and
remediation of groundwater contaminated by mixtures of PFAS and TCE/PCE. To
implement the educational and outreach goals of this project, the PI plans to
leverage the Research Enriched Challenge (REACH) program at Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale to recruit and mentor undergraduate female students to
work on the project. In addition, the PI plans to engage with the US Geological
Survey (USGS) and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to share
the results of the research and discuss potential field
applications/demonstrations of the new two-phase dark-light reactor at
contaminated sites in the State of Illinois.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.