* 2305516
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Institutionalizing Normative Changes for Recruitment, Empowerment, Advancement, and Systematic Equity for STEM Faculty (INCREASE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lara Perez-Felkner, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 999,919.00

The Florida State University (FSU) ADVANCE Adaptation project INCREASE aims to
improve the workplace culture and climate for all STEM faculty at FSU. This work
will build on current efforts to increase the recruitment, empowerment,
advancement, and systemic equity of underrepresented faculty in STEM fields.
This project adapts national and institutional best practices for contextually
relevant and sustainable change. The project focuses on adaptations for systemic
change at the STEM department and college level. The key initiatives include
implementing equity-focused policy initiatives; empowering faculty with mentored
cohort networks internal and external to FSU; and enhancing understanding of
department-specific issues and opportunities.

FSU ADVANCE will generate knowledge on patterns in STEM faculty experiences.
Best practices learned will be shared with other institutions as well as STEM
partners represented on our advisory board, regional and national networks, and
federal laboratories. The FSU project will strategically integrate coordination
with the AAAS SEA Change initiative which is a national effort to recognize
excellence in efforts to support diversity, equity and inclusion by institutions
of higher education. This project attends to the experiences and challenges of
women of color STEM faculty that are underrepresented in STEM academic careers.
FSU ADVANCE will assess the impact of the adaptations over time, for
departments, cohorts, and individual faculty. Reports, publications, policy
dissemination, and project activities will be shared on the FSU ADVANCE website.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.