* 2305924
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Unlocking the genetic basis of structural coloration
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Benjamin Karin, Karin, Benjamin R
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates the genetic basis
of animal coloration, which is an ideal trait for studying evolution. Animal
coloration is divided into pigments and structural colors. Pigments, often red
and yellow, are small particles that directly absorb and reflect light of
different colors. Structural colors, often blue, are caused by the interaction
of light reflecting off different cellular layers inside the tissue. Pigment
colors often have simple genetic control mechanisms, but the genetic basis of
structural colors is only beginning to be understood. This research will
leverage unique species of lizards and snakes that independently evolved
variation in blue structural vs. red or yellow pigment color to unlock their
genetic basis. The fellow will actively recruit, train, and mentor
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in science, focusing on genetic lab
techniques and other practical topics such as coding skills, reading primary
literature, and career development. The fellow will work in elementary schools
to teach evolutionary biology and develop a teaching module using colorful
lizard models.

The primary objectives of this research are to 1) understand the genomic basis
of structural color and associated regulatory and cellular changes, and 2) test
for conserved changes across increasing phylogenetic scales. This research will
first focus on Plestiodon gilberti skink lizards in California which display red
pigmentary and blue structural tail color variation and recently had a high-
quality genome sequenced. The fellow will compare more than 100 genomes to
pinpoint the genomic regions that underlie structural color, then investigate
associated gene expression changes and corresponding cellular anatomy of color-
producing cells. As individuals age they lose their color and converge on the
same adult phenotype, which the fellow will leverage to assess if ontogenetic
color change is controlled by the same regulatory pathways as polymorphism.
Next, the fellow will investigate if conserved genomic regions underlie
structural color polymorphism using whole genome sequencing on replicated color
polymorphic systems at increasing phylogenetic scales across lizards and snakes.
Finally, the fellow will compare genomes in public databases to test if
candidate loci from genomic sequencing predict the presence or absence of bright
structural colors. This research develops an understanding of the repeatability
of evolution and provides a framework to predict the genetic basis of complex
traits that can be applied to important problems in human medicine and animal
conservation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.