* 2305601
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Feedbacks Between Controls of Stream Dry-Down Responses at the Rain-Snow Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Maggi Kraft, Kraft, Maggi A
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Maggi Kraft has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities under the
mentorship of Dr. Sarah Godsey at Idaho State University. The western United
States relies on snow for water resources. In the same region, the majority of
streams fed by snowmelt and rain are non-perennial with streamflow disappearing
for at least a portion of the year. Warming global temperatures are shifting the
precipitation phase from snow to rain, but the impacts of shifting snowfall
fraction in non-perennial streams are not clear. This research will merge
concepts of snowmelt processes, vegetation dynamics, and soil properties across
three watersheds spanning the rain-snow transition to understand how
precipitation phase affects stream wetting and drying. These interactions are
particularly important in controlling streamflow responses across the rain-snow
transition where vegetation, snow, and soils are interrelated and sensitive to
changing temperatures. While these concepts have been evaluated in a piecewise
manner, they have not yet been integrated to allow us to accurately predict non-
perennial streamflow response to changing snow inputs. This research will
advance the science of non-perennial stream ecosystems and provide relevant
information for managing natural resources. Additionally, this project will
develop two education and outreach opportunities via developing and leading a
workshop focused on the analysis of streamflow presence-absence data and
mentoring an undergraduate student to develop, implement and present an
interdisciplinary research project.

Non-perennial streamflow response to shifts in snow represents a fundamental gap
in our understanding of hydrologic behavior. Watersheds spanning the rain-snow
transition, where precipitation shifts phase between snow and rain, provide an
ideal location to study streamflow response to the shifting precipitation phase.
Across the rain-snow transition feedbacks between vegetation, snow, and soil are
interrelated thus, evaluation of coupled observations is needed to accurately
predict streamflow response to changing snow water availability. However, there
is a lack of integrated studies linking daily signals of snowmelt,
transpiration, and soil moisture in non-perennial watersheds. The focus of this
research is to study the response of non-perennial stream dry-down and wet-up to
interactions between snow, rain, vegetation, and soils. This research will be
carried out in three watersheds spanning the rain-snow transition in the semi-
arid western U.S. using measurements of snow depth, sap flux, stream water
presence-absence, soil moisture, and high-resolution satellite imagery. The
satellite-derived and ground-based snowmelt, transpiration, and soil moisture
observations will be compared to the annual and diel stream wet-dry cycle
response. High-resolution soil depth maps will be created to evaluate how soil
water capacity, snow storage, and vegetation modulate rain or snow water inputs
and non-perennial streamflow. This research will advance the science of non-
perennial stream ecosystems and provide relevant information for managing
natural resources.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.