* 2305691
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Impact of Environment-Seagrass-Microbe Interactions on Seagrass Stress Response and Ecosystem Functions
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Jamila Roth, Roth, Jamila
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 02/28/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Beneficial bacteria can reduce the impact of
stressful conditions on plants. Seagrasses are marine plants that grow in
stressful environments. One common stressor is high sulfide concentrations.
Sulfide is a toxic chemical that is abundant in marine sediments and can cause
seagrass die-offs. The bacteria, Candidatus Thiodiazotropha, can detoxify
seagrass sediments by oxidizing sulfide, which is a process that removes sulfide
from the environment. This research will determine how the presence and
abundance of Ca. Thiodiazotropha impacts seagrass health under various levels of
environmental stress. Seagrass meadows are an economically and culturally
valuable resource, and positive interactions between seagrasses and bacteria
provide a potential tool for evaluating seagrass vulnerability to stressors and
increasing stress tolerance of restored seagrasses.

This research will integrate environment-seagrass-microbe interactions to better
understand the generality and magnitude of plant-microbe interactions under
varying environmental conditions. The fellow will analyze (a) the relative
impacts of plant traits vs. environmental conditions on Ca. Thiodiazotropha
abundance using a reciprocal transplant experiment, (b) how interactions between
sulfide stress and Ca. Thiodiazotropha affect seagrass performance using a
mesocosm experiment, and (c) how seagrass-microbe interactions translate
environmental heterogeneity to higher-order variation in plant performance and
nutrient cycling using an incubation experiment. Results from this research will
advance fundamental knowledge related to the evolutionary ecology of plant
microbiomes, drivers of nitrogen cycling in coastal ecosystems, and the impact
of environment-plant-microbe interactions on ecosystem functions and processes.
The fellow will receive training in microbial ecology and biogeochemistry
techniques, inclusive pedagogical strategies, and science communication. This
project will promote the training of students, including students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences, through the development and implementation of
high school science curriculum and mentorship of undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.