* 2305612
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Testing the Latitudinal Diversity Gradient
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kyle David, David, Kyle T
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This fellowship aims to study patterns of
distribution of living organisms across tropical and polar latitudes. Prior
studies of the distributions of species show that the diversity of living
organisms tends to decrease with distance from the equator. Even though this
pattern is global and has been known since the days of Charles Darwin, we still
do not know what causes this trend. This research will explore how the distinct
diversity of living organisms across latitudes arose by comparing species
formation in tropical, temperate, and polar environments. By discovering regions
where species are more likely to originate, the fellow will work to uncover the
history and distribution of biodiversity across the planet. A more complete
understanding of how biodiversity operates across geographic scales will
contribute to our ability to mitigate invasive species, diseases and their
vectors, and the costs of climate change. Research activities will be
accompanied by several education and outreach efforts directed at incarcerated
and formerly-incarcerated populations in the Nashville area.

This project will explore the latitudinal diversity gradient by conducting a
series of large-scale diversification studies. Due to the breadth of sampling
required to estimate global diversification, current studies are largely limited
to densely sampled groups in vertebrates and vascular plants. This limits the
scope of our understanding both phylogenetically and geographically, as these
groups are largely restricted to tropical and temperate climes. To address these
knowledge gaps, this research will generate global diversification gradients in
a previously unexplored kingdom (Fungi) and two marine invertebrate clades
(Polynoidae and Pycnogonida) with circumpolar distributions. Diversification
gradients will be inferred through a combination of methods explicitly designed
to accommodate concerns recently raised over the ability of diversification
analyses to distinguish between hypotheses. These include nonparametric
approaches, hidden state speciation extinction models, and new methods
incorporating diversity-dependence and paleogeographic shifts. The work will
also be integrated into multiple broader impact efforts, including the
Evolutionary Studies Initiative and Maximizing Access to Research Careers
programs at Vanderbilt University, as well as develop new outreach and
engagement materials geared toward prison education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.