* 2305699
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing biopharmaceutical technologies and manufacturing practices (PR)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* David Gulley, PUERTO RICO SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH TRUST
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,903.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on the biopharma
industry in Puerto Rico and mobilizing partnerships among the public, private,
non-profit, and academic sectors to support a successful discovery-to-product
ecosystem. Puerto Rico has the necessary building blocks and key collaborators
to quickly revamp the global supply chain for medicines to make it more stable,
reliable, and demand-driven as part of a sustainable national security strategy
for the United States. A coordinated effort led by the Puerto Rico Science,
Technology and Research Trust, in partnership with other organizations, will
mobilize disparate and existing initiatives on the island that broaden the
capability to adapt new knowledge while facilitating the development of
partnerships to support a biopharmaceutical cluster engine that establishes a
discovery-to-product value chain. The success of this engine is predicated on a
steady pipeline of new medicines (discovery), innovative approaches to
decentralized (sustainable) manufacturing, critical communication and energy
(renewable) infrastructure, and key innovations in data-driven decision-making
capability.

The award leverages the interactivity of all components of an ecosystem (e.g.,
policy, capital, R&D, markets, services, and social responsibility) to achieve
sustained growth. The biopharma ecosystem needs to be transformed into more
efficient, agile, smaller facilities ready for rapidly changing market
conditions and leverage continuous flow manufacturing incorporating distributed
manufacturing, blockchain, 5G, and artificial intelligence infrastructure. These
assets will be leveraged to close the gap in the value chain of
biopharmaceutical discovery to commercial production of medicines through
infrastructure, capacity building, and training. The proposed effort will focus
upon (and unify) a diverse coalition of experts from large corporations,
academia, small companies, and incubators. If successful, the full NSF Engine
resulting from this development award is expected to immediately have a
measurable impact on the economy (with a contribution to GDP expected within the
first five years of the concerted effort), equitably increase the number of
jobs, and workforce training strategies to propel Puerto Rico to be the largest
- and most agile - biopharma hub in the US. In addition, the approach will also
include enhanced clinical trials, providing drug developers with coordinated
access to Hispanic populations. The decentralized manufacturing concept will
allow for a diverse distribution of jobs, equitable economic development, and
inclusive workforce development while raising the existing footprint of the
industry on the Island.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.