* 2305058
* CAS: Lewis Pair Polymerization: Compounded Sequence and Spatiotemporal Controls for Precision Synthesis of Sustainable Linear and Cyclic Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 09/30/2027
* USD 699,254.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Eugene Y. Chen of Colorado State
University is developing new synthetic routes for the construction of
technologically important cyclic polymers and copolymers from bio-based
renewable monomers. Cyclic polymers are an intriguing class of macromolecules
that lack chain ends. When compared to linear counterparts, these polymers
typically have lower viscosity, faster crystallization kinetics, and sometimes
higher resistance to chemical and thermal degradation. These properties make
cyclic polymers ideally suited for a variety of industrially important
applications. The project will utilize synthetic, catalytic, and mechanistic
approaches to prepare a variety of cyclic polymers and copolymers with the aim
of precisely controlling the structures and sequences of monomer units.
Computational methods through established international collaborations will
further guide experimental design. The synthetic work has the potential to help
provide precision regular and block cyclic polymers at a scale large enough for
structure/property relationship studies to be conducted by the broader polymer
community. From the point of view of sustainability, the design principles
associated with this project have the potential to help nucleate a sea change,
whereby recyclable and upcyclable polymers are more widely produced and used as
commodity plastics. The activities associated with this project are intended to
broaden participation and enable the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in polymer chemistry, with a distinct effort to develop and promote
more sustainable approaches than are typically practiced today.

In this work, Lewis pair polymerization (LPP) will be used for tailored
synthesis of cyclic polymers and copolymers. LPP exploits the synergy and
cooperativity between an acid and a base of a Lewis pair (LP) to effect monomer
activation, chain initiation, propagation, termination, and transfer events.
This cooperative two-component catalytic mechanism provides several advantageous
features when compared to other polymerization methods, particularly with
respect to compounded sequence control and spatiotemporal control in one-step
precision synthesis. Cyclic polymers (CPs) have historically been less studied
than their linear counterparts, which is mainly due to limited synthetic access
to this interesting class of polymers. Specific objectives of the project
include: (1) developing a better fundamental understanding of the factors that
determine spatial and temporal control in the synthesis of precision CPs and
cyclic block copolymers (cBCPs), (2) synthesizing higher-order multi-BCPs by LPP
of bio-based acrylic monomers in one pot and one step, and (3) constructing
stereoregular and recyclable CPs derived from renewable vinyl lactones utilizing
chiral dinuclear LPs as promoters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.