* 2305978
* NSF PRFB FY23: Methylation and microbes as moderators of genotype-by-environment interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2024,06/30/2027
* Monica Sheffer, Sheffer, Monica M
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 06/30/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Predicting how organisms will react to climate
change is challenging because their responses can seem random or unique to each
individual. Linking processes that drive individual responses to outcomes at the
level of populations or species could improve predictions. This projectâ€™s main
goal is to study how two factors, changes to DNA structure and relationships
with microbes, affect responses to the environment. The project investigates
patterns in these factors across environments and over time in a grasshopper
species. The project will test how including these factors improves predictions
of the impacts of climate change. The fellow will partner with teachers and
students at a local community college to find the best methods of explaining the
impacts of climate change to broad audiences. The fellow will also involve
community college and transfer students in the research process.

The project investigates a rare combination of two significant emerging
mechanisms in the study of ecological and evolutionary responses to variation in
the environment: CpG methylation and microbiomes. Using a combination of
approaches, the fellow will test the hypothesis that epigenetic changes and
symbiotic relationships help to relax fitness constraints by improving survival
at low elevation and easing temperature constraints on energy gain and fecundity
at high elevation. The fellow will first characterize natural patterns in
methylation and microbiomes across elevation, while controlling for genotype by
using a field reciprocal transplant experiment. Next, laboratory common garden
experiments will establish links between specific environmental factors and
their effects on symbionts, methylation patterns, and phenotypic outcomes.
Complementarily, experiments manipulating the microbiome, by feeding
grasshoppers with sterile, antibiotic, or probiotic-treated food, will elucidate
relationships between the microbiome, methylation levels, and phenotypic
outcomes under controlled environments. Lastly, the fellow will analyze patterns
in methylation and microbiomes over time in museum specimens, and use
historical-contemporary comparisons to test whether these factors can better
predict the impact of climate change on this grasshopper system. The fellow will
gain teaching experience through her broader impacts plan, and increase the
scope of approaches she uses to tackle her research questions by learning
epigenetic methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.