* 2305407
* Derived Symmetries and the Alekseev-Torossian Conjecture: From Algebraic Geometry to Knotted Objects in Dimension 4
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Christopher Rogers, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 367,388.00

Symmetry plays a fundamental role throughout the mathematical sciences. For
example, a key step in finding all possible solutions to a system of equations
is to understand the relevant collection, or "group", of symmetries of the
system. The main goal of this project is to investigate two particular, yet, in
a certain sense, "universal" symmetry groups: the Grothendieck-Teichmueller
group (GRT), and the Kashiwara-Vergne group (KRV). Both are known to have deep
connections to many important areas of mathematics and mathematical physics
including: quantum theory, number theory, the theory of knots and tangles, and
the theory of universal geometric invariants called "motives" in algebraic
geometry. In spite of their significance, the structure of both groups remains
quite mysterious. There are long-standing conjectures concerning their
relationship to one another, as well as their relationship to other symmetry
groups. In particular, A. Alekseev and C. Torossian proved that KRV contains GRT
and conjectured that they are, in fact, equal, a question that remains unsolved.
In this project, the PI and his collaborators will initiate a new
multidisciplinary approach towards answering specific questions concerning GRT,
KRV, and thus shed more light on the Alekseev and Torossian question. The PIâ€™s
focus will be on studying these groups via their actions on explicit geometric
and topological objects. The project includes topics suitable for graduate
student research and will help accelerate the growth of the nascent Mathematics
Ph.D. program at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). The broader impacts of
the project also include coordinating research and career development events
with UNR's chapter of the Association for Women in Mathematics. This project
will find supporting evidence for the validity of the Alekseev-Torossian
conjecture by building on the PI's previous exhibiting non-trivial actions of
GRT on smooth complex algebraic varieties, and a topological characterization of
KRV using wheeled props and knotted surfaces in 4-dimensional space. The tools
needed for this work will be constructed using homotopical and deformation-
theoretic methods, which have already shown to be very successful in studying
GRT and related phenomena. The anticipated outcomes include a "Kashiwara-Vergne
lift" of formality morphisms in deformation quantization; new insights into
Duflo theory and Rozansky-Witten theory; and new examples of GRT and KRV actions
in algebraic geometry.

This project is jointly funded by Topology, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.