* 2305707
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Deciphering the Structural Evolution of Alternative-End Joining
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Noah Bradley, Bradley, Noah Patrick
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. DNA is the fundamental genetic storage
molecule for all cellular life on Earth, yet it is susceptiple to damage by
various cellular and environmental processes, which can impair cell survival.
Consequently, cells have evolved dedicated DNA repair pathways, collectively
known as the DNA damage response (DDR) to recognize and correct mistakes in the
genome. When both strands of the DNA double helix are broken, this creates a
double-strand break (DSB), and is repaired by a mechanisms called alternative-
end joining (alt-EJ), a pathway that stitches two DNA ends back together. The
structural basis for how this process works is unknown, but it is important for
the evolution of all complex life on Earth. This research will explore the
3-dimensional architecture of proteins and DNAs within the alt-EJ pathway, and
will provide a deeper understanding for how organisms protect and repair their
genome from damage. This research will also support teaching, mentoring, and
outreach by the fellow to improve scientific communication and participation of
underrepresented groups.

The alternative-end joining (alt-EJ) pathway is a multi-step pathway that is
conducted by the DNA helicase/polymerase, Pol theta (Polθ). Alt-EJ is an
intermediate DSB repair pathway between non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and
homologous recombination (HR), and this research will contribute to the
understanding of pathway choice. Structurally, full-length Polθ has not been
observed in its native context, and the recruitment of Polθ to DNA and
coordination with other repair pathways has not been elucidated. The research
goals of this proposal involve coupling high-resolution cryogenic-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM) and biochemical/phylogenetic techniques to uncover two
objectives: (i) the structural basis for human alternative-end joining by Polθ
and (ii) the mechanistic evolution of Polθ and alt-EJ using biochemical assays
and molecular phylogeny. Alt-EJ complexes will be assembled on magnetic DNA-
beads to construct specific macromolecular assemblies for visualization at
atomic resolution. The proposed research will provide the fellow with training
and development opportunities in structural biology, biochemistry/biophysics,
and scientific communication (publications, conferences, seminars). The fellow
will also continue to gain experience in teaching and mentoring undergraduate
and graduate students, and work to improve diversity and inclusivity in the STEM
fields by participation in DEI and implicit bias training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.