* 2305864
* NSF PRFB FY23: The role of hybridization on diet breadth evolution of a extreme dietary generalist
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mattheau Comerford, Comerford, Mattheau S
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. A guiding interaction known to contribute to
Earth’s biodiversity is the relationship between insect herbivores and the
plants they consume. The diet of an insect is limited by the interplay between
their genetics, the plant’s defensive compounds, and the insect predators which
hunt them. Speciation events often occur when one of these three factors
changes. However, for this to happen, novel genes must arise. One source of
genetic change is through hybridization (i.e., mating between closely related
but genetically distinct organisms). This project assesses the influence of
hybridization on insect herbivores’ diet. To do so, regions of high and low
hybridization between two closely related caterpillars are evaluated. Here, lab
and field experiments are conducted in collaboration with veterans from the
community college system. Such collaborations provide sources of research
experience not normally afforded to community college students. This effort will
help to foster increased representation of veterans in STEM.

This research explores an overlooked and potentially powerful window into diet-
breadth evolution of insect herbivores via gene flow between organisms that are
potentially undergoing contemporary speciation. The fall webworm (Hyphantria
cunea) is an extreme generalist herbivore whose diet includes >600 hostplant
species. The fall webworm has diverged into two genetically distinct biotypes
with different diet-breadths. Despite sharing geographic overlap, the timing of
their life histories has maintained reproductive isolation except for a zone of
hybridization occurring along their northern range limits, where their
developmental phenology is constrained by a shorter seasonal window. This
project takes advantage of variation in reproductive isolation to test
hybridization’s downstream influence on diet breadth by conducting 1) a survey
and genome sequencing of populations in a north-south transect spanning
different degrees of overlap in phenology, 2) lab-based herbivore performance
assays to compare hybrid performance on the biotype’s intermediate host plants,
and 3) field experiments in association with veterans to evaluate differences in
predation of hybrids on alternative host-associations. By exploring the role of
gene flow on diet-breadth evolution, this study will contribute to determining
the maintenance of contemporary and future biodiversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.