* 2305226
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Investigation of High Mountain Asia Glacial Lake Variations Under a Warming Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Sonam Sherpa, Sherpa, Sonam Futi
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Sonam Futi Sherpa has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out research and professional development activities under
the mentorship and supervision of Prof. Laurence C. Smith at Brown University.
High Mountain Asia’s glacial lakes, filled with melt from glaciers store large
volumes of water. The rapid increase in the size of glacial lakes shows the
impact of rising temperatures from global climate change. These glacial lakes
and glacier melts are a source of water for people living downstream. But a
breaking (outburst) of glacial lakes causes Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
(GLOFs). GLOFs are a natural hazard observed in mountain regions such as the
Andes, the Alps, the Himalayas, and others. HMA is experiencing contrasting
glacier melt alongside different evolution of glacial lakes. Although the
increased number and size of glacial lakes have been reported before, how trends
and patterns of glacial lakes and GLOFs events are changing under warming
climate and monsoons need further investigation. Dr. Sherpa will use the
recently launched SWOT (Surface Water and Ocean Topography) mission to observe
glacial lake size and occurrences of GLOFs. She will build methods and
scientific approaches to understanding water availability and hazard. During her
project, she plans to mentor undergraduates from historically excluded groups in
the field of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) and
computing. She will communicate her results through workshops, science journals,
and social media, including Brown’s existing diversity, equity, and inclusion
platforms. Her study will generate a large volume of open data related to
changing water cycle. Policymakers, the public, and scientific communities will
be able to access these datasets. These open data allow results to be reproduced
and methods to be implemented in new regions. Her work helps in climate-water-
related policymaking and scientific advancement.

High Mountain Asia (HMA), experiences contrasting glacier mass loss patterns
alongside varying evolution of glacial lakes. Although increased number and
extent (area, volume) of glacial lakes have been reported previously by several
studies, how trends and patterns of glacial lakes and Glacial Lake Outburst
Floods (GLOFs) events are changing under warming climate and monsoon require
further investigation. Dr. Sonam Futi Sherpa will utilize cutting-edge
technologies, such as Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) from
Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) mission and other SAR satellites data
to estimate high-resolution spatio-temporal evolution of glacial lakes. She will
further utilize the outputs of climate modeling techniques to investigate
association between melting of glaciers and the expansion of glacial lakes,
under a warming climate. Her work contributes to a fundamental understanding of
patterns and trends of glacial lake volume evolution that are currently
neglected in models addressing the hydrological responses of glaciers to climate
change for water management. Furthermore, her work allows quantification of
hazards coming from GLOFs for risk management. The methodological and scientific
framework developed and used in her study could be utilized in any global or
local system including the Andes, Himalayas, Alps, Greenland, pan-Arctic, or
other glaciated parts of the globe. Dr. Sherpa’s research addresses the National
Science Foundation’s Division of Earth Sciences (EAR) priority science questions
“How is Earth’s water cycle changing?” and “How can Earth science research
reduce the risk and toll of geohazards? She plans to work on the promotion and
mentorship of undergraduates from historically excluded groups in STEM and
computing. She will disseminate the results of her research to audiences from:
1) the scientific community (through scientific conferences and peer-reviewed
journals); 2) undergraduate and graduate students through computational and
science communication workshops and 3) public outreach through social media and
existing Brown University diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) outreach
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.