* 2305703
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Genomic and Metagenomic Mechanisms of flood Tolerance in Maize and Tripsacum dactyloides
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Joel Swift, Swift, Joel F
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Joel F. Swift is "Genomic and metagenomic mechanisms of flood tolerance in maize
and Tripsacum dactyloides" The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Kansas and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Maggie R. Wagner.

As the global climate changes, flood events are becoming more frequent and
severe. While water is a basic requirement for plants, too much can have
dramatic consequences. When flooded, fundamental root functions like gas
diffusion decline dramatically. This leads to oxygen starvation, the buildup of
ethylene (a key stress hormone), and eventually plant death. Many plant species
cope by producing root aerenchyma, a spongy tissue that assists in gas
diffusion. Some species continuously form aerenchyma, while other species only
form aerenchyma under stress. Ethylene acts as the stimulus for both modes, but
the mechanisms of formation differ. Root-associated microorganisms can break
down ethylene precursors, which modifies ethylene levels, and potentially
contributes to plant flood stress adaptation. This research will explore the
links between plant genetics, root physiology, and the microbiome to understand
their effects on plant flood responses. This will provide key information to
assist in breeding flood-resilient crops. The researcher will develop expertise
in quantitative genetics, plant physiology, and anatomical analysis. As a
community college graduate, Joel will engage and mentor students from the host
institution and local community colleges; seeking to further promote diversity
in STEM and instill an interest in plant science careers, from the basic to
applied biological perspectives.

Zea mays (corn or maize) is a globally important crop that is cultivated widely
across temperate North America. Corn’s closest temperate relative is Tripsacum
dactyloides (gamagrass). Corn (stress-induced) and gamagrass (constitutive)
represent the spectrum of aerenchyma production strategies. This project will
utilize these species as a comparative system for examining the effects of
intra- and inter-specific root trait variation on the microbiome under flood
stress. Several corn genotypes will be used to establish a temporal baseline for
flood responses. Corn gene expression, elemental composition, and root
microbiome composition will be measured before, during, and after recovery from
waterlogging and submergence. Root phenotypic variation will be quantified
across a gamagrass diversity panel. Root gene expression of accessions with
contrasting performance under waterlogging will be compared, with a focus on the
differential transcriptional regulation of ethylene biosynthesis. Conditioned
soils from waterlogging experiments will be collected and reinoculated onto new
seedlings to test whether root-driven changes in the soil microbiota affect corn
and gamagrass phenotypes and fitness in a contemporary flood. Results will be
disseminated via conference presentations, publication in open-access journals,
and by depositing sequence data and code into public repositories including the
NCBI Short Read Archive, GitHub, and Zenodo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.