* 2305732
* NSF PRFB FY23: Polyploidy as a driver of developmental and morphological evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Itgen, Itgen, Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Organismal development results from the
actions of expressed genes and cellular processes. Changes in these traits can
alter development, and therefore, the size and shape of an organism. Because of
this, polyploidization can be a key factor in the evolution of development. An
organism becomes a polyploid by having more than two sets of chromosomes. These
additional chromosomes have direct effects on cell biology. First, polyploidy
can alter gene expression by increasing the number of gene copies. Additionally,
cells become larger as a result of the extra DNA content. Yet, how these
polyploidy-related changes affect development remains largely mysterious.
However, these effects do appear to be responsible for the rarity of polyploid
animals. Most animals fail to develop early on as polyploids, suggesting
development is sensitive to this condition. By studying polyploid animals, the
Fellow aims to uncover the circumstances that make polyploidy possible in some
lineages of animals but not others. To achieve this, the Fellow will
characterize development in polyploid salamanders. This fellowship will also
support undergraduate research and educational outreach.

The research aims to investigate the consequences of polyploidy on the evolution
of development and morphology in a hybrid lineage of polyploid salamanders
(genus Ambystoma). The Fellow will assess how increased cell size due to
polyploidy acts as a determinant of morphology across organ systems using CT
scan data and histology. Second, the Fellow will investigate how ploidy-related
changes in cell size and gene expression alter morphogenesis to characterize
developing tissue morphology, pattern formation, and developmental cellular
processes using immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Finally, the
Fellow will characterize how the additional copies of a genome gained through
polyploidization affect developmental gene expression using ATAC-Seq and RNA-Seq
to test for differential regulation and expression of developmental genes
throughout development. By studying these unique polyploid salamanders, the
Fellow aims to understand how polyploidy shapes development and morphology.
Addressing these knowledge gaps will broaden the fields’ understanding of the
role polyploidization has had in the evolution of phenotypic traits across the
tree of life. In addition, the Fellow will facilitate and mentor research
opportunities and develop workshops for undergraduates with limited research
opportunities. The Fellow will also receive training in skills related to
developmental and genomic research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.