* 2305419
* Strengthening the Gravitational-Wave Event Portal
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jonah Kanner, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 429,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational-wave astronomy is one of the most rapidly evolving fields in
astrophysics. Over the past eight years, NSF's LIGO and Italy's Virgo have begun
to record compact object mergers of black holes and neutron stars for the first
time. These discoveries are having a tremendous impact on our ability to study
the population of black holes in our universe, learn about fundamental particle
physics through study of the dense interiors of neutron stars, test general
relativity as never before, and investigate a range of other topics. Data from
these cutting-edge instruments are made available to the scientific community
and the public through the Gravitational Wave Open Science Center (GWOSC) at
gwosc.org. As LIGO and Virgo become more sensitive, the rate of discoveries is
quickly accelerating. Starting in 2015, the number of observed compact object
mergers has grown from 1, to 10, to 90. During the last observing run, LIGO and
Virgo were observing mergers of black holes or neutron stars about once per
week, and future upgrades are expected to make this rate grow. As we begin to
record hundreds or thousands of these astrophysical events, the scientific
community will need a new set of tools to access and analyze the information
associated with these discoveries. This project will fund enhancements to the
GWOSC Event Portal, which allows scientists, teachers, students, and enthusiasts
around the world to browse catalogs of compact object mergers, view plots, and
discover associated data. The award also includes funding to host two Open Data
Workshops to train students and scientists who wish to contribute to this new
field of astronomy.

This award supports two activities that will expand public access to
gravitational-wave (GW) data. The first project is to grow and enhance the
gravitational-wave Event Portal in three ways: (i) the database will grow to
include the hundreds of events expected for detection in up-coming observing
runs; (ii) the Event Portal structure will be broadened to include events
discovered by groups outside the LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA collaboration; and (iii), the
Event Portal will become more interactive with new plotting features. As the
second project, this award will support two Gravitational Wave Open Data
Workshops in the first and third years of the proposal. These innovative
workshops gather thousands of researchers who are new to gravitational-wave data
analysis with a “hands-on” introduction to the methods of the field. The
workshops center on software tutorials prepared by expert analysts, who also
attend the workshop to provide mentoring. Following each workshop, software
tutorials and video lectures are posted to a free online course, creating
opportunities for thousands of students to learn gravitational-wave data
analysis at any time throughout the year.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.