* 2305456
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Potential for Diversified Crop Rotations to Promote Solid Phosphorus Cycling in Agroecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Joshua Garcia, Garcia, Joshua
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 03/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will lead a project investigating the potential for diversified crop rotations
to enhance soil phosphorus cycling in agriculture. Phosphorus is an important
plant nutrient as it plays a major role in plant growth and development. In
agriculture, phosphorus fertilizers can help meet the nutritional needs of crop
plants and maximize crop yields, yet the future practicality of these
fertilizers is uncertain due to depleting phosphorus reserves and other
environmental concerns. Using long-term research trials, the Fellow will
determine if diversified crop rotations can support natural soil phosphorus
cycling to help support crop yields while minimizing the need for phosphorus
fertilizers in agriculture. This will ultimately help to develop more
sustainable and ecologically based management practices for crop production. As
part of the project, the Fellow will disseminate findings from their research to
farmers and relevant stakeholders through a variety of extension platforms with
the University of California Cooperative Extension. The Fellow will also provide
research mentorship to undergraduate students from marginalized backgrounds
through programs such as the McNair Scholars Program. Lastly, the Fellow will
leverage connections at University of California, Davis, Graduate Studies to
establish a support organization and programming for postdoctoral scholars from
marginalized backgrounds.

The overarching hypothesis of the project is that diversified crop rotations
will beneficially alter soil physiochemical and biological properties, which
will enhance soil phosphorus cycling, plant phosphorus uptake, and productivity.
The Fellow will compare soil properties between diversified corn-soybean
rotations and non-diversified corn-soybean rotations across four long-term
research sites located throughout the Midwest. The Fellow will perform soil
physiochemical analyses, including analysis of soil organic matter and total
carbon and nitrogen content, to examine the effects of crop rotation on
properties relevant to phosphorus cycling, soil metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic sequencing to compare microbial taxonomic and functional
composition between rotation methods, and corn phenotypic analyses to link
changes in soil properties to plant traits. The Fellow will also implement
structural equation modeling using the data gathered to study relationships
between biotic and abiotic soil properties, phosphorus pools, and plant
productivity. The Fellow will disseminate findings from this work through
diverse platforms, including farmer outreach and peer-reviewed scientific
journal articles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.