* 2305437
* SHF:Small: Learning-based Fast Analysis and Fixing for Electromigration Damage
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Electromigration (EM) has a significant reliability issue and limiting factor
for advanced very large scale integration (VLSI) designs due to the shrinking
size and increasing current density of copper-based interconnects in sub-3nm
technology. As a result, future chips are expected to age faster than previous
generations. While recent advances in EM modeling and assessment techniques have
been made, fast and accurate EM analysis and automatic optimization for large-
scale power grid networks remain challenging due to the need for physics-based
modeling that involves solving partial differential equations for hydrostatic
stress in large interconnects. This becomes even more difficult for full-chip
level EM management. Machine learning techniques, particularly deep learning
based on deep neural networks (DNNs), such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), and scientific machine learning (SciML) approaches, have emerged as
promising solutions to traditional numerical analysis techniques for solving
partial differential equations (PDEs). The unsupervised physics-
informed/constrained neural network (PINN/PCNN) framework in the SciML field
shows powerful capabilities such as mesh-free and parametrized numerical
solutions. However, existing PINN/PCNN works can only solve small PDE problems
with simple boundary conditions. For large engineering problems with millions of
variables commonly seen in design automation, PINN/PCNN approaches show slow
convergence, if they converge at all. Additionally, fixing EM-induced failure or
damage to achieve the expected EM mean time to failure at both design and run
times remains challenging due to the sensitivity-based optimization framework
and lack of sufficient on-chip temperature sensors. The tools to be developed in
this project will be valuable to advancing the understanding of this important
problem and curtailing the lifetime reliability issue of complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor (CMOS) chips.

This project will develop novel learning-based EM analysis based on PINN/PCNN
framework and efficient machine learning-accelerated full-chip EM fixing and
run-time management methods for VLSI chips in the nanometer regime. First, the
project will explore new SciML-based solutions such as enhanced PINN/PCNN
methods, for hydrostatic stress analysis for multi-segment interconnect trees.
On top of those methods, full-chip multi-physics coupled EM induced IR drop
(i.e., reduction in voltage) analysis and lifetime estimation for power grid
networks considering Joule heating effects will be developed. Second, the
project will develop efficient full-chip EM-aware power grid optimization
techniques, aided by DNNs, along with a dynamic run-time EM-aware management
method to identify the real hotspots of processors. The project will investigate
DNN-accelerated full-chip power grid optimization by exploiting the
differentiability of the trained DNN models to allow for rapid sensitivity
calculations based on a sequence of linear programming techniques. Finally, we
will devise a DNN-based method to estimate hotspots and develop a dynamic run-
time EM lifetime management method, considering the actual hotspots of
processors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.