* 2305684
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing cyber security technologies for the maritime system (SC)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* George Skipper, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 998,073.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on developing the
vision and plans for creating a world-class maritime cybersecurity capability
for South Carolina and subsequently adopted across the nation's maritime
transportation industry. The project intends to be at the vanguard of research,
education, workforce development, outreach, and product creation. Innovation
efforts will include cybersecurity education, research, experimentation,
investment, and commercialization of products and services with national impact.
Key partners in this collaboration include the University of South Carolina
Beaufort, South Coast Cyber Center, Clemson University, South Carolina State
University, the University of South Carolina, South Carolina Council on
Competitiveness, Technical College of the Lowcountry, and the South Carolina
Research Authority. South Carolina's ports, rail, interstate highways, and
strategic position in the southeast United States make it an ideal location for
this Development award. The state's maritime transportation system enables
critical economic activity for firms and households nationwide. The project's
goals include building collaborative partnerships with academia, industry, and
government to understand the interdependencies, vulnerabilities, and risks to
drive the development of technologies and services that build critical
resiliency into the ecosystem.

This project will identify and develop commercially viable maritime
cybersecurity solutions and services in concert with building a robust cadre of
cybersecurity professionals and technology to drive sustainable and equitable
economic growth. A key priority will be the development of a strong
cybersecurity workforce among traditionally disadvantaged members of society.
The outcomes of this award will more clearly define the current maritime
cybersecurity needs and gaps; innovations and solutions to address the gaps; and
establish tangible innovation, technology, and workforce development plans
needed to address industry challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.