* 2305038
* Asymptotic Analysis of Geometric Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Qing Han, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 387,000.00

This project involves nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations that
arise in geometry, physics, and engineering. The equations studied in this
project exhibit a certain degree of degeneracy or singularity. Degenerate
elliptic equations demonstrate significant differences from uniformly elliptic
equations, an important class of nondegenerate counterparts. Solutions of
degenerate elliptic equations have much worse properties than those of uniformly
elliptic equations (typically, a loss of smoothness of derivatives at some
level). The classical analysis of uniformly elliptic equations, emphasizing the
regularity of solutions (i.e., smoothness of their derivatives), is inadequate
for studying degenerate elliptic equations. The theme of the project is the
analysis of solutions to these equations near sets where degeneracy or
singularity occurs. One of the main tasks is to study the properties of
solutions in new formats and to identify optimal conditions for the existence
and regularity of solutions. Such a task is reflected in all problems in this
project. The central part of this project is dedicated to the development of new
methods and techniques in studying the properties of solutions of degenerate and
singular elliptic differential equations. In addition to pursuing fundamental
problems in geometry and physics, this project also contributes to establishing
a general framework to study several important classes of degenerate elliptic
differential equations and advancing our knowledge of these equations. Student
training and interdisciplinary collaborations are important aspects of this
project. Three graduate students in mathematics and one graduate student in
electrical engineering participate in this project.

The project will study degenerate or singular elliptic partial differential
equations. Due to the complexity and diversity of the types of degeneracy, it is
impossible to develop a general theory for degenerate elliptic equations. The
project focuses on three classes of degenerate elliptic equations that appear
frequently in geometry and physics. The first class is the uniformly degenerate
elliptic equations. Many important geometric problems are reduced to this class
of equations. These equations are defined on compact manifolds with boundaries
and degenerate only on boundaries, with a uniform rate of degeneracy in terms of
the distance to the boundary. The second class of equations consists of elliptic
equations that are singular at isolated points, with a uniform rate of
singularity in terms of the distance to the singular point. Asymptotic
expansions demonstrate that solutions to these two classes of equations are
singular with specific singular factors. The primary objective of the research
on these equations is to study the impact of these singular factors on the
existence and regularity of solutions. The third class of equations consists of
elliptic equations and systems of elliptic equations that are singular in a set
of codimension 2. This class of equations appears in the study of radially
symmetric solutions to the Einstein equation, near the extreme Kerr solution.
The research on this class of equations will study the asymptotic behaviors of
solutions near punctures and to prove the mass and angular momentum inequality.
Completely different methods are required to study these three classes of
equations, although they differ only in the dimension of the sets where
degeneracy occurs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.