* 2305172
* Spin-labeling Electron Paramagnetic Resonance  Methods for Measurements at Nanoscale Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 435,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Tatyana Smirnova and her group at North Carolina State University
are working on developing a novel measurement methodology to assess properties
of nanoparticles at interfaces. As particles become smaller and approach the
nanoscale – typically 1 to 100 nm in diameter (thousands of times smaller than
the diameter of a human hair) - interfacial properties become the dominant
factors in interactions of the particles with their surroundings. This project
aims to address the need for measurements at nanostructured interfaces by
positioning molecular probes at the nanoparticle surface with atomic-scale
precision and reading the interfacial properties spectroscopically. Once
developed, the new measurement method has the potential to yield much needed
data that will aid in the design of novel materials as well as improve
manufacturing processes. Direct participation of graduate and undergraduate
students will provide for specialized training in materials, physical, and
analytical chemistry. Selected elements of the research plan are directly
integrated in undergraduate classroom laboratory activities, bringing a
discovery-based approach to undergraduate education.

The proposed approach to develop a new measurement capability is based on a
series of spectroscopically active probes, which will be covalently attached to
nanostructured surfaces via common surface groups to assess local dynamics,
proton concentration and electrostatic and dielectric properties at interfaces.
The approach utilizes electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and is expected to
provide unique capability to report on highly local, site-specific heterogeneous
properties of nanoscale interfaces. The position of the probe with respect to
the interface will be determined with atomic-scale accuracy from measurements of
dipolar interactions between the electronic spin of the probe and the surface
magnetic nuclei by pulsed EPR. The validity of the measurement approach will be
investigated over a wide range of environmental conditions to demonstrate a
broad applicability of the method to nanosystems of interest in materials
science, chemistry, and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.