* 2305552
* Assessing the role of the lithospheric mantle during passive margin development - insights from the South Atlantic African margin
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Tyrone Rooney, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2026
* USD 572,325.00

Oceans and continents dominate the surface of Earth. Continental crust is thick
and ancient, preserving billions of years of history. Oceanic crust is much
younger. Plate tectonic processes bring together different continental plates
into supercontinents. Supercontinents are then broken apart to form new oceans.
This project focuses on the process of transition between continental and
oceanic crust. We examine lava from the edge of a continent that has been
rifted, and where an ocean has been newly created. These lavas can provide
insight into how magmatism impacted the breakup process. The project focuses on
the southwestern margin of the Atlantic Ocean along the coast of Angola. This
region has been uplifted since the continent began to break apart. The uplift
brings to the surface rocks that are usually buried under thick piles of
sediment. Broader Impacts include support for undergraduate and graduate
students to participate in research and training activities. The project will
also create a module for use in undergraduate classes for non-science majors.

The substantial hydrocarbon interests along the rifted margins of the South
Atlantic have resulted in strong seismic characterization of basins along the
continental margin. The seismic data provide an important interpretive framework
that has recognized the presence of magmatism in the hyper-extended and
supposedly ‘non-volcanic’ basins. Lavas and xenoliths, typically the most direct
probe of mantle conditions at passive rifted margins, are usually buried under
thick sediments. This project will obtain new petrographic, geochronologic,
major and trace element, and isotopic data from volcanic rocks and xenoliths
from the southern Angolan continental margin that are exposed due to uplift of
the crust. This focus region provides an ideal venue to explore the transition
between the richly volcanic margin that dominates further south in Namibia, and
the vast sedimentary basins that define the margin further north in Angola.
Analytical and interpretative aspects of the project are focused on two
questions: 1) Why do basins in southern Angola exhibit the characteristics of a
magma-poor volcanic margin (i.e., hyper-extended crust and thick sediment
accumulation) but also experience magmatism? This question will be addressed by
examining the isotopic, major and trace element characteristics of magmatism
along the basin margin that is along strike with gravity highs associated with
offshore magmatic features. Sub-lithosphere contributions to the lavas will be
constrained using these data. 2) Is the Upper Cretaceous magmatic event in this
region and synchronous African margin uplift the result of processes operating
in the plate or underlying asthenosphere? This question will be addressed by
examining lavas and associated mantle xenoliths that erupted along the African
passive margin contemporaneous with this uplift event. The project will include
an isotope study on lavas and xenoliths to explore possible source reservoirs,
and a compositional study of minerals within the xenoliths. The outcome of this
work could have substantial implications beyond the discipline given the
importance of magmatism in influencing hydrocarbon systems along this passive
rifted margin.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.