* 2305834
* Investigating Membrane Proteins with Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Gary Lorigan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 577,656.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program, Professor Gary A.
Lorigan from the Miami University is studying two membrane proteins, namely
pinholin and gp28, which are involved in cell lysis/cell death. Membrane
proteins make up approximately one-third of all known proteins and are
responsible for many important properties and functions of biological systems.
Despite their abundance and importance, there is very little information about
membrane-associated molecules. This project will apply electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopic techniques to gather information about the
structural and dynamic properties of the membrane proteins pinholin and gp28. In
the implementation of this project, graduate students and undergraduate student
will acquire knowledge and experience in the preparation of membrane protein
samples and in state-of-the-art EPR spectroscopic techniques. Undergraduate
students will obtain valuable experience in biophysical chemistry and graduate
students participation in DUOS, a STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) project at Miami University, is an opportunity for them to become
outstanding mentors.

Pinholin is a biologically significant membrane-bound holin protein that is
directly involved in cell death through lysis of the inner membrane in E. coli.
The other prinicipal target of these studies is gp28, a new type of protein that
disrupts the outer membrane (OM) in phage phiKT. Currently, there is very
limited structural information on both pinholin and gp28. The secondary and
tertiary structure of mutated pinholin embedded in a lipid bilayer will be
elucidated by measuring distances between strategically placed nitroxide spin
labels using EPR spectroscopy. State-of-the-art EPR techniques such as double
electron electron resonance (DEER) will be applied to study the structure,
topology, oligomerization state, and dynamic properties of the membrane-bound
proteins pinholin and gp28. Different conformational forms will be investigated.
The EPR data will be used in the development of a structural model to help
elucidate the mechanism of hole formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.