* 2305470
* Catalyst Project: Data Science and Machine Learning – An Interdisciplinary STEM Training Project for the Future Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Negash Medhin, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty
to strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. In
collaboration with North Carolina State University (NCSU), Benedict College (BC)
seeks to enhance the undergraduate curriculum and provide adequate knowledge,
hands-on training, and certifications in data science and machine learning for
HBCU students.

The project’s four overarching objectives are to: (1) develop joint data science
and machine learning programs, (2) integrate experiential learning and
internships, (3) develop learning laboratories for research and teaching, and
(4) develop joint learning and research programs. HBCU students taking the new
proposed courses will learn how to solve real-world problems using data science
and machine learning modules in the classroom. They will also be provided with
academic year experiential learning and summer research opportunities at BC and
NCSU. In addition to strengthening STEM undergraduate education and research at
an HBCU, the project will also enable students historically underrepresented in
STEM to improve their marketability and create sustainable industrial
internships for those interested in emerging data science and machine learning
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.