* 2305974
* NSF PRFB FY23: Linking genotypes, phenotypes, and ecology to elucidate the origins of parasite resistance
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Nadya Muchoney, Muchoney, Nadya Dougherty
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Parasites are one of the most common threats
to the health of organisms worldwide. The ability of hosts to prevent or control
infection is therefore a critical factor for survival. Resistance to parasites
depends upon the genes of the host, as well as other factors including the
host’s diet and microbes present within the host’s gut. However, relatively
little is known about how these factors interact to impact infection. Using
genetic analyses and lab experiments, this project will look at how host genes,
chemicals in the diet, and gut microbes interact to provide protection against
parasites. This research will help to understand the causes of disease
susceptibility, and will be important for agriculture, conservation, and human
and wildlife health. Additionally, the fellow will mentor undergraduate students
through hands-on research experiences and develop lessons on the connection
between diet and disease for K–6 students.

This research will focus on monarch butterflies, which use toxic chemicals in
their food plants as a medicinal defense against a debilitating protozoan
parasite. As both the genotype of the monarch and the chemistry of its diet
strongly influence this host-parasite relationship, this system is ideal for
evaluating interactions between genetic and ecological sources of resistance.
The specific research aims are: (1) determine the genetic basis of resistance by
crossbreeding monarchs from resistant and susceptible populations and performing
quantitative trait locus analysis; (2) experimentally evaluate the extent to
which host genotype and dietary chemistry indirectly contribute to resistance by
modulating the gut microbial community; (3) investigate the mechanistic basis of
resistance by measuring the ability of parasites to penetrate the host’s gut
barrier in the presence, or absence, of plant chemicals and gut microbes. This
research will elucidate the direct and indirect (i.e., microbe-mediated)
pathways through which host genes and diets contribute to disease resistance.
Through this project, the fellow will receive training in cutting-edge
techniques in quantitative genetics, chemical ecology, and microbiology. The
fellow will also lead immersive undergraduate research experiences to support
student preparation for scientific careers and collaborate with a local science
center to implement interactive K–6 lessons that foster enthusiasm for
ecological concepts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.