* 2305529
* CAREER: Atomistic Investigation of Phase Transition in Nanostructured Silicon--Towards Convergent Understanding with Mechanics-Informed Machine Learning Potential
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Wei Gao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2026
* USD 479,070.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support fundamental
research on phase transition and plasticity in silicon nanostructures.
Nanostructured silicon, such as nanoparticles, nanopillars, and nanowires have
been widely used for integrated circuits, micro and nano-electromechanical
systems, and photovoltaics due to the unique mechanical, optical, and electrical
properties. The knowledge generated in this research will be applied to enhance
the mechanical reliability of silicon nanodevices, to improve the machining of
silicon materials, and to explore novel approaches for silicon phase
engineering, thereby advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare. In
addition, the machine learning approach will provide an innovative computational
framework to develop mechanics-inspired interatomic potentials to study the
deformation of silicon and other materials at the atomic scale with high
fidelity. The research will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate
education through two activities. A set of computation modules called “The
Atomic View of Materials” will be designed and integrated into mechanics courses
in the mechanical engineering curriculum. These modules will help students
visualize the mechanical behavior of materials and get trained on advanced
modeling and simulation skills. In addition, this project will boost the
participation of underrepresented minorities in research through internships.

Recent nanomechanical experiments have shown many unique and intriguing features
of phase transitions in nanostructured silicon that are different from bulk
silicon in many aspects. The kinetic mechanism of phase nucleation and
propagation at atomic scale remains unknown, however. The research objective of
this project is to quantitatively determine the roles of stress field,
grain/phase boundaries, and plastic deformation on phase transition in silicon
nanostructures. It is noted that there is no reliable interatomic potential to
describe silicon phase transition, thus a novel mechanics-informed machine
learning potential based on deep neural network will be developed to fill the
gap. The potential will be trained with the dataset containing stress-dependent
phase transition minimum energy paths, which will provide sufficient resolution
to sample the energy landscape under high stress. The phase transition will be
investigated with a combination of molecular dynamics simulations and finite
deformation nudged elastic band method. In addition, a new finite deformation
Dimer method will be developed based on the conventional Dimer method to probe
phase nucleation under high stress and finite deformation without having to
specify a final state structure. The results generated in this project will be
used to understand experimental observations from literature and collaborators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.