* 2305609
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Investigating a Novel Circadian Time-Keeping Mechanism Revealed by Environmental Manipulation
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* David Ehichioya, Ehichioya, David Ehireme
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. In animals,
many essential biological functions, including sleep, activity, and feeding have
daily 24-h (circadian) rhythms. These rhythms are controlled by internal body
clocks. In mammals, the time-keeping system is complex with multiple clocks
located in the brain and the body. Most studies have focused on the central
clock in the brain, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which synchronizes with
the external light-dark environment. But little is known about the other clocks
and their time-keeping mechanism. The fellow and colleagues have evidence that
manipulation of light can rescue daily rhythms in mice with disrupted SCN
function. Through this research, the fellow will identify the location in the
brain and the mechanism of this clock.

Results from this study will advance our understanding of the circadian time-
keeping mechanism. The fellowship will provide training in circadian rhythms and
neuroanatomy and opportunities to plan and coordinate outreach activities to
extend scientific knowledge to a young generation of learners from diverse
backgrounds. This project will explore the role of a novel non-canonical clock
mechanism in generating circadian rhythms. The fellow will study an animal model
in which the canonical circadian rhythm is disabled. This model is an
exceptional tool to discover the locus of the extra-SCN pacemaker(s) by
screening the brain for areas that exhibit circadian rhythms. The fellow will
map novel circadian neural circuits using whole-brain imaging of c-Fos
expression. In addition, the fellow will pharmacologically manipulate dopamine
signaling to investigate the role of dopamine in driving circadian rhythms in
the absence of canonical clock genes. The training plan increases the
participation of underrepresented groups in biology in two ways. First, the
training plan will foster the fellowâ€™s research interests while improving
personal and professional development to become an independent researcher.
Second, the impact of this project will be broadened by sharing knowledge of
circadian rhythms and the experience gained in conducting this project through
educational outreach that will empower underrepresented people in science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.