* 2305730
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Understanding how Tripartite Interactions between Insects, Symbiotic Bacteria, and Parasites Influence Infection Outcomes in Insect Vectors
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sandra Mendiola, Mendiola, Sandra Y
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Insects
commonly form partnerships, known as symbioses, with bacteria. Within their
insect hosts, bacterial symbionts can serve a variety of roles from synthesizing
essential vitamins to increasing host resistance to heat stress. These bacterial
partners can also alter the way insects respond to infection with other
microbes—a phenomenon of particular interest for insects that transmit parasites
that infect humans, animals, and plants (i.e., insect vectors). However, not all
bacterial partners are equal and variation among individual insects as well as
parasite strains can further complicate these interactions. This research
addresses how variation among insect, bacterial symbiont, and parasite strain
influences the outcome of infections in insect vectors. Its outcomes therefore
also have implications for human health; the project will also help to address
the underrepresentation of certain groups of undergraduates and
postbaccalaureates in this important area of scientific inquiry.

The Fellow will carry out this research using kissing bugs—vectors of
Trypanosoma cruzi, causative agent of Chagas disease—and their symbionts. The
Fellow will first assess whether there is specificity in insect-symbiont
pairings across kissing bug species and their Rhodococcus spp. symbionts by
pairing all possible combinations of insect and bacteria in a full factorial
design and assessing insect survival and fecundity as well as bacterial growth
and persistence within the insect. Commonly circulating strains of T. cruzi from
each kissing bug species’ native range will then be used to challenge the
different insect-symbiont pairs to determine which pairings are the least
permissive to infection. These data will then be used to determine whether
insects, symbionts, parasites, or interactions between the three are driving
insect infection outcomes. Concurrently, the Fellow will work to broaden the
participation of historically underrepresented groups in science by: (1)
providing research opportunities related to the project for undergraduates and
post-baccalaureate scholars; and (2) cultivating a regional network of
underrepresented scientists across disciplines and career stages. These combined
activities seek to increase the recruitment and retention of students from
historically underrepresented groups in scientific research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.