* 2305431
* Collaborative Research: Electronic Analog &amp; Hybrid Computing for Power &amp; Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jason Poon, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2026
* USD 267,323.00

This project will develop computing methods that aim to make the electric grid
more reliable, efficient, and sustainable. The grid has evolved tremendously in
the past decades with the rapid adoption of distributed energy resources, such
as solar and wind, and electric vehicle charging. These trends have introduced a
plethora of new problems in optimization, control, and simulation of the grid
that have posed challenges to conventional computing approaches, which are
primarily digital in nature. The project team will develop new tools for the
modeling, analysis, design, and benchmarking of alternative computing
approaches, namely electronic analog and hybrid computing, with the ultimate aim
of facilitating the implementation of critical algorithms and tools for the
future electric grid that are not practical or feasible with the prevailing
digital computing paradigm. The potential advancements in computing technologies
will benefit a variety of other industrial sectors, such as transportation and
manufacturing, and drive advances in computing and semiconductor technology
broadly.

We will explore a number of fundamental questions related to electronic analog
and hybrid computing systems, including a unified and system-theoretic
assessment of their design, stability, performance, and robustness, motivated by
their potential role in enabling applications for future power and energy
systems. We propose three approaches to our project: i) modeling and analysis,
ii) design automation, and iii) performance assessment. Through our research
program, we will develop comprehensive modeling and analysis methods that will
yield accurate, stable, and predictable electronic analog and hybrid computers.
We will leverage these insights to develop an open-source design automation
library and toolchain that will enable users to easily synthesize various
controllers, optimizers, or simulators as an analog or hybrid computer. Finally,
we will develop a first-principles performance assessment tool that will clarify
the benefits of utilizing analog or hybrid computers, identify the particular
applications for which their benefits can be fully realized, and enable
principled and quantitative comparisons among analog, hybrid, and digital
computers to be made.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.