* 2305085
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Sunlight- and Oxidant-Induced Transformation of Tire-Derived Contaminants on Roadway-Associated Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Edward Kolodziej, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 384,781.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Ning Dai, Prathima Nalam, and Ravi Ranade at the
University at Buffalo-the State University of New York and Michael Dodd and
Edward Kolodziej at the University of Washington will study the transformation
of tire rubber-derived contaminants on roadway surfaces that are exposed to
sunlight and airborne oxidants such as oxygen, ozone, and hydroxyl radical.
Particles generated from the wear of tires during transportation on roads
contribute substantially to water, soil, and air pollution. The complicated
mixture of rubber compounds and proprietary additives arising from such
particles, as well as their transformation products, can have severe adverse
impacts on ecosystems. Both sunlight and ozone are known reactants in water, but
their roles in transforming contaminants on roadway-associated surfaces such as
tire rubber, concrete, and asphalt pavements are largely unknown. This project
will conduct research to address these critical knowledge gaps. In addition,
this project will include a series of synergistic educational activities
comprising K-12 teacher and community college outreach, engagement with citizen
science groups, and project-based research experiences for undergraduate
students.

This project will evaluate the independent and combined effects of sunlight and
airborne oxidants on the transformation of tire-derived organic contaminants on
roadway-associated surfaces. The transformation kinetics, mechanisms, and
product compositions from surface reactions will be characterized and compared
against expectations for bulk gas and aqueous phase reactions. By using a suite
of carefully selected, environmentally relevant contaminants and their
structural analogues, the project will yield new insights on interfacial
photochemical and redox processes occurring on roadway surfaces, which can
enable modeling of the environmental behaviors and potential ecosystem and human
health risks of these and many other tire-derived contaminants. Structure-
activity relationships determined from this project can be used to inform the
selection and/or design of new tire rubber components that are safer to the
environment. The findings from this project have the potential to contribute to
environmentally safer and more sustainable roadways while informing the
development of sustainable, tire rubbers with reduced ecological impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.