* 2305523
* Questions in Wave Turbulence and Quantum Kinetic Theories
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Minh-Binh Tran, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2023
* USD 5,405.00

This research is devoted to developing mathematical methods for studying two
different classes of physical phenomena: wave turbulence and quantum kinetics.
Wave turbulence is manifested in many physical systems, including familiar water
waves, water surface gravity and capillary waves, and a great variety of waves
in plasmas (in particular, in fusion devices). A Bose-Einstein condensate is a
state of matter that was first predicted theoretically in 1924 and produced
experimentally in 1995. While quantum phenomena are exhibited on micro-scales,
and nature is well described on macro-scales by classical mechanics, for a Bose-
Einstein condensate macroscopic quantum phenomena become apparent. The quantum
kinetic theory that describes some physical properties of this state of matter
is the second subject of this research. Although wave turbulence and quantum
kinetics are dramatically different as physical phenomena, their mathematical
description uses similar equations. Despite the widespread applications of these
kinetic equations, little is known rigorously in this field. The aim of the
project is to develop mathematical techniques and apply them to concrete
physical situations, leading to a more profound understanding of both wave
turbulence and quantum kinetics.

The project is aimed at developing the theory of the existence, uniqueness,
finite-time condensation, and relaxation to equilibrium for strong solutions of
the kinetic equations. The principal investigator will address the local-in-time
existence via techniques of harmonic analysis and novel Strichartz-type
estimates. For important questions related to 3-wave wave turbulence, regularity
theory for the kinetic equation with a particular broadening (regularization) of
the resonance set will be used. This research project is informed by several
sub-fields of mathematics, physics, and chemistry, and the work has potential
applications in optical turbulence, oceanography and atmospheric sciences, and
quantum physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.