* 2305665
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Role of Individual Behavior in Climate Induced Range Shifts
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kwasi Wrensford, Wrensford, Kwasi C
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Climate change
is having profound effects on animal populations around the world. When faced
with warming temperatures, species commonly shift their range to higher
latitudes or elevations in search of more optimal habitat. However, these shifts
can vary immensely in direction and magnitude within and among species, and the
underlying mechanisms of range shifts from an organismal level remain poorly
understood. This project will build a framework to understand the complex
factors that influence animal responses to a changing climate, better informing
conservation decisions. To broaden the impact of this project, the Fellow will
engage with community stakeholders and crowdsourced data, and implement near-
peer mentoring networks and fieldwork support grants to broaden participation of
those from underrepresented backgrounds. The project will focus on responses to
changing climate by (1) synthesizing available data on range shifts and traits
to build predictive models of climate induced range shift and (2) using passive
camera trap arrays to study habitat preferences and behavior of a wide-ranging
focal species. For the first objective, the Fellow will review documented cases
of climate-induced range shift across mammal species and then conduct a meta-
analysis to identify relationships between a species’ ecological and behavioral
traits and range shift; these relationships will then be used to parameterize
models to forecast future ranges. The second objective will use field surveys of
the bobcat, Lynx rufus, along its northern range front, where it has been
expanding its range northward in certain localities. Multiple camera-trap arrays
will be set up from the range edge to interior; a survey will then be done of
local environmental characteristics in order to determine individual habitat
preferences and assess differences in individual behavior across the range
front. This project will have the unique distinction of integrating organismal,
field-based approaches with large-scale quantitative modeling to provide a more
robust understanding of the mechanisms underlying climate-induced range shifts.
To broaden participation of groups underrepresented in biology, the Fellow will
implement peer mentoring networks among undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral scientists centered around “Research Mixer” events. In addition,
the Fellow will implement a fieldwork grant program to financially support
students working with postdoctoral mentors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.