* 2305161
* The Determinants of Crystalline Phase in Bottom-Up Nanocrystal Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Janet Macdonald, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2026
* USD 478,645.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Janet Macdonald, from Vanderbilt
University aims to help elucidate how nanocrystals form, as well as provide
insight into their structure and hidden properties. The properties of all solids
are determined by the elements that comprise them and their arrangement. Even a
simple combination of two elements, like iron sulfide, can produce as many as
nine different crystal formations with vastly different chemical and magnetic
behavior, conductivity, color, other properties, and potential uses. This
complexity makes crystalline science incredibly intriguing. The knowledge to be
gained from this research project is expected to help in the discovery of
conditions to produce individual nanocrystal types in pure form. Focusing
research on nanocrystalline inorganic materials could ultimately unleash
potentially disruptive technologies as this size of crystal generally has a
great potential for applications in solar cells, batteries, medical magnetic
imaging, semiconductors, and novel catalysts. One outreach activity of the
project, involves using the knowledge gained on iron chemistry to rediscover
long-lost methods for preparing ancient rock art of the Anishinaabe. In
addition, this project will provide a rigorous research training for graduate
and undergraduate students to help build the future workforce in science.

Under this award, Professor Macdonald and her team will perform a wide,
sweeping, and systematic study of the phase-controlled synthesis. Manganese,
iron, cobalt, nickel, and copper chalcogenides (sulfides, selenides and
tellurides) be examined in particular because they have particularly complex
phase diagrams. Libraries of organochalcogenides will be employed to separate
the role of the kinetic rate from the decomposition mechanism of the precursors
in phase determination. Maps will be drawn of the phase landscape that will
provide guidance for targeted synthetic changes to achieve one phase over
another. The second aim strives to resolve a long-standing debate about how
polytypes are controlled in nanocrystal synthesis. Tools gleaned from molecular
coordination chemistry will be employed with the goal of achieving polymorphic
phase control more broadly across the periodic table to target "ghost phases"
that have been predicted but never seen.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.