* 2305117
* On-tissue Chemical Derivatizations for Untargeted Spatial Metabolomics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Young-Jin Lee, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 407,402.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Professor Young-Jin Lee and his group at Iowa State University are
developing analytical technologies to advance spatial metabolomics. Mass
spectrometry imaging (MSI) is a popular tool for spatial metabolomics to dissect
metabolite differences between different cells and cell types directly from
tissues. One critical bottleneck is limited compound coverage due to the low
ionization efficiency and small sampling size. To overcome this limitation,
researchers started to adopt on-tissue chemical derivatization (OTCD) but its
application has been limited to targeted imaging of selected metabolites. The
Lee group is exploring OTCD-MSI as a tool for untargeted spatial metabolomics by
combining multiple OTCD on sequential tissue sections to increase overall
metabolite coverage and annotation confidence. The potential impact spans across
many scientific disciplines, including drug discovery, plant metabolomics, food
safety, and biomedical science, while providing exciting educational
opportunities for students to engage in interdisciplinary research at the
boundary of biological and physical science. A diverse group of students will be
recruited to participate in the project through various channels, including high
school students through Project SEED of the American Chemical Society.

Built upon previous success in implementing OTCD to METASPACE, a free web-based
metabolite annotation platform for spatial metabolomics hosted by the Alexandrov
group at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, this research will further
advance untargeted spatial metabolomics. First, bioinformatics tools will be
developed to improve metabolite annotations in OTCD-based untargeted spatial
metabolomics by using functional group search algorithms. Second, in-source gas-
phase reactions will be developed to assist in determining molecular structures.
Carbon-carbon double bond positions of lipids will be determined using ozone gas
and the number of labile hydrogens in OTCD-derivatized metabolites using heavy
water vapor. Finally, microdroplet reaction acceleration in OTCD will be
investigated to better understand the underlying phenomena and further improve
OTCD reaction efficiency, specifically regarding the role of the electric field
using a new electrospray ionization (ESI) spray device. Combined with METASPACE-
based analysis of OTCD-MSI datasets, this approach is expected to help make
untargeted spatial metabolomics accessible to many researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.