* 2305877
* NSF PRFB FY23: Understanding the evolutionary importance and vectoring mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer within a parasitic plant system
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2027
* Peter Flynn, Flynn, Peter J
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 03/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Symbiosis, which describes the interaction
between two different organisms, is important to all life on Earth. Parasitism
is one form of symbiosis. This project will look at a parasitic plant called the
corpse flower, which relies on other plants to survive. It aims to study the
relationship between this plant and the insects that pollinate them in their
natural habitat. Because these relationships have evolved over millions of
years, it is likely that smaller organisms like bacteria and viruses have also
evolved with them over time. Bacteria and viruses may also contribute to the
transfer of genes among plants, and maybe even between plants and the insects
that pollinate them. This study will combine field work and studies of the
genomes of bacteria and viruses to add to our understanding of how genes move
between different organisms. Also, from this research, science activities will
be designed for students to learn more about ecology.

This project will include (1) a comprehensive multi-scale microbial survey of
the various bacterial and viral communities across a parasitic plant system
(Rafflesiaceae-Tetrastigma); (2) identification and characterization of
horizontal gene transfer events within this parasitic plant system; (3) design
of microbial interaction networks to assess the structural patterns of
horizontal gene transfer within this parasite plant system; (4) development of a
science workshop curriculum and outreach activities at various age levels for
students to discover biology; and (5) encouragement of substantial independent
scientific research experiences for undergraduate students. Moving forward, the
findings from this project can better inform ecological models to predict how
microbial transmission and horizontal gene transfer events will influence other
symbiotic relationships between eukaryotic organisms. This system aims to
describe the evolutionary innovation of horizontal genome transfer and its
contribution to genomic assembly in microbes and eukaryote hosts and how this
ultimately informs organismal phenotypes and governs ecological interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.