* 2305848
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Behavioral and Physiological Innovations Facilitating the Evolution of Brood Parasitism
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nicholas Antonson, Antonson, Nicholas Dolan
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will investigate the evolution of
selfish begging behavior in birds through muscle physiology and genomics. For
many animals, survival is most challenging immediately after hatching/birth and
natural selection strongly favors the evolution of extreme (and sometimes
bizarre) behavioral traits at this stage to enhance offspring survival. One
example of this is begging to receive care in nestling birds. The Fellow will
study how begging evolved and characterize how selfish traits promote
competition among offspring by applying behavioral, genomic, and physiological
techniques to nestling birds raised with chicks they are related to or unrelated
to. The Fellow, as a former teacher, will also conduct outreach on the
relationship between muscle physiology and behavior at local schools and mentor
undergraduate students both at the host institution and from minority-serving
institutions.

The process by which traits evolve iteratively over time and support the
diversification of behavioral phenotypes is of critical importance to generating
a mechanistic understanding of behavior. This is particularly interesting in the
case of early life traits, which are theorized to be under a stronger selective
force than those traits that manifest after first reproduction. Begging in
nestling birds is a model system for addressing questions of iterative evolution
because it is well-studied from a behavioral perspective. However, little is
known about the molecular and physiological mechanisms that facilitate/constrain
begging as a behavior or how iterative trait evolution guides the transition
from specialized begging directed at parents to a generalized parasitic begging
phenotype that may be successful at coercing care in a variety of host species
nests. The goal of this research combines an emerging model of layered
evolution, where the innovation of behavioral traits can be modeled by looking
at molecular shifts in the expression of individual genes and how it builds on
ancestral evolutionary scaffold, with physiological methods like in situ muscle
recording to explore the basis of mechanistic constraints on begging evolution.
The project’s broader impacts target the retention and development of scientists
from under-represented backgrounds through middle school outreach and through
the training and direct mentorship of undergraduates in the host institution’s
NSF REU program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.