* 2305981
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: How does urban environmental heterogeneity and societal inequity shape phenotypic traits in wildlife?
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Lauren Stanton, Stanton, Lauren Ashely
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research project will address how
variation in urban living conditions, such as pollution and green space
availability, affect the behavior and physiology of wildlife across different
neighborhoods. In doing so, the results of this project will illustrate how
inequities within our society affect the evolution and general wellbeing of
other nonhuman organisms in cities. The fellow will conduct research in
collaboration with local communities spanning socioeconomic statuses with
unequal access to STEM resources. Thus, this project will not only provide an
opportunity to directly broaden participation in STEM, but also allow the fellow
to serve as an advocate for equitable environmental policies that will benefit
both people and animals across urban neighborhoods. In addition, the fellow will
provide K-12 educational outreach at museums and underserved schools, and use
knowledge of local animal behavior to humanely mitigate conflict between
residents and wildlife.

To understand how heterogeneity in urban environmental conditions affects
wildlife, this research will evaluate and compare the behavior and physiology of
raccoons (Procyon lotor) across high and low income neighborhoods in the San
Francisco Bay Area, as well as in the surrounding nonurban areas. The fellow
will begin by humanely capturing raccoons across neighborhoods in order to mark
each individual with a microchip and safely collect blood and hair samples,
which will provide insights on raccoon physiology (e.g., stress) and genetic
relatedness across neighborhoods. The fellow will receive training on how to
process each biological sample and conduct the associated physiological and
genetic analyses. After all raccoons have been processed and released, the
fellow will work in partnership with local agencies and community members to
make behavioral observations of raccoons using trail cameras and evaluate their
cognitive abilities using puzzles and other testing apparatuses. Together, this
information will enable the fellow to link raccoon behavior and performance
across tests to underlying cognitive and physiological mechanisms that may be
influenced by urban environmental conditions. The fellow will also evaluate how
raccoon behavior may be inherited from parents of offspring, and whether
knowledge related to local resources and dangers could be transmitted among
raccoons within each neighborhood as well.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.