* 2305721
* 2023 LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate: Mississippi LSAMP - Host Site: Jackson State University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Thomas Hudson, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: Blacks and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared students,
highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.
The need for cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United
States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy.

The Louis Stokes Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation (LSMAMP), led
by Jackson State University (JSU), will support Cohort 16 of its Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) program. A comprehensive program exists that develops a cohort of
twelve BD Fellows to not only complete their M.S. degree requirements, but also
the STEM doctoral degree. The two-year program will consist of didactic learning
with engaged faculty-led research activities in hands-on laboratory training at
state-of-the-art facilities and equipment housed in CORE multi-user research
laboratories the institution and in collaboration with other federal, private
and non-profit organizations. Enrichment activities include STEM speaker series,
community service, professional development workshops. Formative and summative
evaluation results will be disseminated broadly to support replication of the
model to other graduate programs seeking to diversify STEM graduate education
programs and the nation's STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.