* 2305202
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Re-envisioning Inclusive and Sustainable Excellence (RISE) Advancing Women in STEM at Old Dominion University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Augustine Agho, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Old Dominion University (ODU) Re-envisioning Inclusive and Sustainable
Excellence (RISE) project is designed to make a significant contribution to
ODU's efforts to eliminate systemic gender and racial inequities in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Gender and racial biases
produce gaps in recruitment, hiring, tenure, and promotion, and contribute to
adverse departmental climates. Using an intersectional lens, the RISE project
team will adapt evidence-based strategies from previous ADVANCE programs to
ODU’s specific STEM environment. The RISE project seeks to achieve sustainable
change that will transform ODU’s campus community into one that embraces a
vibrant and diverse STEM faculty.

The ODU RISE project has three goals: 1) Improve STEM faculty recruitment and
hiring processes; 2) Address equity issues related to the tenure and promotion
process, and 3) Improve departmental climate to enhance inclusivity. Using an
intersectional lens, the RISE project’s structured interventions include: 1)
providing resources for STEM departments for hiring and holding departments and
deans accountable for their hiring practices; 2) creating processes for
equitable launch upon hire, equitable distribution of service, and increased
transparency in the evaluation of scholarly work and promotion and tenure
guidelines; and 3) implementing strategies and programs that foster academic
culture change and result in departments where diverse STEM faculty can thrive.
The goals and activities are mutually supportive, reciprocal, and necessary for
progress and sustainability. The RISE project aims to raise awareness about
equity issues among faculty members and improve the departmental climate of all
STEM disciplines. The outcomes of the RISE project will be disseminated locally,
regionally, and nationally by ODU media professionals and the Association for
the Advancement of Science (AAAS). The RISE project will promote mindfulness
about the implementation of intersectional strategies that enhance inclusivity
in STEM at other similarly situated institutions across the nation.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. 
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.