* 2305867
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Genetic, Physiological, and Environmental Drivers of Plant-Pollinator Niche Dynamics Across Scales of Biological Organization
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kathleen Arrowsmith, Arrowsmith, Kathleen Caroline
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. This project
represents an examination of pollinator foraging patterns using a wide variety
of biological techniques. The fellow will utilize the pollen collected by
individual bees in nature to understand of the flowers visited by these bees
during the course of the bee’s natural foraging. By uncovering how environmental
and biological factors influence variation in pollinator foraging behavior, this
project will improve scientists’ ability to predict how environmental changes
may influence pollinator biodiversity and pollination behaviors. Additionally,
the fellow will engage in efforts to improve the accessibility of field-based
research to scientists of diverse identities and backgrounds. She will work to
implement field safety standards for researchers in professional settings and
establish community science efforts to include non-professional science
enthusiasts in the exciting world of native pollinators.

This project will apply an emerging molecular tool ¬– pollen DNA metabarcoding –
to measure variation in niche breadth and niche turnover among individual
pollinators along a natural temperature and geographic gradient. In addition to
examining environmental variation, the fellow will test for phenotypic
(pollinator body size) and genotypic (microsatellite markers) drivers of these
niche characteristics, focusing specifically on bumble bees as a model system
for pollinator molecular ecology. With this data, she will examine whether
individual-level niche dynamics can be used to improve the predictive ability of
models simulating community-level patterns of species loss. The inclusion of
individual-level niche dynamics in network disassembly models will be a novel
extension of stochastic coextinction modeling that has the potential to shed
light on apparent contradictions in the structure of mutualistic networks
whereby frequently observed patterns of interactions (e.g., nestedness) do not
follow the expectations of theories like competitive exclusion. In addition to
expanding her molecular and computational skills, the fellow aims to improve
accessibility and safety in field work by developing workshops and resources to
start conversations about field safety among researchers at all career stages.
She also plans to establish a pollinator monitoring program at the Lady Bird
Johnson Wildflower Center in Austin, TX to engage community members and support
pollinator conservation through accessible science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.