* 2305427
* Deciphering the Subantarctic South Pacific Ocean’s Role in Pleistocene Climate Evolution with IODP Expedition 383 Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Jesse Farmer, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 342,538.00

The Southern Ocean is a key element of the global climate system. It is home to
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, the fastest ocean current on Earth. As a
strong carbon sink, it represents an important shield against some of the
effects of human-caused greenhouse gas emissions. However, the processes driving
the Southern Ocean’s variability are still poorly known. This project will
investigate the role of the South Pacific in the climate system over the past 2
million years. It will do so using sediment cores recovered during a recent
drilling expedition on the Joides Resolution. The project will generate records
of surface ocean conditions that can inform our understanding of the capacity of
the ocean to take up carbon dioxide and store it in the deep ocean. The
geosciences are the STEM field with the least participation from
underrepresented minorities. The project will use a cohort student program to
actively promote diversity and broadened participation. Under the guidance of a
psychology professor, the project will create an environment that enhances
engagement, learning and innovation through diversity. A goal of this cohort
approach is to shift geoscience education from a style based on gatekeeping to
one that that is inviting and supportive of people from diverse backgrounds.

The climate science community’s understanding of Earth’s long-term climate
evolution predominantly comes from Northern Hemisphere climate records. Given
the central role of the Southern Ocean in the global climate system and its
proximity to the Antarctic Ice Sheet, the Southern Hemisphere data gap severely
inhibits our ability to understand global changes in ocean-atmosphere-ice sheet
dynamics and carbon cycling during major climatic transitions. Records from the
South Pacific are especially valuable to improve our understanding of these
processes, because the Pacific contains by far the largest surface area and
volume fraction of the Southern Ocean and therefore holds the largest capacity
for carbon storage in the deep ocean. This project proposes to generate high-
resolution climate proxy time series over the past 2 million years with emphasis
across the Mid-Pleistocene Transition (MPT) using new sediment cores recovered
during Expedition 383. These long records will explore changes in climate/carbon
dynamics at the ocean surface by reconstructing dust input, nutrient
utilization, and export production and these records will be synthesized and
interpreted with collaborators’ records of sea surface temperature, water mass
structure and circulation. Drawing from expertise across three US institutions,
the project will produce an unprecedented suite of complementary biological and
geochemical tracers at three drill sites (U1539, U1540, and U1541) in the
Subantarctic Pacific.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.