* 2305993
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Plant plasticity in response to climatic variability and drought stress
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Haley Branch, Branch, Haley A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
seeks to understand the biological mechanisms behind drought tolerance in plants
and will advance knowledge about the ability of plant populations to adapt to
drought. This is important because as the climate warms, drought becomes more
common. The Fellow will examine plant responses by assessing changes in whole
plants, both structures above the ground and in the roots, that can prevent
dehydration. Little is currently known about these responses, which makes this
vital research for understanding plant vulnerability to future climates. In
addition to the scientific research, the Fellow will assess the accessibility of
long-term ecological research stations in the United States to create a database
of sites where accessible fieldwork can be performed. This will assist disabled
researchers to determine where they can participate in fieldwork. The Fellow
will also educate station leaders around disability issues and provide potential
avenues for improvements.

Populations with large geographical ranges generally occupy diverse
environments, making them excellent candidates for studying adaptive differences
to climatic variability. Mimulus guttatus, yellow monkeyflower, is a model
organism for examining plant adaptation and this species will be used to assess
genetic and phenotypic differences that confer drought tolerance or
vulnerability across populations. Seeds of Mimulus guttatus from range-wide
populations will be grown in a common greenhouse environment and exposed to wet
or dry treatments. The timing of life history and photosynthetic performance of
plants will be broadly characterized, and the exposure of different treatments
will allow for the assessment of plasticity of these traits. A subset of plants
will be grown in agar to assess root-level adaptation to drought stress,
examining architecture and cellular structure. Root and leaf tissues will be
collected throughout developmental stages and analyzed for differences in
genetic expression using RNA-seq to help explain drought response modulation.
Populations that are found in more stable mesic areas will likely be less
drought-adapted than populations from drier or more variable climates. The
Fellow will be trained in a collaborative environment from experts in plant
physiology, evolutionary genetics, and phylogenomics. The Fellow will also
advise undergraduate students on independent research related to this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.