* 2305190
* RUI: Developing Predictive Guidelines to Stabilize Gold Nanoparticles with Peptoids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amelia Fuller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Amelia A. Fuller of Santa Clara
University will prepare new molecules and investigate their ability to stabilize
gold nanoparticles in water. Gold nanoparticles have unique properties that make
them important and versatile materials for medical diagnostics, for example. To
function in water-rich environments for these applications, gold nanoparticles
need to coated with specially tailored molecules. The molecular coatings are
designed to prevent nanoparticles from forming insoluble, non-functional
aggregates. Professor Fuller and undergraduate research assistants in her
laboratory will investigate the use of a class of molecules called peptoids for
their capacity to coat gold nanoparticles. Dozens of peptoids with different
molecular properties will be synthesized and purified. The ability of each of
these to prevent nanoparticle inactivation through aggregation will be measured.
The research team will determine the specific molecular features of peptoids
that confer optimal stability to the nanoparticles. Undergraduate students who
participate in the research will cultivate their technical and problem-solving
skills. Many of these students will be engaged through introductory-level
coursework that incorporates research training. These experiences will equip a
large cross-section of students with proficiencies they need for successful
careers in science.

Colloidal gold nanoparticles are versatile materials that have found wide-
ranging applications that leverage their extraordinarily sensitive optical
properties. To function in environmentally and physiologically relevant aqueous
conditions, gold nanoparticles must be surface-modified with capping ligands.
Ideal capping ligands form a well-packed layer on the nanoparticle surface that
solubilizes the nanoparticle in aqueous media and shields the core from the
salts and proteins that cause them to agglomerate. In this project, Professor
Amelia A. Fuller and her group at Santa Clara University will prepare new
capping ligands based on the peptoid (N-substituted glycine) scaffold, and
investigate their ability to stabilize gold nanoparticles in water. Sequence-
specific peptoids that incorporate a wide diversity of functional groups will be
prepared. Their ability to stabilize gold nanoparticles of varied sizes will be
evaluated. Ultimately, the Fuller laboratory aim to identify critical molecular
features of peptoid capping ligands that confer optimal stability to gold
nanoparticles. If successful, this understanding will enable the use of peptoid-
capped nanoparticles in a wide variety of sensing and diagnostic applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.