* 2305651
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Overcoming Barriers to Wild Species Improvement through Genetic Analysis of an Evolutionary Novelty in the Solanum
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Satterlee, Satterlee, James W
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
James Satterlee is ‘Overcoming barriers to wild species improvement through
genetic analysis of an evolutionary novelty in the Solanum’. The host
institution for the fellowship is the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Zachary Lippman.

How do genetic differences result in the evolutionarily novel traits observed
across the tree of life, such as flowers in flowering plants or limbs in
vertebrate animals? This research will address this question using the plant
genus Solanum as a model system. Solanum contains familiar major crop species
such as tomato, potato, and eggplant. Unlike tomato and potato however, the
lineage that gave rise to eggplant evolved sharp prickles on their surface to
deter herbivores. During the domestication of eggplant and other closely related
regionally important crops, breeders selected cultivars lacking prickles. Using
this trait variation as a starting point, this work will first identify the
genes that control the development of prickles and then seek to address which
types of genetic changes occurred to allow these genes to take on their new
function(s). Practically, an understanding of the genetic control of prickle
development will allow the rapid engineering of desirable prickle-less lines in
agriculturally useful Solanum species. This project will include a public
outreach component involving short-form scientific videos for social media
dissemination as well as a yearly course open to the public on genome editing
and crop improvement.

The underlying genetic changes that give rise to phenotypic novelty remain
poorly understood. Evolution of new gene function can be driven by changes in
the cis-regulatory DNA sequence surrounding the gene coding sequence. Such
sequence changes may allow a gene to take on a new expression pattern,
conferring function in a new place or time while avoiding potential pleiotropic
effects of coding sequence mutations. In this way, it is hypothesized that
ancestral gene functions may be redeployed in a new context to produce
morphological novelty with a conserved molecular toolkit. This research will
test this hypothesis through an investigation of the genetic basis for the
evolution of prickles, a relatively recent (~16 My old) morphological
innovation, in the agriculturally important genus Solanum. New high-quality
genome assemblies will be leveraged to map and identify genes involved in
prickle development in multiple species. Next, this work will aim to understand
how these genes were recruited into the prickle developmental pathway using a
combination of single-cell transcriptomics, open chromatin profiling, and
comparative genomic analysis to link prickle-associated gene expression patterns
to their underlying regulatory basis. Genome editing will be used to verify the
functions of candidate genes and their cis-regulatory sequences. Finally,
heterologous expression of candidate drivers of prickle development will
determine their sufficiency and relevance to the evolutionary emergence of
novelty. Together, this work will advance understanding of the emergence of
innovative traits in evolution and may suggest routes for the synthetic
engineering of novel morphologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.