* 2305276
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Soil Carbon Biogeochemistry Under a Changing Climate: Current and Future Alterations from Forest Fires
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2026
* Sean Fettrow, Fettrow, Sean
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Fettrow’s project entitled “Soil Carbon Biogeochemistry Under a Changing
Climate: Current and Future Alterations from Forest Fires” investigates the
impacts forest fires have on the forest carbon cycle. Forests protect against
rapid climate change and global warming because trees remove carbon dioxide
(CO2) from the atmosphere during photosynthesis. Some of this carbon is stored
belowground in soil from root growth, carbon that “leaks” out of the roots and
from leaf litter. Over time, carbon in forest soils has built up to be one of
the largest active reservoirs of stored carbon, but climate change has put this
carbon reservoir at risk. During a forest fire, which are becoming more frequent
and intense due to climate change, some of the carbon in the soil is released
back to the atmosphere as the forest burns. In addition, the biology and
chemistry of soil changes after a forest fire, changing how forests function.
The significance of this project is that it will allow for a better
understanding of how the forest carbon cycle is changed by forest fires,
particularly as forest fires become more common with climate change. These
findings will advance Earth science and may lead to improved forest management
and climate policy. In addition, part of Dr. Fettrow’s professional development
plan is to help motivate and train the next generation of scientists by
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students in the field and lab, particularly
students from underrepresented communities and first-gen students.

The main goals of the project are to (1) determine how forest fires affect
belowground soil carbon and biogeochemistry (i.e., biological, and geochemical
reactions affecting soil carbon cycling), (2) resolve uncertainty surrounding
the magnitude of soil carbon loss during a forest fire (3) and investigate how
forest fire affected soils and their carbon storage capacity is altered. These
goals will be accomplished by conducting integrated laboratory and field
experiments across multiple temporal and spatial scales, using basic soil, gas
and water biogeochemical analyses paired with state-of-the-art facilities such
as the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. These experimental activities
and research findings will benefit both science and society. First, the results
will help improve Earth System Models (ESMs) that predict global carbon feedback
loops and cycles, particularly under a changing climate. This information will
also improve fundamental understanding of soil biogeochemistry with global
change. Second, findings will be useful for land managers and policy makers
developing natural climate solution programs and improving climate mitigation
policy aimed at protecting and restoring our valuable forests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.