* 2305491
* CAREER: Automated and Efficient Machine Learning as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Feng Yan, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2026
* USD 293,522.00

Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) is an emerging computing paradigm that
provides optimized execution of machine learning tasks, such as model design,
model training, and model serving, on cloud infrastructure. Explosive growth in
model complexity and data size along with the surging demands of MLaaS is
already resulting in substantial increases in computational resource and energy
requirements. Unfortunately, existing MLaaS systems have poor resource
management and limited support for user specified performance and cost
requirements, exacerbating waste in computing resources and energy. This project
aims to utilize the unique features of MLaaS to design efficient, automated, and
user-centric MLaaS systems. This approach will significantly reduce resource
waste and shorten the model design cycles through a variety of novel
optimization approaches and by eliminating candidate models that fail to meet
model serving latency and target accuracy. To support complete MLaaS workflow,
this project will also develop MLaaS model serving methodologies that can meet
service level latency requirements with minimum resource consumption using
intelligent autoscaling.

This project has the potential to tremendously reduce the resource and energy
consumptions as well as the carbon footprint associated with the fast-growing
societal demands in machine learning and cloud computing. Important insights and
technologies will be produced targeting resource management and energy saving of
the next-generation machine learning systems and cloud infrastructure. The
findings of this project will also contribute to related fields of parallel and
distributed systems, performance evaluation and optimization, and green
computing. This project will carry out substantial integrated education
activities including new course and online education development, integration of
industry feedback in education. Additionally, the work will impact undergraduate
and graduate students by training them in the art of system optimization
combined with the latest machine learning domain knowledge while combining
outreach and engagement of students from underrepresented groups and especially
women.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.