* 2305832
* Study of Instabilities in Phase Transitions, Shell Buckling, and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yury Grabovsky, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 325,438.00

Energy minimization principles can often be used to explain what is observed in
nature, such as instabilities - phenomena where small changes in the environment
cause large quantitative or even qualitative changes. This project considers
energy methods to analyze three types of instability relevant to applications.
The first type concerns phase transformations in solids, which underly shape
memory effects and other applications of smart materials, with a focus on
stability of phase boundaries, to improve the ability of identifying critical
strains at the onset of phase transitions. The second is buckling, where the
failure of a slender structure occurs abruptly, after the critical stress
threshold has been crossed. Slender structures play an increasingly important
role in the technological world, delivering light-weight and highly functional
devices. However, a full understanding of their extreme sensitivity to
imperfections is not yet available in both mechanics and engineering. One
specific goal of the project is to shed light on the buckling of axially
compressed cylindrical shells, by revealing the mechanisms that allow small
imperfections of shape and load to have a dramatic effect on the critical
stress. The third instability analyzed is of a numerical type, where the
precision of measurements of properties of materials, such as electromagnetic
permittivity or electrical impedance spectrum, does not translate to equally
precise prediction of their response at much higher or much lower frequencies
than in the available data. Inspired by applications to radiology and remote
sensing, the aim is to quantify these instabilities to inform the creation of
new algorithms that reconstruct the material response characteristics with
provable optimality. The project provides research mentoring and training
opportunities for graduate students. Mathematics being developed to study
stability of phase boundaries represents a contribution to Calculus of
Variations, where the almost intractable concept of quasiconvexity plays a
central role. The research project will develop tools needed to gain insight
into the structure of quasiconvex envelopes. Notwithstanding the fact that
quasiconvexity in general defies any meaningful general attack, the information
this research will deliver will be of direct practical importance, permitting
exact or approximate relaxations of specific energies, and will provide a
provably complete set of practically accessible information. The investigation
of buckling of cylindrical shells will create a new set of theoretical
predictions to be compared with experiment. The key feature of these predictions
is the quantitative description of mechanisms of instability responsible for the
discrepancy between the classical buckling load and the experimentally observed
ones. Theoretical issues pertaining to more general shells will also be
addressed. Stieltjes functions form a special class of analytic functions
virtually ubiquitous in physics. Quantitative understanding of such functions
will contribute to practical algorithms for reconstructing material responses,
such as complex electromagnetic permittivity of dielectric media and complex
impedance of electrical circuits. A new investigation into the properties of
completely monotone functions will complement and expand the current scant
knowledge about this important class of functions. Applications to more
efficient processing of radiology and remote sensing data are anticipated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.