* 2305465
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Is there a taphonomic clock? Assessing the progression of terrestrial bone alterations across environments and time
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Rachel Laker, Laker, Rachel
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Rachel Laker has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities at the University
of Cincinnati under the mentorship of Dr. Joshua Miller and at South Dakota
School of Mines under the mentorship of Dr. Sarah Keenan. In this fellowship,
Dr. Laker will investigate the accumulation and morphology of taphonomic damage
(cracks, microbial tunnels, and other damage that occurs after death but before
burial) on bones as related to the time of decay and loss of the organic
collagen. Taphonomic damage on bones is often used to estimate how much time is
represented by different bone and fossil accumulations, which is critical
information when comparing faunas from different ages or localities. The rates
at which taphonomic damage accumulates are largely unknown. Actualistic
experiments are generally evaluated over limited amounts of time (weeks to
perhaps decades) and frequently yield rates of destruction that conflict with
observations from bones found on natural landscapes, which can persist from
years to millennia. To better understand how taphonomic damage forms, and
quantify the rates at which it occurs, Dr. Laker will measure the taphonomic
damage accumulated on caribou antlers that have been decaying across several
millennia (evaluated using radiocarbon dating). To increase science engagement
and cultural connectivity, on a regular basis Dr. Laker will virtually engage
with the Gwich’in Native Alaskan community bordering the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge. Dr. Laker will continue to serve the geosciences community as
an advocate for belonging, accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and
inclusion values through undergraduate mentorship and professional service.

This project aims to constrain our understanding of the physical manifestation
and rates of taphonomic damage of bone on timescales ranging from years to
millennia. Dr. Laker will (1) define the expression and variation of taphonomic
alterations of a single environmental setting, including variability associated
with collagen preservation and differences in bone construction, then (2) test
the consistency of these findings, including the rates and morphologies of
taphonomic alterations, across a latitudinal gradient. By integrating
microscopic and macroscopic scales of analysis to improve our understanding of
the formation of ubiquitous but poorly understood taphonomic features, this work
will address shortcomings in taphonomic laboratory and field experiments to
contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the links between time and
taphonomic degradation of bone. This research will generate a toolkit for
assessing the time represented by faunal assemblages of different environments,
enhancing paleoecological comparisons of paleontological records.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.