* 2305481
* NSF PRFB FY23: Cross-species gene regulation of a plant-fungal symbiosis under environmental stress
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Damian Hernandez, Hernandez, Damian
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 02/28/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. About 75% of all land plants partner with just
one type of fungus, "arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi". This relationship shapes how
plants get nutrients and how whole ecosystems function. Whether this
relationship is useful for plants depends on environmental factors like nutrient
availability. For example, fungi often help plants when nutrients are scarce,
but can harm plants when plants can easily get nutrients on their own.
Unfortunately, the genes that control when this relationship harms or helps
plants are not well-known. Knowing which genes determine when fungi benefit
plants will be vital to using fungi in agriculture and biodiversity efforts. The
fellow will use large gene surveys, greenhouse experiments, and microscopy to
explore how plants and fungi impact each otherâ€™s genes under different
conditions. The fellow also proposes broadening participation in biology by
continuing to mentor students from diverse backgrounds and organizing career
development seminars for students. These seminars will provide necessary
knowledge for applying to careers in STEM.

The fellow will identify genetic regulation occurring across species (i.e.,
plant genes that regulate fungal genes and vice versa) to understand how plants
and fungi co-regulate their relationship in different environmental conditions.
The fellow will satisfy this objective in three aims: 1) the fellow will explore
how environmental stress reorganizes co-expression patterns of plant and fungal
genes using gene co-expression networks, 2) the fellow will use plant growth
assays of the model legume Medicago trunculata missing potentially important
regulatory genes (i.e., genes with many connections in the above networks)
with/without arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi under different stresses, and, lastly,
3) the fellow will grow Medicago truncatula with 19 different characterized
fungal isolates to explore how genetic/functional diversity of fungal partners
impacts context-dependency of plant-mycorrhizal associations. Through the
completion of this project and working closely with Drs. John Stinchcombe and
Vasilis Kokkoris, the fellow will: 1) refine his training in next-generation
sequencing and multivariate statistics, 2) gain skills in fungal biology and
fungal assays, and 3) develop as a mentor through teaching biology courses and
developing courses through his professional development seminar series.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.