* 2305876
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Priority Effects Within and Between Guilds of Fungal Symbionts
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2024,06/30/2026
* Kylea Garces, Garces, Kylea Rose
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This study
will untangle the complexities of plant-fungal relationships and the way below-
ground fungi assemble. Specifically, as multiple fungi colonize the same plant
host, priority effects, or the order in which specific fungal species arrive,
may alter the ability of other fungi to colonize, which will have varying
outcomes for the host plant. This experiment will manipulate arrival order of
different fungal species and across fungal guilds to evaluate both fungal
community outcomes and their influence on plant growth, reproduction, and
nutrient content. The research outcomes can help to predict the appropriate
symbiont to add to a community based on restoration goals. The Fellow will lead
efforts to examine traditional grading systems that often induce barriers for
diverse individuals in STEM. The Fellow will lead a faculty learning community
focused on alternative assessment strategies and then implement these strategies
in their own courses; a peer-reviewed education manuscript will be written to
enhance teaching and learning at broad scales. Fungal symbionts are ubiquitous
in nature and play considerable roles in determining host plant fitness. It is
known that priority effects can shape community assembly, especially considering
two-species systems, yet less is known about the importance of order arrival as
communities become more complex in multi-symbiont interactions. The Fellow will
evaluate the order of arrival of fungi within an abundant native grass species,
Schizachyrium scoparium, across North America to determine how mycobiome
community assembly affects plant hosts. The Fellow will characterize mutualistic
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) and root endophytic fungi from a prairie
restoration. To evaluate within guild assembly, the study will manipulate the
order of introduction of unique species of AMF or root endophytes on
Schizachyrium in a growth chamber experiment. As plants host multiple symbionts,
the Fellow will then look at priority effects across guilds by altering order
arrival of AMF, root endophytes and vice versa to evaluate fungal community
outcomes and their respective influence on host plant growth. The project will
allow the Fellow to hone skills on the mechanisms that drive microbial
communities. The broadening participation efforts contribute to classroom
settings by improving conventional grading systems and retaining
underrepresented minorities in scientific disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.