* 2305814
* Research Infrastructure: Installation of solar infrastructure to enhance research capacity and resilience to disturbance at El Verde Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Jess Zimmerman, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 920,880.00

The goal of this project is to enhance research and education capacity at El
Verde Field Station (EVFS) via installation of a solar system and batteries for
self-sufficient energy generation. EVFS is located in the Luquillo Experimental
Forest, Puerto Rico. It is administered by the University of Puerto Rico and is
one the principal sites of the Luquillo Long-term Ecological Research Program.
The station is an essential resource for scientists, staff, and students from
Puerto Rico and the United States who rely on EVFS for safe, hospitable, and
affordable lodging, direct access to remote field sites, and the use of
specialized equipment to accomplish their research and education objectives. It
serves as a hands-on training center for students at the K-12, undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral levels, contributing to a globally competitive and
diverse STEM workforce. EVFS has been without reliable electricity since
Hurricanes Irma and Maria knocked out the electric grid in September 2017,
functioning since then in a reduced capacity on generator power. Installing a
solar system and batteries will result in site-based power generation and
storage to meet the electricity needs of EVFSâ€™ facilities. This will ensure the
continuation of critical research and education projects and enable new lines of
scientific inquiry in the field of tropical forest ecology. The solar
infrastructure will also make for a more self-sustaining station that is
resilient to future power outages and demonstrate how sustainable electricity
generation can support and advance publicly funded ecological science.

The project involves installation of a 73.35 kW DC / 56.887 kW AC solar system
and 224 kWhr of battery storage at EVFS that will provide up to 73% of annual
electricity needs including all essential office, laboratory, and dormitory
equipment. It will be integrated with the existing electric infrastructure so
that there is redundancy in electricity generation and the station is buffered
from large-scale disturbances such as hurricanes. The panels will be mounted on
the roofs of several existing structures at the station, which will require
installation of a standing seam roof and repair of an interior ceiling in one
building. Batteries, inverters, and associated hardware will be located in a new
storage room built for this purpose. Funding will cover costs for a shade study
and integrated electrical assessment, engineering designs for the roof and
storage room, environmental assessment, clearing and grubbing, construction of
the roof and storage room, installation of the solar system, purchase of energy
efficient appliances, and purchase of a digital display for communication with
visitors about project and real-time energy generation. The completed solar
system will be maintained by UPR staff and will support and enhance ecological
research and education in Puerto Rico for current and future generations. This
award by the Division of Biological Infrastructure is jointly supported by the
Division of Environmental Biology LTER program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.