* 2305728
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Assessment of interactions between nectarivorous birds and flowering plants to investigate pollination loss in Hawaiian forests
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Samuel Case, Case, Samuel B
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will investigate pollination loss in Hawaiian forests, which have experienced
high rates of species extinction and invasion by non-native species. For
instance, most native nectar-feeding birds in the Hawaiian Islands have gone
extinct, and plants that depend on these birds for pollination may be at risk
for extinction from the loss of their bird partners. The Fellow will closely
examine bird-plant interactions, using film and 3D scans of bird bills and
flower tube shapes, to predict the impacts of bird pollinator loss on Hawaiian
plants. To broaden participation, the fellow will conduct surveys and analysis
to understand and start to resolve barriers that LGTBQIA+ biologists face in
STEM careers and involve native Hawaiians in the research.

Pollination often depends on mutualistic interactions with nectar-feeding
animals (hereafter nectarivores), in which nectarivores transfer pollen between
plants while collecting the sugary reward. Nectarivores and plants may coevolve
to exhibit matched functional traits, such as coupled bird bill and floral tube
shapes, increasing the specificity and benefits of their interactions. When
traits are mismatched, however, species may fail to interact, or interactions
may negatively impact plants. Hawaiian lobelioids (Campanulaceae), which have
coevolved with nectarivorous Hawaiian birds, may be pollination-limited due to
bird species loss. Nevertheless, historic plant-pollinator interactions are
largely unknown, and it is uncertain whether extant nectarivores (native and
introduced) may potentially compensate for bird extinctions by maintaining
pollination processes. Thus, a mechanistic model is needed for identifying
interaction outcomes for plant-nectarivore species pairings. The Fellow will
simulate interactions from three-dimensional (3D) digital models of birds and
flowers, in order to investigate how trait-matching metrics derived in 3D can be
linked to pollen transfer in wild-filmed interactions. The Fellow will then
predict outcomes for potential extinct and extant interactions to estimate
mutualism loss and validate models with tests of seed viability. Further, the
Fellow will conduct social science research to disentangle barriers to LGBTQIA+
scientists in biology professions. The research will involve a survey for
LGTBQIA+ biologists across professional levels in academia, government, and
industry, and work groups designed to increase LGTBQIA+ representation,
explicitly at the postdoctoral level. The Fellow will also launch a research
training program for native Hawaiians pursuing careers in biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.