* 2305773
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2027
* Joely DeSimone, DeSimone, Joely
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. During spring
migration, hundreds of individuals of migrating birds arrive at stopover sites
under extreme energetic demands and time constraints, while the residents they
encounter are preparing to breed. Though largely unknown, the interactions
between resident and migrating birds in these landscapes are likely common and
intense. Residents could provide crucial social information about habitat
quality to migrating birds in unfamiliar landscapes or competitively exclude
migrants from refueling sites. Furthermore, climate change has induced species-
specific changes in the timing of migration and reproduction, potentially
creating novel community assemblages and transforming migrant-resident
interactions during stopover. The Fellowâ€™s proposed studies will be among the
first to investigate migrant-resident interactions during stopover and will
significantly advance our understanding of (1) migration ecology and climate
change biology, fields that have tended to focus on species- and population-,
rather than community-, level questions; (2) avian physiology, which typically
treats migration and breeding as two distinct phases, overlooking how their
overlap may significantly affect behavior and species interactions; and (3)
community ecology with its central theories of competition and species
coexistence that are not usually extended to compositional changes at such short
time scales. The Fellow aims to broaden participation in STEM through the
development of a near-peer mentoring program for biology undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdocs in a rural Appalachian community.

Using 60 years of data from a long-term migration monitoring banding station,
the Fellow will compare historical and current stopover community compositions
and species social networks to test whether species-specific changes in
migration phenology have altered community assemblages and migrant-resident
interactions. In the field, the Fellow will use playback of resident songs to
test for the role of social information or competition between residents and
incoming migrants, and the extent to which species interactions depend on
migrant energetic and reproductive condition. The project will also leverage
long-term banding data to assess whether resident space use, body condition, and
social network associations change during periods of high migrant abundance. The
Fellow will receive training in a range of research techniques, gain mentoring
experience, and expand her professional network. The near-peer mentoring program
will help participants gain academic skills, mentoring experience, a community
of peers, and a deeper understanding of barriers to participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.