* 2305518
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Linking soil nitrogen enrichment to mineral weathering and associated organic matter persistence
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2024,04/30/2026
* Amelia Fitch, Fitch, Amelia A
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Soils store a huge amount of organic matter - more than the atmosphere or land
combined! Soil organic matter is mostly made up of carbon, and if it becomes
available to microbes living in the soil, they will “eat” this organic matter
and respire carbon dioxide (CO2). As the climate crisis continues to alter local
temperatures and precipitation, we want to understand how the SOM will stay in
the ground instead of being released to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. One
mechanism that helps carbon stay in the soil, which we call SOM persistence, are
positive and negative charges between SOM particles and minerals, which come
from rocks broken into tiny pieces. The process of breaking rocks down into
minerals that help protect SOM from microbes is called weathering. In soils
where the bedrock, or parent material, has a lot of minerals, these minerals can
be released with increasing amounts of moisture, temperature, and acids that
flow through the soil. Nitric acid is a naturally produced acid from biological
nitrogen (N) fixation, which plants like peas and beans with their symbiotic
bacteria can do. Across soils that have a lot of N fixing plants, more nitric
acid may have helped to weather parent material and release minerals that can
help protect SOM, leading to more carbon persistence. This project will
investigate the relationship between rock weathering by nitric acid and how it
relates to soil C storage from shallow to deep soils, and across ecosystems with
low and high weathered parent material. The sites chosen to study the long-term
N enrichment gradient in Oregon forests also provide an opportunity to
collaborate with ongoing outreach efforts through the Inspiring Girls
Expeditions and expand the current trips to include forest ecosystems. This
program will be a no-cost educational experience for high school students
identifying as women, non-binary, or genderqueer, and selection of students to
this program will not be based on traditional academic benchmarks such as grades
and test scores. Instead, students will be chosen based on their interest in
Critical Zone sciences and the degree to which this program may change their
futures.

The need to understand the processes that affect mineral-associated organic
matter (MAOM) formation and persistence are imperative given the importance of
SOM persistence by mineral interactions in C sequestration and storage. Though
biological nitrogen (N) fixation and anthropogenic deposition introduce
significant quantities of N in ecosystems across the globe, the effects of
nitric acid on weathering and subsequent MAOM persistence has not been studied.
The long-term goal of this research is to understand how N enrichment and nitric
acid weathering affects MAOM abundance and persistence across climates and
primary mineral weathering states. This research will quantify both MAOM
abundance under long-term soil N-enrichment and MAOM loss after short-term
nitrate and nitric acid inputs. These paired experiments will clarify how MAOM
formation and destabilization co-occur across increasing N enrichment and
between more and less weathered basalt parent material. Because deep soils store
a substantial amount of soil C, an additional aim of this proposal is to
understand SOM protection by mineral-associations and destabilization with
depth. Despite the significant gains in understanding broad patterns of MAOM and
mineral associations, key mechanistic questions remain untested. The effects of
N enrichment on MAOM constitutes a significant knowledge gap in the
understanding of MAOM formation and persistence, and consequently, soil C
storage. This proposal advances knowledge in Critical Zone science by linking
short and long-term N enrichment with fine-scale geochemical drivers of MAOM.
There is an urgent need to understand and predict how much carbon (C) can be
stored in soils and the degree to which this carbon persists. This work offers
an opportunity to improve the accuracy of MAOM predictions and the accuracy of
terrestrial C cycling models in the face of global change. By investigating MAOM
abundance in soils across a gradient of soil N, between temperate and tropical
climates, and between soils of low and high weathered basalt parent material,
these findings can apply to many ecosystems that experience N enrichment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.