* 2305157
* CAS-Climate: Workshop on Advanced Manufacturing for Industrial Decarbonization; Arlington, Virginia; Summer 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 59,800.00

Advanced manufacturing has a potential to contribute toward industrial
decarbonization through replacing or improving manufacturing processes of low
energy efficiency or high emissions using innovative technologies and utilizing
novel manufacturing methods to make products that improve energy efficiency or
reduce emissions. To unleash the full potential of advanced manufacturing for
industrial decarbonization, convergent research is required among experts in
advanced manufacturing, industrial electrification, low-carbon fuels and energy
sources, as well as carbon capture, utilization and storage, and equally
important, techno-economics, etc. This award supports a workshop on advanced
manufacturing for industrial decarbonization to be held in the Washington DC
area during summer 2023. The workshop will enable extensive domain experts to
discuss together and identify economically viable technologies for industrial
decarbonization enabled by advanced manufacturing. Results from the workshop
will be instrumental in setting coordinated priorities and strategies on
fundamental research that potentially leads to cost-effective industrial
applications. Speakers and participants with a diverse background will be
targeted, including those from underrepresented groups and representing a wide
range of institutions (e.g., minority serving, EPSCoR jurisdiction, and Non-R1
institutions).

This workshop aims at: (i) identifying gaps and challenges in advanced
manufacturing for industrial decarbonization, including thorough techno-economic
assessments, (ii) sharing perspectives from federal agencies, and (iii)
formulating recommendations for research initiatives on economically viable
decarbonization technologies. The objectives will be achieved through a set of
activities. Experts from industry, national laboratories, and academia will
present inspiring examples of advanced manufacturing for industrial
decarbonization and their techno-economic assessment. Individuals from federal
agencies will talk about their agenciesâ€™ perspectives. Panel discussions will
provide a deep dive into different topics on advanced manufacturing for
industrial decarbonization. In addition, idea presentations will be given by
other participants regarding emerging technologies in the field. A steering
committee will be formed, consisting of representatives with diverse
professional, technical and demographic backgrounds. The committee will work
with the project team on both the workshop technical content and broadening
participations, such as identifying and inviting speakers and strategizing
participant recruitments. The workshop outcomes will be summarized in a report
with wide disseminations. The findings are expected to improve coordination on
the research initiatives on advanced manufacturing for industrial
decarbonization and, therefore, promote the progress of science in the
intersection between manufacturing and decarbonization, increase the
competitiveness of the U.S. industry and better the sustainability of the
planet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.