* 2305103
* Halogen Bonding Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Christopher Palmer, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Christopher P. Palmer, Orion Berryman, and their research groups in
the Department of Chemistry at the University of Montana are developing novel
materials and approaches for use in liquid chromatography. Liquid chromatography
is used by many disciplines and industries to measure and determine the chemical
composition of mixtures. Everyday applications of liquid chromatography
addressed by this research include quality control and safety assurance of food
products and pharmaceuticals, environmental analysis, clinical medicine,
defense, and materials development and engineering. This research introduces
novel materials and methods with broad scientific, social, and economic impact,
enabling the analysis of mixtures with diverse compositions, and addressing
important challenges in separation sciences. This project provides education,
training, and development opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
with diverse backgrounds in an area of critical national need.

This project is developing, synthesizing, and characterizing novel and generally
useful liquid chromatographic stationary phase materials that utilize halogen
bonding as the interaction and retention mechanism. Distinctive characteristics
of halogen bonds, including soft-soft complementarity between the donor and
acceptor atom and a high degree of directionality, generate chromatographic
retention and separation selectivity that is distinct from traditional
separations approaches. The project involves the synthesis and characterization
of monodentate and bidentate halogen bond-donating stationary phases based on
well-characterized halogen bond donors. The collaborative Palmer-Berryman team
will characterize the performance and selectivity of these halogen bonding
stationary phases in liquid chromatography. If successful, these studies have
the potential to for significant impact, potentially expanding halogen bonding
liquid chromatography applications to the separation and analysis of
representative pharmaceuticals, peptides, and proteins in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.