* 2305020
* CDS&amp;E: Immersive Virtual Reality for Discovering Hidden Chemical Information and Improving Multivariate Modeling and Predication
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* John Kalivas, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,994.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Chemistry Division, and partial co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Human-Centered Computing
Program, Professor John Kalivas and his undergraduate group at Idaho State
University are developing new virtual reality (VR) methods of chemical data
analysis. In collaboration with the Applied Visualization Laboratory at the
Idaho National Laboratory, the Kalivas group is complementing data visualization
VR processes with tactile and auditory elements to enhance data analysis. By
including all three human senses in conjunction with the humanâ€™s unique
reasoning capabilities, it should be possible to outperform the computer in
complex data analysis situations where the computer is restricted to numerical
conclusions. There are many data analysis situations where critical decisions
must be made that are not always obvious, such as deciding if an early biopsy is
cancerous or not. In addition to medical diagnostics, the insights gained will
be useful for a broad range of other applications such as process analytical
technologies and the agriculture industry. Educational versions of the VR
programs are being developed to allow blind and deaf students to learn and
explore data science processes, bringing these students to the forefront of
machine learning technology. This part of the work is being developed in
collaboration with the Idaho Educational Services for the Deaf and Blind. The
project will provide research opportunities for undergraduates and high school
students in underserved regions of Idaho.

In this project, the Kalivas team is exploiting their recently developed
Physicochemical Response Integrated Spectral Measurement (PRISM) approach in VR.
A strategic feature of PRISM is that it is composed of hundreds of sample-wise
similarity measures based on amplifying hidden-but-essential chemical (and
physiochemical if present) properties encoded within measured spectra such as
infrared (IR), near IR, Raman, etc. Each of these similarity measures can be
incorporated as an object feature in the VR setting to fully characterize the
inherent chemical nature of a sample. A key goal of this exploratory project is
to effectively convert multidimensional chemical data to VR thereby
significantly enhancing the connection between data and discovery. Using VR to
depict data points/samples visually, haptically (touching including texture to
data shapes), and with sonification (sound for each data point), the human user
will be able to explore data in-depth to uncover hidden patterns and
corresponding chemical attributes. With such a detailed data analysis process,
improved classification and target sample predictions with better explanations
or interpretations of sample relationships should be possible. All developed
algorithms will be posted to the Kalivas web site, allowing free access to
potential users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.