* 2305066
* Adsorbent Materials for Liquid Phase Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Luis Colon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 457,080.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Luis A. Colón and his research group at SUNY Buffalo are
developing innovative organo-silica adsorptive materials. These materials are an
essential component in separation methodology used in chemical analysis, which
in turn is central to chemical, biological, environmental, pharmaceutical, and
other related sciences. The materials are based on silica structures and
designed to have useful physicochemical characteristics with the goal of
improving the currently used separation media, with consideration in the
chemical analysis of contaminants. The research approach is targeting a flexible
platform on which different separation materials could be synthesized, bringing
new possibilities for their use in specific practical applications. The research
activities will engage graduate and undergraduate students, including members of
traditionally underrepresented groups, providing advanced training and skills in
chemical analysis necessary for the modern-day workforce in the academic,
pharmaceutical, and industrial chemical sectors. The research project is focused
on the synthesis and the physicochemical characterization of organo-silica
adsorbent materials. The adsorbent will be synthesized on core magnetic
nanoparticles and core silica particles to be used in magnetic solid phase
extraction (SPE) and in liquid chromatography (LC). The adsorbent material will
consist of a silica-hybrid that will have a characteristic fibrous/dendritic-
type structure, while containing azide-chemical functionalities at the surface,
serving as a platform to react with chemical entities that will alter the
surface chemical composition of the material via “click” chemistry (copper-
catalyzed azide-alkyne cyclocondensation). The organo-silica surface will be
modified with chemical functionalities (e.g., fluorocarbons, ion exchangers, and
polar moieties) that will provide a set of different mixed-mode interactions in
liquid phase separations. Through a systematic evaluation, using well-
established techniques (e.g., infrared spectroscopy, elemental analysis, gas
adsorption analysis, and scanning electron microscopy) the physicochemical
properties of the materials will be established. LC and SPE will be used to
examine the chromatographic and adsorptive performance of the newly synthesized
materials, which will include the use of standard protocols to assess the
selectivity and stability of the materials. The project holds promise for
advancing knowledge in the field of adsorbent materials for use in separation
methods. The new materials will be used in chemical analysis, for example, in
the analysis of pollutants and pharmaceutical compounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.