* 2305455
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing climate resilient food technologies (HI, USAPI)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Erik Franklin, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Florence Rabanal
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,926.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on catalyzing an
ecosystem for translational research that increases sustainable food production
and economic expansion in Hawaii's aquaculture, fisheries, and agriculture
sectors. This Development Award integrates Indigenous knowledge systems and
scientific technologies to generate food products and services to respond to the
challenges of food insecurity among underserved communities, an over-reliance on
food imports, and the burgeoning effects of climate change. The team's partners
represent the strongest possible contributors in the region to achieve the
proposed work - a diverse group of innovators and entrepreneurs, academic
institutions, businesses, governments, and investment organizations that provide
a significant influence within the multibillion-dollar regional food industry
and support activities that contribute to national and global economic impacts.

This Development Award will enable a regional effort in food system innovations
that promotes a robust culture of innovation, diversity, equity, inclusion, and
accessibility. Novel approaches to food production from agriculture, fisheries,
and aquaculture, including indigenously-managed land and aquatic resources, are
supported to directly supply markets to address issues of equity and justice and
provide working implementations of food system models for regional economic
development and diversification. The region currently houses numerous talented,
early-stage food system start-ups and research activities, which are anticipated
to expand in the scope of innovation, the scale of activity, and the number of
businesses through the Development Award. To fuel this expansion, building a
workforce for resilient food systems is critical for sustained growth. The team
will engage with a collective of 18 Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) that
serve Native Hawaiians, Asian Americans, and Pacific Islanders to identify
existing programs, fill current gaps in the education landscape, train a skilled
labor force, and launch future waves of entrepreneurs for long-term growth in
food production. The Development Award will enable the team to prepare for an
NSF Engine by supporting a two-year process to assess, plan, and coordinate
activities among partners that allows a comprehensive evaluation of resources,
opportunities, and challenges to inform the goals, structure, and operations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.