* 2305224
* Collaborative Research: The Weirdest Stars in the Universe: Illuminating the Origins and Evolution of Thorne-Zytkow Objects
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Levesque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 443,632.00

Some of the weirdest stars in the universe are called Thorne-Zytkow objects, or
TZOs. They represent a completely new model for how the insides of stars can
work, a new possible fate for binary star systems, and a new way to produce
heavy elements. This research program will carry out an in-depth study of TZOs.
The investigators will run computer simulations of the binary star systems that
might form TZOs and use some of the planet's largest telescopes to search for
TZOs. In addition to learning more about these mysterious stars, this research
will transform our understanding of cold and massive stars and explain how they
evolve, die, and enrich the chemistry of our universe. The investigators will
work closely with high school students on short research projects that can be
presented at regional or state science fairs.

Thorne-Zytkow objects combine the outward appearance of red supergiants - cold
and luminous massive stars - with strange neutron cores supported not by
standard stellar fusion, but by extreme quantum physics. The formation and
evolution of a TZOs is key for understanding this novel model of supporting a
cool luminous exterior with a neutron degenerate interior. Terminal TZO
scenarios, which could include mass-loss-driven dissipation of their outer
layers, a supernova-like explosion, or direct collapse to a black hole, are
crucial for understanding how TZOs contribute to enrichment and add to the
population of compact objects. The merger of a red supergiant and neutron star
to form a TZO is notably different from the standard scenario assumed for
massive binaries, where both stars produce compact objects and eventually merge
to generate a gravitational wave transient. Neglecting TZO formation and
evolution will lead to incorrect predictions for heavy element enrichment and an
over-prediction of gravitational wave transients. Using high-resolution
spectroscopy, advanced stellar atmosphere models tailored for cool stars, and
archival light curves of these stars, the investigators will determine whether
potential TZO candidates have the distinctive surface abundance signatures
predicted. As an integral part of this research program, the investigators will
work annually with high school students on short research projects suitable for
presentation at regional or state science fairs and develop infrastructure for
use by other potential project mentors across the field of astronomy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.