* 2305969
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Investigating the role of thermal stress response in facilitating adaptation in camel spiders
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2024,10/31/2027
* Erika Garcia, Garcia, Erika Loaiza
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Desert
organisms have evolved unique strategies to survive long periods without
nutrients, especially under stressful conditions like extreme heat.
Interestingly, unlike other desert adapted organisms, camel spiders have a high
metabolism and energy inefficient burrowing habits. The Fellow will use camel
spiders as a model to understand this unexpected biology and investigate the
molecular basis and evolution of thermal tolerance across a range of climates.
Understanding patterns of ecological adaptation, how camel spiders live in
desert conditions, is important to predict future change in some of the harshest
habitats in the world. The training objectives include acquiring new skills in
genomic sequencing and bioinformatics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and
the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. Support through this fellowship will also
provide the Fellow with opportunities for public outreach, science education,
and mentoring the next generation of aspiring scientists from underrepresented
backgrounds.

This research will investigate the association between stress-related proteins
and ecological adaptation in a group of arachnids commonly known as camel
spiders. Contrary to other arachnids, camel spiders have evolved unique
behaviors in extreme environments, thus may have evolved a completely novel
mechanism to withstand high stress environments. Differences in expression
patterns of stress proteins in response to varying levels of thermal conditions
may be facilitating adaptive divergence in this group. Using next-generation
sequencing techniques, the Fellow will 1) investigate the expression dynamics
and role of stress-related proteins in promoting diversification of camel
spiders across a climate gradient in Israel and 2) explore the functional
divergence, in a phylogenomic context, of such proteins within chelicerates to
determine if camel spiders have evolved an alternative mechanism in response to
stress. Understanding the molecular evolution of stress tolerance is essential
to predicting future impacts in changing environments. Additionally, this award
will support the Fellow in developing accessible educational material for public
outreach, K-12 students from underrepresented communities, and will support the
Fellow in creating research opportunities for undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.