* 2305615
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing sustainable agriculture technologies (WI, IA, MN)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Arjun Sanga, WiSys Technology Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Florence Rabanal
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,911.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on sustainable
agriculture innovation across Wisconsin. Globally, agricultural systems must
become more productive and resilient to feed an expected population of 10
billion by 2050. Those systems must also confront declining biodiversity,
unsustainable resource use, labor inequality, and climate change. The
agricultural sector in Wisconsin is a source of strength contributing $104.8
billion annually to Wisconsin's economy and 11.8% of the workforce. An
innovation engine dedicated to sustainable agriculture across Wisconsin will
address these global and regional challenges while nurturing healthy ecosystems
and supporting sustainable land, water, and energy management. They must balance
trade-offs between production yield, labor, water, energy, land, and climate.
This Engine Development Award builds on a partnership between the innovation and
technology management offices of the University of Wisconsin (UW) System -
WiSys, Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation (WARF), and UW-Milwaukee Research
Foundation (UWMRF). The award will leverage the WiSys VentureHome® network to
provide Wisconsin's physical and digital infrastructure to accomplish these
goals and facilitate collaboration among new and existing collaborators across
academia, industry, government, nonprofits, and farms.

The technical plans combine the latest scientific advances enriched by
traditional farmer knowledge with bold socio-economic initiatives that support
innovative new ventures and develop a tech-savvy and diverse agriculture
workforce. Farmlands across the Midwest need economically viable strategies to
reduce the impact of climate change on agricultural production, mitigate
agricultural greenhouse gas emissions, solve water quality problems, and enhance
the production of underutilized specialty crops that improve consumer health.
The subsequent NSF Engines development application attracted thirty-five
Wisconsin partners who provided letters of collaboration, including thirteen
collaborators who will pilot innovative programs through subcontracts. Together,
the network will harness use-inspired research across UW System into novel and
emerging technologies from animal and plant breeding and genetics to next-
generation sensors and digital agriculture to support improved food-production
systems based on principles of ecological intensification. Through the WiSys
VentureHome network, they will address the regional gaps in the lack of
accessible entrepreneurial support for high-tech, scalable startups, access to
early-stage risk capital, and mentorship from experienced founders. Funds from
this Development Award will serve as seed capital to supercharge existing
university-industry-nonprofit collaborations, attract and train under-
capitalized workers in non-metropolitan communities, and catalyze a new Regional
Innovation Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.