* 2305252
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic study of mesoporous carbon formation from food waste
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rajesh Shende, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 245,000.00

Over one-third of the food produced in the United States goes to waste. About
94% of this wasted food ends up in landfills, incinerators, and municipal sewage
systems. In landfills, the decomposition of food waste generates greenhouse
gases (methane and carbon dioxide) and other by-products that can cause soil,
air, and water pollution. Because food waste is a renewable source of organic
carbon that can support a circular economy, there is a critical need for novel
and cost-effective processes for converting food waste to high value products.
The overarching goal of this project is to explore the conversion of boneless/
homogenized food waste into mesoporous carbon which could be used to fabricate
electrodes for supercapacitors and energy storage applications. To advance this
goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to design, evaluate, and
optimize a novel 2-stage process which consists of a surfactant assisted
hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) of food waste to produce a hydrochar precursor
material followed thermal treatment to produce an electrode-grade mesoporous
carbon material for preparing supercapacitors with high specific surface area
(>2000 m2/g) and electrical capacitance (>275/F/g). The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the generation of new data and
fundamental knowledge to advance the conversion of food waste to mesoporous
carbon for supercapacitors and energy storage applications. Additional benefits
to society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of one graduate student at Old Dominion University and one graduate
student at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology.

Food waste is a promising resource and feedstock for advancing a circular
economy. However, there are several challenges associated with the processing
and conversion of food waste to valuable organic compounds including its high
moisture content, variable composition, and the presence of inorganic
impurities. Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC), which can utilize water as a
reaction medium, has emerged as promising process for the conversion of food
waste to high-value organic products. In this project, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) will explore the ulization of surfactant assisted HTC to
convert homogenized and boneless food waste to hydrochar followed by the thermal
treatment of the produced hydrochar to generate an electrode-grade mesoporous
carbon for supercapacitors and energy storage applications. The guiding
hypotheses of the proposed research are that 1) the self-assembly of surfactant
micelles in hydrothermal media will provide nucleation and growth sites for the
dispersed hydrochar that forms during the HTC of food waste and 2) the use of a
surfactant will open the pores of the hydrochar during thermal treatment to
improve mesoporosity, specific surface area, and ion intercalation. The specific
objectives of the research are to 1) conduct mechanistic investigations of
hydrochar formation during surfactant assisted HTC; 2) develop and validate
treatment processes to remove metallic impurities from hydrochar; 3) investigate
the chemical-thermal treatment of the synthesized and purified hydrochar to
generate mesoporous carbon; and 4) carry out a life cycle assessment (LCA) and
techno-economic analysis (TEA) to evaluate the environmental impact and economic
feasibility of producing mesoporous carbon from food waste for supercapacitor
manufacturing and energy storage applications. To implement the education and
training goals of the project, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at
Old Dominion University (ODU) and the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology (SDSMT) to 1) recruit and mentor graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups to work on the project and 2) develop and implement
outreach activities to advance diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM
education including annual workshops at ODU and SDSMT that focus on the science
and engineering of food waste conversion to high value products.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.