* 2305250
* RUI: Configuration Spaces of Flexible Polyhedral Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Thomas Hull, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 10/31/2023
* USD 225,148.00

Imagine a 3D surface made of many metal plates joined along their sides by
hinges. Could such a surface start as a large dome and be flexed into a compact
shape small enough to fit into a rocket? Could the flexing of such a surface be
controlled to act as part of a robotics mechanism? Answering questions like
these is the goal of this project. PI will develop new tools to establish a
strong connection between general 3D flexible polyhedral surfaces (which might
look like a dome, with positive curvature, or a saddle, with negative curvature)
and origami, which is folded from flat, zero-curvature paper. The folding and
unfolding of origami crease patterns has been studied heavily in recent years
for applications in engineering and physics. Bringing mathematical tools from
origami to flexible polyhedral surfaces could open up the field for practical
applications in architecture, robotics, and structure designs for outer space.
In addition, the PI will organize workshops and lectures on the topic of this
project for students, educators, and the general public, leveraging the
popularity of origami to increase interest in STEM and its intersections with
art.

This project will investigate and develop three new tools to establish
connections between flexible polyhedral surfaces and origami. The first is a
newly-discovered dual relationship between vertices in a polyhedral surface that
are elliptic (have positive discrete curvature) and hyperbolic (with negative
curvature). PI will prove that such dual vertices of degree 4 are kinematically
equivalent to each other (have the same kinematic equations) as well as to a
family of degree-4 flat-foldable origami vertices, whose kinematics are very
well-understood. The second is to establish a bijection between foldings of
general origami vertices and flat-foldable origami vertices. The third is to
find a geometric explanation for why it is so useful to parameterize the angles
at each hinge of a flexible polyhedral surface with the tangent of the half
angle; such parameterizations often linearize the configuration space of
flexible polyhedral vertices, but little is known as to why. The techniques used
to achieve these goals will include discrete differential geometry tools like
the Gauss map and new tools from origami like the midpoint normal axes of a
rigid origami vertex and projections of origami vertices into higher dimensional
foldings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.