* 2305569
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Leveraging Best Practices for Institutional Change at a Research-Intensive Hispanic-Serving Institution
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kelly Nash, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University of Texas at San Antonio’s (UTSA) ADVANCE Adaptation project is
designed to improve the workplace culture and climate for STEM faculty at a
newly minted research one university. This project is informed by an
institutional self-assessment that identified opportunities to enhance the
institution’s ability to recruit highly qualified STEM faculty to UTSA and to
ensure that they are retained and thrive professionally and personally. The
project aims to integrate essential change components into a comprehensive
institutional strategy that aligns data management, practice, and leadership to
effect systemic change. The project will implement a faculty mentoring program
to foster a culture of mentoring that supports faculty at all points in their
professional career. In addition, the project will support policy reviews and
revisions and provide training to key stakeholders. These initiatives are
evidence-based and informed by the relevant research literature and/or adapted
from other ADVANCE institutions.

The UTSA ADVANCE project will create a university level and college level Local
Change Teams that will be empowered to drive evidenced-based systemic changes
such as mentoring and policy review and revision including accountability
protocols. This project aims to develop and implement a range of coordinated
initiatives in pursuit of systemic institutional changes. The project has
support from institutional leadership, includes plans for monitoring the
effectiveness of the strategies implemented, and is designed to be sustainable.
It is anticipated that the lessons learned from the project will inform other
Hispanic-serving institutions and minority-serving institutions around the
nation in designing strategies to support equity for STEM faculty. This work is
expected to build an institutional culture of equity and improved practices that
will benefit all faculty and students at UTSA.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.