* 2305164
* Unraveling Nitrate Photochemistry in the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Cort Anastasio, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 628,430.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Drs. Cort Anastasio, Ted Hullar, and Davide Donadio from the
University of California at Davis and their teams will study the influence of
surfaces and organic molecules on nitrate photochemistry. Nitrogen oxides (NOx),
which are emitted during combustion of fossil fuels, play major roles in the
production of smog. During smog formation, NOx is converted to nitrate, which
traditionally was thought to be an unreactive final product. However, research
over the past 20 years suggests that some nitrate in the environment – such as
on surfaces or in the presence of certain carbon-containing molecules – can
absorb sunlight to very quickly reform NOx. If true, this would lead to more
smog than expected from the initial NOx emissions. The collaborative UC-Davis
team will address this discrepancy in the projected studies. This project also
includes the training of undergraduate and graduate students as well as
contributions to podcasts and fact sheets about environmental chemistry for
middle and high school students.

This project will study nitrate photochemistry on surfaces and in the presence
of organic molecules by combining computational chemical modeling with
experimental measurements in the laboratory. The modeling will leverage ab
initio molecular dynamics of the (photo)excited triplet state to unravel the
molecular pathways and free energy surface of nitrate photochemistry in
solution. This will allow predictions of nitrate quantum yields, which will be
benchmarked against published measurements. This approach will then be applied
to predict quantum yields on a variety of environmentally relevant surfaces,
which will be integrated with computed nitrate absorption spectra to estimate
nitrate photolysis rates. Simultaneously, rates of nitrate photolysis on the
same surfaces will be measured in the laboratory using newly developed
techniques to study solid-state photochemistry with monochromatic illumination.
Unlike most past studies, the measurements will also employ chemical actinometry
on the surface to better quantify photon fluxes. Then by combining the modeling
and experimental results, the team aims to establish the extent to which faster
nitrate photolysis on surfaces is due to an increase in light absorption and/or
an increase in photochemical efficiency. Using computational and experimental
approaches, this project will also assess how organic molecules impact nitrate
photolysis in solution and explore the underlying mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.