* 2305659
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Considering evolutionary responses to temperature variability when predicting risk to climate change and disease in amphibians
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Jennifer Cocciardi, Cocciardi, Jennifer M
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will address how the dual
pressures of climate change and disease interact to affect one of the most
endangered taxa on the planet, amphibians. While independently, climate change
and emerging infectious diseases present daunting challenges to species
persistence, together they can increase vulnerability by promoting pathogen
growth rates, altering host immune response, and reducing host thermal
tolerance. Most research in this area has focused on how temperature variability
can increase the risk of disease, with few studies examining if the disease
affects vulnerability to temperature extremes. Yet, understanding this is
crucial, given that temperature variability and extremes are a trademark of
climate change. This project will explore this question, as well as broaden
diversity and increase participation in the Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
field by supporting the development of an immersive summer experience for
underrepresented high school students in amphibian disease ecology.

This research will take an interdisciplinary approach to understand how the
fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) increases vulnerability to
temperature variability in an amphibian host species. To do so, this project
will quantify the relationship between disease prevalence, environment,
phenotype, and genotype in the northern cricket frog (Acris crepitans),
resulting in a predictive risk model. Specifically, the research will consider
the importance of evolutionary responses to temperature variability and extreme
events when predicting the risk to climate change and disease. The fellow will
conduct an observational survey correlating local variation in thermal traits to
Bd prevalence and microhabitat temperatures, an empirical experiment
investigating if and how Bd alters thermal physiology, and a quantitative
genetics experiment relating phenotypes to population-level genetic variance to
predict the adaptive potential of thermal traits. This project will culminate in
a predictive risk model that links Bd infection dynamics, host demography,
thermal performance, and evolution to understand population-level resilience to
changing wildlife disease dynamics under future climate change scenarios. This
project will involve training the fellow in wildlife disease ecology and disease
modeling, as well as providing opportunities to practice inclusive pedagogy
through training and outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.