* 2305863
* NSF PRFB FY23: Soil carbon allocation among mycorrhizal species under global change
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Joseph Edwards, Edwards, Joseph
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Almost all trees have helpful fungi growing on
their roots: mycorrhizas. The fungi provide nutrients from soils and, in
exchange, the trees feed these fungi carbon (sugars). Some of this carbon ends
up trapped in soils. Forest soils store a large amount of atmospheric carbon
dioxide, and mycorrhizas can help promote this carbon storage. However, we know
little about how plant and fungal species differ in their carbon and nutrient
trade economies. These differences could have major impacts on how forests are
managed to promote soil carbon storage. This research will investigate how
different plants and fungi trade carbon for nutrients and how much of this
carbon gets transferred to soils. This information will be used to test whether
mycorrhizal species can help better predict future soil carbon storage in
forests. In addition, the fellow will communicate these findings through
targeted workshops for primary school students at different age levels. The goal
of these workshops will be to increase students’ interest in science as a field
and future career path.

The fellow will investigate species effects on mycorrhizal carbon allocation at
spatially hierarchical scales ranging from the laboratory to across the
continent. The project will test the hypothesis that mycorrhizal tree and fungal
species modulate the exchange rate of carbon and nutrients based on surrounding
environmental conditions, with this economy ultimately influencing overall soil
carbon storage in forests. Using isotopic labeling, the “carbon cost” of
different mycorrhizal fungal species will be measured from cultured fungi. This
experiment will be juxtaposed by measuring belowground “carbon supply” from a
plant biodiversity experiment, where various tree species have been planted
under similar conditions. The relative variation observed among plant and fungal
species from these experiments will be compared with soil carbon measurements
taken from forests across the United States to assess the degree to which
species-level information can effectively predict soil carbon storage.
Throughout these experiments, undergraduates from diverse backgrounds will be
recruited and trained, and community outreach events will be organized focused
on youth organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.