* 2305705
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How Does Sociality Impact Evolution?
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shailee Shah, Shah, Shailee
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. It will
broaden participation of these groups in two ways: (1) by implementing a grant
writing workshop that will enhance the diversity of postdoctoral scholars in the
US, and (2) by funding the Fellow to engage in novel research investigating the
impact of sociality on evolution. Sociality—i.e., individuals living in social
groups—is widespread across animal taxa. The organization of a social group, or
its social structure, determines which group members become breeders and thus
pass their genes onto the next generation. Thus, sociality can have a
considerable impact on the genetic makeup of a population, yet this link between
sociality and evolution remains understudied. This research will leverage
variation in sociality across time and space within one species—the superb
starling—to understand how sociality can impact evolution, a fundamental process
that shapes the diversity of life on our planet.

The Fellow will use a multidisciplinary approach to investigate the relationship
between sociality and evolution. First, using a more than 20-year dataset from
nine groups of cooperatively breeding superb starlings within a population in
central Kenya, the Fellow will examine how temporal variation in social
structure, driven by the impact of rainfall on immigration and reproduction,
results in changes in allele frequencies over time. Next, using genomic data
from populations at eight sites spanning a country-wide rainfall gradient, the
Fellow will examine the impact of spatial variation in social complexity on the
relative strength of different evolutionary processes within the same species.
The project's broader impacts are designed to help demystify the “hidden
curriculum” of grant-writing for late-stage graduate students and new postdocs,
to increase participation of individuals from groups underrepresented in biology
at the postdoctoral level. The Fellow’s training will help develop an
independent research program combining behavioral ecology and population
genomics to investigate sociality in preparation for the next stage of her
academic career.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.