* 2305463
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Linking the past to the future: Using PETM fluvial records to understand the effects of climate change on rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2026
* Bolton Howes, Howes, Bolton John
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Bolton Howes has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities under the
mentorship of Dr. Akshay Mehra at the University of Washington and Dr. Brady
Foreman at Western Washington University. From providing irrigation and
nourishment for agriculture to acting as transport routes that connect inland
areas to the coasts, rivers and floodplains are critical to the functioning of
humanity and our planet. Rivers and floodplains also are highly sensitive to
changes in climate, vegetation cover, and land use. Since rivers can pose risks
to cities, agriculture, and infrastructure through flooding and the movement of
channels, it is crucial to understand how river systems will respond to ongoing
climate change. For clues about the future of rivers, geologists can turn to the
sedimentary record. The Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) represents a
significant period of rapid warming in our planet's past, analogous to the
current climatic changes. Scientists know that the environmental changes
triggered by the PETM affected sediment patterns and river behavior. For
instance, research indicates an increase in channel movement at several
locations during the PETM. Increased mobility in modern rivers could lead to
infrastructure damage, alterations in water availability, and shifts in
navigational routes. This project has two objectives: (1) to determine if the
increased channel movement during the PETM was specific to certain basins or a
widespread phenomenon, and (2) to use historical data from satellites and
surveys to ascertain if anthropogenic climate change has led to increased
migration rates of modern rivers. The findings of this project will provide
valuable insights into how humanity can better prepare for anticipated changes
in river systems over the coming century. This project will also culminate in
the development and dissemination of open-source software for 3D modeling.
Undergraduate students will be active contributors to the research, learning
skills in field geology and quantitative methods for the geosciences. Finally,
the project will foster public engagement through lectures at museums within the
field area.

This project employs a two-pronged approach to explore the impacts of climate
change on the behavior of fluvial landscapes. First, the project will utilize
traditional stratigraphic techniques in conjunction with drone-derived digital
elevation models and photo-orthomosaics to measure the morphology and size of
fluvial sandstones before, during and after the PETM in the Piceance, Hanna, and
Bighorn Basins. Three-dimensional models, created from drone imagery, will
facilitate more accurate measurements of ancient rivers geometry and improve the
estimation of uncertainty and lateral variability. These measurements will
enable the project to accurately characterize the changing fluvial dynamics
induced by the heightened temperatures and increased seasonality during the
PETM. Secondly, the project will employ historical records of modern rivers,
sourced from satellite imagery, maps, and surveys, to ascertain if anthropogenic
climate change and alterations in land use have influenced modern river
behavior. This analysis of modern rivers will determine if modern rivers have
already adjusted to the changing climate, or if (and how much) infrastructure
plans need to accommodate future change in fluvial landscape behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.