* 2305756
* CAREER: Nonsmooth Control Systems for Societal Networks with Data-Assisted Feedback Loops: Theory and Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jorge Poveda, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2027
* USD 477,423.00

The overarching goal of this CAREER proposal is to formally advance the analysis
and synthesis of hybrid and non-smooth data-assisted controllers, which are
algorithms that: (a) incorporate data-driven mechanisms in the closed-loop
system for the purpose of real-time estimation, learning, and adaptation; and
(b) are characterized by hybrid and non-smooth dynamical systems able to meet
stringent robustness, stability and transient demands that are mathematically
unachievable using smooth control techniques. The research is motivated by
technological advances that have made devices for actuation, sensing,
computation, and communication increasingly portable, inexpensive, and prevalent
in networked engineering systems, including robotic networks, the power grid,
and connected transportation systems. In these applications, the increasing
complexity of the underlying (hybrid) dynamical systems and their corresponding
decision-making problems have exposed the fundamental limitations of traditional
smooth feedback control and optimization methods. The research plan will seek to
overcome these limitations by developing a new paradigm of data-assisted network
control based on hybrid control theory for multi-agent systems deployed over
cyber-physical infrastructure. The project incorporates a strong educational and
outreach plan that will involve active recruitment and mentorship of students
from diverse backgrounds via summer enrichment camps, as well as after-school
programs for middle and high-school students. The outreach plan also includes
the development of a regional workshop in the broad areas of control and
autonomous systems, as well as active collaborations with industry and national
laboratories to inform and guide the research. The research project will
leverage recent mathematical tools developed in hybrid control theory, further
integrated and developed in three cohesive research thrusts: 1) The development
of robust data-assisted switched and non-smooth controllers able to overcome
obstructions to smooth stabilization, tracking, and optimization by switching
between multiple feedback-based algorithms that use concurrently real-time and
recorded data generated by the system under control; 2) The robust coordination
of multi-agent data-assisted controllers to synergistically exploit their
individual capabilities to obtain a desired network-wide performance, while
preserving suitable scalability properties with respect to the size of the
network and their data requirements; 3) The analysis and synthesis of strategic
data-assisted controllers for multi-agent systems where certain individual
agents systematically and dynamically manipulate their data for the purpose of
deception without inducing unstable behaviors in the closed-loop system. The
theoretical principles uncovered in the project, as well as the proposed
algorithms, will be tested and validated in realistic numerical and experimental
engineering systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.