* 2305414
* RUI: Pure and Applied Knot Theory: Skeins, Hyperbolic Volumes, and Biopolymers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Helen Wong, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 281,433.00

Knot theory is the mathematical study of entanglement of loops up to continuous
deformation. One can create a knot by taking an entangled string and connecting
the endpoints, and two knots are equivalent if one can continuously deform one
to the other, for example by bending, stretching, and passing strands inside and
through others, but without cutting or breaking the string in any way. This
project considers both theoretical problems and applications of mathematical
knot theory. One group of problems studies a family of invariants of knots
related to quantum field theory from physics. More specifically, the project
seeks to understand how the quantum invariant of a knot detects geometric
properties of the knot and the 3-dimensional spaces that can be associated with
it. The mathematical techniques from this research has potential applications to
mathematical physics and theoretical topological quantum computing. Another
group of problems concerns applications to the study of knotted proteins and
other biopolymers, some of which are known to be associated to various diseases.
The project uses knot theory techniques to develop a model that can be used to
quantify and to relate local topological complexity with biophysical processes.
The model can also be used to potentially design synthetic biopolymers with
special biophysical properties. The project includes a number of research
problems suitable for collaboration with undergraduate students, as well as
outreach and dissemination activities that seek to increase interest in
mathematics more generally. The PI has successfully involved undergraduate
students in similar research in the past and will continue to advise and
encourage students to continue careers in mathematics and related areas.

The research is split into three parts, two seek to connect quantum topology
with hyperbolic geometry and one applies knot theory to molecular biology. One
project concerns a version of the Volume Conjecture based the theory of the
Kauffman bracket skein algebra from quantum topology and its relationship to the
Teichmuller space of a surface from hyperbolic geometry. A second project
studies algebraic and geometric properties of a generalization of the Kauffman
bracket algebra which is related to the decorated Teichmuller space of a surface
with punctures. A third project involves a collaboration with a biophysicist to
study local entanglements that are held tightly in place by molecular forces in
biopolymers. The proposed knot-theoretic model would give a description of such
local entanglements, allowing one to quantify and measure changes in the local
topological complexity of biopolymers in experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.