* 2305182
* Combining Chemical Reaction with Single Cell Mass Spectrometry for Real-time Quantification of Nitric Oxide (NO) Inside Live Single Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Linda Atkinson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 410,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), Zhibo Yang and his group at the University of Oklahoma are
investigated methods for the possible detection and quantification of nitric
oxide (NO) in single cells. NO is a small molecule important for human health
and diseases. The production and concentration of NO is tightly regulated as
this is an important signaling molecule in healthy biology; deviations in NO
concentration can also potentially lead to biological dysfunction; hence methods
to accurately detect NO levels, particularly in living systems are in high
demand. Because the concentrations of NO in cells are very different from cell
to cell, meaningful studies need to be performed at the single-cell level.
However, detecting and quantifying NO in single cells is very challenging,
primarily because of its instability and low abundance (e.g., a cell diameter is
~1/10 of that of human hair). Dr. Yang and his group will design a microscale
device that can be coupled to a sensitive analytical tool, mass spectrometry
(MS). This device can directly extract NO from single cells, and then use online
chemical reactions to convert it into a stable molecule for sensitive detection
and accurate quantification using MS. This new technique can potentially offer a
new analytical tool for the measurement of oxidants such as NO at the single
level. The summer outreach program is expected to provide lesson development for
science teachers at Oklahoma high schools through school-university-community
collaborations. The products (e.g., lecture materials, lessons, and survey
results) from the outreach program will be accessible by other high schools and
general public. In addition, conducting the research will provide professional
development for undergraduate and graduate students.

NO is a small bioactive molecule playing important roles in numerous cell
functions that are relevant to neuronal signaling, immune response, and human
disease. The functions of NO are related to its abundance in cells. Due to cell
heterogeneity, which has been reported in nearly all biological systems, the
abundance of NO significantly varies from cell to cell. Quantification of NO in
individual cells could substantially improve our understanding of the functions
and mechanisms of NO in biological systems. However, these studies are very
challenging, primarily because of the extremely small size of single cells and
the reactive, diffusive nature of NO. This proposal combines chemical reactions
with single cell mass spectrometry (SCMS) to detect and quantify NO in single
cells. Cell lines will be used as model systems to produce endogenous and
exogenous NO. An established single-probe SCMS experimental setup will be
combined with off-line chemical reactions for NO measurement. The key diagnostic
reaction involves the two-electron oxidation of amlodipine (AML) to
dehydroamlodipine (DAM ). Since this reaction involves the simple removal of the
elements of "H-H" from AML, the observation of DAM is an indirect measure of NO,
and it will be important to control for other two-electron oxidation reactions
that could, in principle, produce DAM from AML. Perhaps most notably, as part of
these studies, a new device, the elongated single-probe (eSingle-probe), is
being developed and will be used for real-time reactive (rrSCMS) analysis for NO
in single cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.