* 2305663
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Leveraging Biocoronas for Enhanced Agricultural Nanotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Roxana Coreas, Coreas, Roxana
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. With climate
change and population density on the rise, global food demand is projected to
substantially increase. Nanobiotechnology offers sustainable approaches to help
supply agricultural demands by adapting nano-sized materials to monitor plant
health and to deliver nutrients or genetic material (RNA and DNA) to increase
crop yields. Plants spontaneously react to nanomaterials by forming internal
structures called biocoronas. Biocoronas can impact the effectiveness of
nanomaterials for agricultural applications, such as blocking the release of
genetic material for gene editing. To increase the potential and successful use
of nanomaterials in crops, the Fellow will characterize biocoronas, and use this
information to optimize gene-editing mediated by nanomaterials. The Fellow will
also work to promote diversity at the host institution, using social media, and
through outreach to migrant farm-worker communities.

The Fellow aims to extract and identify the in planta biocorona composition from
the surfaces of nanocarriers functionalized with genetic material, such as
silencing RNA. Enriched proteins, lipids and metabolites will be identified
through untargeted multi-omic approaches and datasets will be fed into machine
learning algorithms that can predict the in planta biocorona formation in
various agricultural crops. Moreover, these datasets will be used to develop
gene-editing nanocarriers with specific surface chemistries, such as single
protein coatings that enhance nanotechnology uptake efficacy and payload release
for post-transcriptional gene silencing, which will be validated using RT-qPCR.
The Fellow will enhance computational skills through training workshops,
organize nanobiotechnology seminars held at the host campus, and lead
informational sessions tailored to undergraduates from historically excluded
groups interested in pursuing graduate degrees in STEM. The Fellow will
disseminate the results of this project at specialized international scientific
conferences and through social media platforms. Given that this project involves
the development of agricultural biotechnologies, the Fellow plans to create a
mentorship-based organization that conducts scientific outreach to students from
migrant farm-worker communities, which has the benefit of exposing youth from
undeserved neighborhoods to research directly relevant to their communitiesâ€™
interests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.