* 2305946
* Collaborative Research: From Global to Local: Geochemistry of Global Phosphate Ores and Implications for Tracing the Environmental Impacts of Fertilizers Utilization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Avner Vengosh, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 140,724.00

Phosphorus (P) is one of the primary macronutrients essential for plant growth
and crop production, and thus its availability is important for sustainable
agriculture development and food security. Approximately 47 million tons of
P-fertilizers are annually generated from phosphate rocks and applied worldwide.
Intensification of P-fertilizer utilization over the last few decades has caused
widespread eutrophication and degradation of the quality of freshwater resources
and coastal areas. Yet elevated levels of metals in phosphate rocks and
P-fertilizers such as cadmium, chromium, and uranium pose less recognized but
significant potential risks to soil and water quality. Although pollution of
soils and water from P-fertilizer applications has been documented in a few case
studies, no systematic evaluation on the occurrence of metals in global
phosphate ores and the ability to detect their impact in the environment have
been conducted. The results of this study will have important and critical
information on levels of metals in global phosphate rocks as well as in various
fertilizers utilized in the U.S., the long-term impact on soil and water quality
in agricultural areas, and the possible risks for rural communities in areas of
extensive P-fertilizers utilization.

The project will characterize the geochemistry of global phosphate ores and
associated P-fertilizers, as well assess the environmental impact of the metals
they contain. The project is based on developing novel geochemical methods for
tracing the origin of the phosphate rocks and the impact of P-fertilizers in the
environment. The objectives of the study are to: (1) generate a systematic
chemical dataset of major global phosphate ores, including major and trace
elements, rare-earth elements, strontium and lead isotopes, and radionuclides
(uranium, radium) for evaluating the origin of the phosphate ores (geological
setting, age, diagenetic modification), and the relationships between the
geological settings and the occurrence of metals in global phosphate ores; (2)
evaluate the differential incorporation of metals from dissolution of phosphate
rocks in P-fertilizers and waste byproducts (gypsum); (3) evaluate the potential
of using the geochemical and isotope variations as tracers to delineate the
impact of P-fertilizers in the environment; and (4) evaluate the environmental
impact of P-fertilizers application through laboratory experiments and a field-
scale investigation in an agricultural research station in North Carolina, where
different rates of P-fertilizers have been applied for several decades. The
field study will include systematic monitoring of soils, plants, unsaturated
zone, agriculture runoff, shallow groundwater underlying experimental
agriculture fields, and regional groundwater in vicinity of extensive
agricultural activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.