* 2305006
* The Role of Substrate in Accelerating the Reactivity of Graphene in Diels Alder Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mingdi Yan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Mingdi Yan and Lawrence Wolf from the
University of Massachusetts-Lowell will explore the transformation of monolayer
pristine graphene nanocarbon monolayer sheets in a controlled fashion through
organic synthesis with a particular focus on the Diels-Alder reaction. Local hot
spots of curved distorted sites will be created on the graphene surface over
nano-featured substrates. Theoretical computations will be used to aid in
rationally designing these graphene sheets with curved features. Pristine
graphene has the potential to impact many technologically important
applications, such as in display screens, nanoelectronics, solar cells, and
various others and functionalized graphene has similar and yet to be discovered
applications. The ability to functionalize graphene with well-defined chemical
functionalities and in a controlled fashion is a frontier goal in the field and
has the potential to provide access to novel materials with great potential for
technological application. As part and parcel of this research project, graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in multidisciplinary research;
specialized courses related to the research will also be developed. Furthermore,
high school students of diverse backgrounds will be provided with summer
research experience and K-12 students will be engaged through science
presentations and workshop demonstrations.

This project will integrate theory and experiment to provide mechanistic
insights on how surface curvature enhances the reactivity of graphene and which
substrate configurations best accelerate Diels-Alder and other cycloaddition
reactions. In Aim 1, monolayer graphene supported on a metallic or insulating
substrate having well-defined surface topography will be fabricated.
Subsequently, Diels-Alder reactions will be carried out, and the extent of
graphene functionalization will be determined to test the hypothesis that the
reactivity of graphene will increase by introducing surface curvature and will
further increase by using a metal substrate. In Aim 2, combined atomistic and
larger scale computational methods, including density functional theory, semi-
empirical, and molecular mechanics methods, will be developed and used to
investigate the origins of the reactivity enhancement by surface curvature and
the role of surface curvature and the resulting distorted electronic structure
on the reactivity of graphene in cycloaddition reactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.