* 2305392
* Critical symplectic geometry, Lagrangian cobordisms, and stable homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Oleg Lazarev, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 170,443.00

Symplectic geometry originated as a geometric approach to classical Newtonian
mechanics, unifying previously disconnected ideas and providing a qualitative
understanding of dynamical systems in cases where explicit solutions are not
possible. More recent discoveries have revealed that symplectic geometry plays a
key role in many other fields of mathematics like algebraic geometry, low-
dimensional topology, and representation theory. This project will incorporate
ideas from homotopy theory and category theory into symplectic geometry in order
to prove structural results about symplectic manifolds and maps between them.
The project also has a significant educational component. The PI will organize
graduate school panels and math outreach events at UMass Boston, supervise
undergrad research, mentor graduate students and postdocs are other
universities, and serve as a judge for nationwide math competitions.

The PI will investigate critical symplectic geometry: the study of certain
symplectic manifolds called Weinstein domains up to stabilization and
subcritical handles. Critical symplectic geometry was introduced in the PI's
previous work in order to define a symplectic analog of topology localization in
rational homotopy theory and generalize symplectic flexibilization. Furthermore,
critical symplectic geometry is the natural setting to study J-holomorphic curve
invariants like the Fukaya category, which is invariant under these two
operations. In this project, the PI will relate critical symplectic geometry to
Lagrangian cobordisms, show that Lagrangian cobordisms can detect symplectic
flexibility, develop a geometric approach to Floer homotopy theory, and
investigate non-Weinstein examples arising from Anosov dynamical systems. The
project will use modern techniques from homotopy theory, higher algebra, and
dynamical systems and import ideas from symplectic geometry into these areas of
mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.