* 2305217
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Petrochronometers as provenance proxies: implications for the spatio-temporal evolution of continental collision to escape
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2024,04/30/2026
* Megan Mueller, Mueller, Megan A
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Megan Mueller has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct
research and educational activities at the University of Arizona alongside
mentor Dr. Mauricio Iba√±ez-Mejia. Sedimentary provenance analysis is widely used
across the Earth sciences to reconstruct ancient sediment dispersal networks,
source-to-sink sediment budgets, sedimentary basin evolution, and to discern
links between tectonics, paleogeography, climate, and biology. However,
provenance methods that exclusively focus on studying the age distributions and
chemistry of the mineral zircon (ZrSiO4) in sedimentary environments are limited
in tracking detritus sourced from mafic and metamorphic rocks. This limitation
is especially pronounced in continental collision settings, where obducted
fragments of oceanic crust and exhumed metamorphic massifs are common sources of
sediment but whose cryptic provenance signatures impose limits on the ability to
perform accurate geodynamic and paleogeographic reconstructions. This research
investigates the applicability of combined traditional and non-traditional
sedimentary provenance methods to reconstruct sedimentary provenance during the
transition from continental collision to tectonic escape in the Ulukisla Basin
in south-central Turkiye. This study develops workflows for novel, emerging
sedimentary provenance techniques that can be applied to tectonic settings
worldwide and aid in addressing outstanding questions in the Earth sciences. The
project supports field- and laboratory-based training and research experience
for undergraduate students in the United States and Turkiye.

Accurately reconstructing the timing and dynamics of continental collisions in
modern and deep-time settings remains a key challenge for the tectonics
community. However, a growing body of work suggests that sedimentary basins may
hold the most complete record of subduction, accretion, collision, and escape.
Utilizing the deformational, magmatic, and metamorphic information preserved in
detrital minerals thereby provides a way to unite proxy records into a holistic
model of collisional evolution. This project leverages the U-Pb, Hf, Nd, and
trace element composition of detrital zircon, rutile, and titanite, to track
sedimentary provenance from igneous and metamorphic sources. This study will
create a proof-of-concept workflow for detrital petrochronology applied to
sedimentary basin analysis. Furthermore, these datasets establish quantitative
relationships between the timing, tempo, and spatial extent of magmatism,
metamorphism, deformation, crustal thickness, and exhumation. Using this multi-
proxy approach, this project aims to document the spatial and temporal evolution
of continental collision and tectonic escape. The results will inform future
work in sedimentary provenance analysis and continental collision settings from
modern and ancient orogens.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.