* 2305248
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing microelectronics technologies (MO, KS)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Anthony Caruso, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Cooperative Agreement
* Geoffrey Brown
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,878.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award will coordinate, stimulate
and ripen an innovation ecosystem and workforce across the Missouri-Kansas
region centered around advancing microelectronics and playing a meaningful role
in ensuring US economic and national security in microelectronics. The region
boasts an actionable foundation of economic infrastructure and technical know-
how from mineral assets mining to microelectronics components and system
development, manufacturing, testing, and applications. The region has the
potential for private and State investment and raw material, gas supplies, and
electronic waste recycling capacity, further bolstering the circular economy and
this ecosystem. The expected outcomes in 24 months include a blueprint for (a)
the creation of more than 6000 jobs in the microelectronics industry; (b)
workforce training and nationwide coordination to meet the expected additional
130,000 US microelectronics workers needed before 2029; (c) coordination
processes that enable dynamic industry-government-academia decision making; (d)
demonstration of the impact of underrepresented and diverse leadership; (e)
small and medium-sized business startups and expansions with vetted feasibility
plans; and, (f) public and private sector funding to meet the US on-shore
production needs in microelectronics.

This effort will develop an ecosystem enabling use-inspired research for
translation to dual-use applications, a next-generation STEM workforce, and
embedding DEIA practices at all levels. The technical work will follow a top-
down approach from use-case and application mapping and supply-demand
determination to research technology enablers for advanced manufacturing of
chips, packaging, raw materials, gases and mining, resource allocation, and
compiler/firmware development to chip design. In advanced manufacturing,
materials, mining, and extraction, the applied research will develop
translational methodologies and tools that facilitate the on-shore manufacturing
and sustainable supply of critical goods. The materials thrust will encompass
public policy development encouraging the environmentally responsible domestic
recovery of critical materials from existing and new process streams. The
Development Award award will empower the team to develop replicable intellectual
infrastructure that drives technical innovation and creates a self-sustaining
ecosystem for a sub- and mid-tier microelectronics industrial base that results
in a strong workforce and innovation ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.