* 2305890
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Connecting physiological and cellular aging to individual quality in a long-lived free-living mammal.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2027
* Taylor Evans, Evans, Taylor C
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The ability of an organism to reproduce in
specific environments (fitness), is not evenly distributed within populations.
There are differing predictions that investing in current reproduction comes at
a cost to survival and future reproduction. One hypothesis called the individual
quality framework suggests that some individuals show higher ‘quality’, both
reproducing more effectively and surviving longer. These ‘high quality’
individuals may be more able to weather adverse conditions and maintain
reproduction while comparatively lower quality individuals are more impacted by
negative environments such as food scarcity or land disturbance. This research
will take advantage of a well-studied population of grey seals (Halichoerus
grypus) that breed on Sable Island to evaluate the individual quality
hypotheses. The fellow will collaborate with government scientists and community
members in Canada at Sable Island National Park to increase public interest in
the Sable Island seals and promote the value of long-term studies.

Telomeres, repeating DNA segments which degrade with cell division and protect
chromosomes from oxidative stress, are a gauge of somatic wear and may provide a
metric for overall quality, thus linking cellular aging to expressed
reproductive fitness. The fellow will resample DNA from marked seals that had
early-life genetic samples collected at weaning. Telomere length will be
estimated for new and archived samples using qPCR, and these lengths will
provide telomere erosion rate. Telomere dynamics will be related to lifetime
reproductive effort observed for each seal to evaluate whether longer, slower
eroding telomeres correlate with higher reproductive success and survival. The
project will also investigate whether ‘quality’ in terms of telomere dynamics is
heritable, and whether maternal foraging strategy provides a pathway for the
transmission of quality to offspring. The fellow will gain experience with
telomere assays as well as Bayesian mark-recapture and state-space population
modeling. For each field season during this work, the fellow will conduct
targeted recruitment of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
be research assistants, leveraging this project to expand access to fieldwork
and broaden participation in behavioral ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.