* 2305718
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Characterizing Ecological and Genetic Mechanisms of Hybrid Vigor in Boechera
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Gabrielle Sandstedt, Sandstedt, Gabrielle D
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Gabrielle Sandstedt is "Investigating the genetic and ecological basis of hybrid
vigor in nature". The host institution for the fellowship is Utah State
University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Catherine Rushworth and Emily
Josephs. A critical concern for plant breeding is ensuring food security in a
world impacted by climate change. One approach to this problem is breeding
genetically divergent plants to create hybrids that outperform their parents in
survival and reproduction, a phenomenon called hybrid vigor. While hybrid vigor
has led to the formation of many hybrid crops, it is not understood how hybrids
will respond to changing environments. This work utilizes Boechera, a wildflower
system to deepen an understanding of the genetics and ecology of hybrid vigor in
nature. Such knowledge can be implemented to secure the food supply.
Additionally, this research will allow to promote equitable opportunities for
students in academia by participating in programs that support undergraduates
from diverse backgrounds, such as Utah State University's Native American Summer
Mentorship Program. The research also presents valuable opportunities initiating
public discussions on the role of research in developing crops that meet the
needs of a growing population. The Fellow will coordinate these discussions and
provide learning activities at the longstanding scientific lecture series
Science Unwrapped, a science outreach program hosted by Utah State University.

The purpose of this research is to identify ecological variables and genetic
mechanisms that facilitate hybrid vigor in nature. To pinpoint the effects of
key environmental variables on hybrid vigor, parental lines and hybrid
combinations of two Boechera species, along with wild-collected hybrids, will be
planted in a manipulative field experiment and measured for fitness. The next
objective uses genomic and transcriptomic sequencing data of natural hybrids and
de novo crosses to determine the genetic mechanisms involved in hybrid vigor.
This includes characterizing the distribution of genetic load within Boechera
species, examining whether heterozygosity masking these alleles in hybrids
predicts fitness across environments, and determining how differential gene
expression underlying hybrid vigor phenotypes varies across environments. The
research will generate extensive data, including seed collections, plant tissue
samples, fitness and trait measurements (which will be submitted to
https://datadryad.org), and several types of genomic sequence data (which will
be made available on https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra). Together, these data
will reveal ecological and genetic factors that contribute to hybrid vigor while
providing substantial ecological and genetic resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.