* 2305939
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Salamanders in the city: An integrative investigation into microevolutionary change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Anthony Snead, Snead, Anthony Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Urbanization and climate change are rapidly
altering habitats, forcing wildlife to either undergo local adaptation, leave,
or risk extinction. Amphibians are one of the most threatened groups by both
urbanization and climate change; however, amphibians are understudied in
evolutionary biology and genomics. Therefore, the northern two-lined salamander,
Eurycea bislineata, will be used to better understand the genomic and phenotypic
(trait) consequences of urbanization and environmental change. By simultaneously
measuring traits and analyzing the genome, the fellow will link genes and traits
responsible for local adaptation to provide critical insight into how genomes
give rise to complex traits. Through this research, the fellow will develop a
long-term species monitoring program that provides essential data on the impact
of urbanization on wild populations and offers a unique field biology experience
to undergraduate students. Furthermore, the fellow will use the research to
mentor undergraduate and graduate students while developing accessible and
relevant educational materials for children, adolescents, and adults.

Using a hierarchical design, E. bislineata will be sampled from urban, suburban,
and rural areas that differ in the local climate. After assembling and
annotating the genome with long-read sequencing technology, physiological
traits, and 3-D morphology will be collected from each salamander prior to whole
genome sequencing. Using that data, the fellow will quantify phenotypic and
genomic differentiation between populations before identifying genes potentially
under selection and attempting to link the candidate genomic variants with
ecologically relevant phenotypic traits. By first identifying genomic and
phenotypic variation associated with urbanization and climate, the fellow
increases their power to link candidate genes to traits. The fellow will use the
data as an accessible example of urban-driven microevolution to develop outreach
materials and disseminate them through existing programs established by the
American Museum of Natural History and other STEM outreach organizations. The
fellow will mentor a diverse group of students from within and outside the
sponsoring institution and give guest lectures to develop the skills essential
to running a research lab while further developing their strengths (genomic and
quantitative) and acquiring skills in organismal biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.