* 2305628
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2023 HPCA/CGO/PPoPP Symposia (HPCA/CGO/PPoPP 2023)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Daniel Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 02/29/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides NSF support to broaden participation in three co-located
conferences - The 29th IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization (CGO), and ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of
Parallel Programming (PPoPP) - held in Montreal, Canada in February-March 2023.
This award supports approximately 24 students to attend these symposia, which
are attended by leading researchers from academia, both students and faculty,
and from industry. The symposia were held annually separately for many years,
and jointly since 2013. Students who attend the conferences are exposed to
intellectually stimulating research by attending the many talks, panels,
keynotes, and poster presentations at the conferences.

This project aims to increase the impact of these conferences by enabling the
participation of additional students for whom travel support would otherwise
preclude their attendance. Students receiving travel grants through this award
will learn the importance of good communication skills as well as learn about
what it takes to conduct high-quality research, through interactions with
speakers, faculty, and peer student groups. The award also enhances the
diversity of the attendees, thus maintaining a balance between underrepresented
and other groups among the participants supported by the grant. Priority for
these funds is given to defray the travel expenses of under-represented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.