* 2305704
* NSF PRFB FY23: Dissecting the holobiont: exploring how genetics, environments, and microbiomes contribute to emergent host phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Emily Hardison, Hardison, Emily A
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 10/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Microbes can have many effects on animals,
including everything from their digestion to their survival in extreme
temperatures. For example, green frog tadpoles raised in water without microbes
were more affected by high temperatures and had a higher chance of dying from
heat stress than tadpoles grown in water containing wild pond microbes. This
suggests that their microbiome – the microbes living in and on tadpoles – shapes
the frog’s physiology and tolerance to extreme conditions. Green frogs live in
ponds across the entire East Coast of the USA, from colder northern states to
much warmer southern states. An unknown question is: are the microbes living in
ponds and their resident tadpoles different in the North and South? And if so,
do northern microbes help frogs thrive in colder water or southern microbes help
them in warmer water? Using a combination of observations and experiments, the
fellow will study green frog microbiomes across their geographic range, to see
if they help the frogs to thrive across a wide range of temperatures. This work
is important for predicting how animals will respond to environmental change and
helping amphibian conservation efforts.

To address these questions, the fellow will start by comparing water and tadpole
microbiomes from ponds along the species' range. By pairing this analysis with
habitat characterization, the fellow will explore drivers of variation in
microbial communities from tadpole pond habitat. Building on this fieldwork, the
fellow will conduct a captive breeding study using green frogs from their
northern and southern range limits and perform a factorial experiment, rearing
their offspring in tanks amended with microbes collected from northern or
southern ponds, followed by measuring tadpole thermal performance. Through these
activities, the fellow will gain new understanding of the factors shaping
microbiome composition (i.e., host genetics, environmental conditions, and
environmental microbes) and their impacts on intraspecific variation in the frog
microbiome and emergent thermal phenotypes. Through this project, the fellow
will also gain invaluable training in bioinformatics, microbiome physiology, and
lab leadership. Finally, the fellow will host mentorship workshops to promote
inclusive and informed mentorship practices and will advise and participate in
conservation-focused STEM education programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.