* 2305817
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Investigating enhancer and protein divergence at follistatin paralogs underlying genetic assimilation of wing plasticity
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kevin Deem, Deem, Kevin D
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Today's diversity of plant and animal forms
observable in nature arises from accumulated morphological innovations. Despite
the scientific interest in this topic, the evolutionary processes that give rise
to new forms are still surrounded by mystery and debate. One promising model is
genetic assimilation, in which new forms that have emerged from environmentally
induced variation (phenotypic plasticity), can later become genetically
determined. However, it remains unclear how such a switch from environmental to
genetic control might occur. This project aims to characterize the molecular
mechanisms facilitating genetic assimilation, to further our understanding of
morphological novelty, diversity, and evolution. As a study system, the fellow
will utilize the pea aphid, in which a female form variation has been
genetically assimilated in males by changes in their DNA.

Pea aphids produce two types of wingless morphs: asexual wingless females
induced by maternal environment (wing polyphenism, a type of phenotypic
plasticity), and genetically determined wingless males (genetic assimilation).
Importantly, the shorthand term "wingless" used here describes not only a loss
of wings, but a systemic change in metabolic, behavioral, and multiple
morphological character states. Thus, "wingless" pea aphid morphs comprise a
bona fide example of phenotypic novelty. Two duplicates of the gene follistatin
(fs), a TGF-beta ligand inhibitor, are separately involved in male and female
wingless morph determination. The duplicate fs2 is upregulated in wingless
females, while the presence of the fs3 duplicate determines wingless male
morphs. Both duplicates exhibit changes to their protein coding and putative
regulatory regions. The fellow will use cutting edge experimental techniques to
characterize changes in cis-regulation (Aim 1), signatures of selection (Aim 2),
and protein function (Aim 3) at fs paralogs, to determine how duplication and
divergence facilitated genetic assimilation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.