* 2305910
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Coalescent Modeling of Sex Chromosome Evolution with Gene Flow and Analysis of Sexed-versus-Gendered Effects in Human Admixture
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Miriam Miyagi, Miyagi, Miriam
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The goal
of this project is to generate insights about how events in human evolutionary
history, such as interactions between populations, can be inferred from modern
genome data. This work seeks to deepen the understanding of biological and
social factors that have shaped human history. The research will also generate
theories to contextualize identity categories within human evolutionary
genomics, and further develop approaches to help understand human diversity. In
addition, this project will provide the fellow with training in the mathematical
and computational techniques used in population genetics, and promote the
fellow’s activities in public outreach, mentoring of trainees, and fostering
inclusive community within Brown University’s postdoctoral body.

This project will give the fellow an opportunity to continue developing skills
in theoretical population genetics, with a particular focus on coalescent theory
and simulations. The project will include the development of a coalescent model
which can describe the evolution of non-autosomal chromosomes with inversions, a
critical component of modeling patterns of bias in admixture. In addition, the
fellow will use forward-time population genetic simulations of gene flow between
populations to generate expectations of patterns of relatedness under novel
models of gene-by-environmental and cultural determination of migration
probability. The fellow will then use the results of the theory and simulation
work to generate insights into how human demographic history has been impacted
by cultural and biological factors. This project will build on work in science
and technology studies, mathematics, and evolutionary biology to generate an
interdisciplinary understanding of how populations evolve in the face of
admixture and gene flow. Finally, throughout the course of the project, the
fellow will support underrepresented students in STEM through teaching,
mentorship, and community organizing in collaboration with existing groups at
Brown University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.