* 2305189
* CAREER: An Investigation of Microplastics Fate and Contaminant Transport in Storm Runoff, The Nexus of Environmental Engineering and Material Sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Maryam Salehi, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2026
* USD 386,959.00

The use of plastics in consumer products and materials results in the release of
small particles of plastic known as “microplastics” that can pollute the
environment. These microplastics are persistent in the environment and will
typically take hundreds of years to decompose completely. Microplastics can be
transported through water, air, and through the food web following ingestion and
uptake by animals and other organisms. In addition, microplastics can also
absorb toxic pollutants, causing them to spread further and faster in the
environment, including the world’s oceans. Although a majority of microplastics
in marine environments originate from inland sources, the relative importance of
microplastic pollutants released in urban storm runoff to surface waters is
still poorly understood. The goal of this CAREER project is to close the
critical knowledge gap on the environmental degradation of microplastics and how
they facilitate the transport of heavy metals in urban stormwater. Successful
completion of this research will greatly advance our understanding of
microplastic sources in urban environments and how they mobilize heavy metals.
Such knowledge will greatly aid the development of effective stormwater
management strategies. Additional benefits to society will result from advancing
scientific literacy and improving the Nation’s STEM workforce through the
development of educational materials for K-12 teachers to educate their students
on plastic pollution and inspire them to pursue careers in environmental
engineering and science.

The goal of this CAREER project is to utilize material science and environmental
engineering interdisciplinary research to understand processes controlling the
fate and transport of microplastics in urban stormwater. This will be achieved
through the specific research objectives to elucidate the roles that intrinsic
and extrinsic material properties play in influencing the kinetics of
microplastic photodegradation and particle fragmentation, and examine how
aqueous physiochemical processes impact microplastic facilitated transport of
heavy metals present in stormwater. The fundamental knowledge developed in this
research will provide a better conceptual understanding of the mechanisms
controlling microplastics persistence and contaminant transport within the urban
environment, which is crucial to estimating their negative impacts on the
ecosystem and developing effective control measures and remediation strategies.
This investigation represents one of the first efforts to develop a
comprehensive mechanistic understanding of the physical and chemical processes
that control microplastic fate and contaminant transport in stormwater. A key
novelty of the proposed research addresses the mismatch between laboratory
experiments that generally use virgin plastic pellets and beads by using
environmentally relevant degraded secondary microplastics generated through the
disintegration of larger plastic segments. This approach using microplastic
fragmentation under abrasive tension will facilitate the development of dynamic
models to predict microplastics disintegration under various mechanical loadings
and physical conditions. The integrated educational plan will benefit society by
providing professional development for K-12 educators through annual workshops
to increase the recruitment of underrepresented students into environmental
engineering. Additional benefits will result from dissemination of results to
inform water managers, practitioners, policymakers, and other stakeholders in
Tennessee on the presence of microplastics in stormwater, and ways to combat the
problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.