* 2305137
* Elucidating Factors Affecting the Preservation of Biomolecule Solution Structure for Spray-based Ionization Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Matthew Johnson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Stephen Valentine, Peng Li and Matthew Johnson and their groups at
West Virginia University are developing new methods to study the structures of
biological macromolecules such as proteins. These molecules must foldinto very
specific three-dimensional (3D) structures in order to perform their required
biological functions. Drs. Valentine, Li, and Johnson are developing new tools
for generating micrometer-sized droplets of varying charge that allow the study
of challenging biomolecules in solution using mass spectrometry (MS) techniques.
The proposed studies provide fundamental knowledge required to conduct the most
efficient MS measurements for biomolecule structure determination. In the
future, this knowledge can be used to study disease processes as well as to
develop biomolecular drugs. The work also provides valuable technology exposure
to diverse graduate and undergraduate students in the areas of MS measurement
and instrumentation development.

The Valentine/Li/Johnson team at West Virginia University is developing a new
approach to examine biomolecular structure using native MS. Recent experiments
have shown that the technology of vibrating sharp-edge spray ionization (VSSI),
when operated in a voltage-free mode for native MS experiments, can better
preserve the structures of challenging proteins such as those possessing regions
of disorder. For ion production, VSSI provides the ability to decouple the
processes of droplet charging and droplet production in contrast to the
Coloumbically-driven process encountered in electrospray ionization (ESI). Thus,
with VSSI, it appears to now be possible to map protein structure
transformations associated with specific droplet conditions. In this study the
relationships between such transformations and droplet characteristics such as
overall charge, diameter, and temperature equilibration with the heated
capillary will be examined. The scientific knowledge gained from these studies
will be shared publicly and can then be used to guide scientists with regard to
best nanoelectropsray ionization (nESI) practices for studying the structures of
challenging biomolecular species. In this way, the work has the potential for
broad scientific impact across diverse fields from protein biophysics, to
protein biocatalysis, to proteomics to human biology and biomedical science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.