* 2305519
* ADVANCE Adaptation: UMass Boston CARES: Communities, Acknowledgment, Recognition and Equity through a Culture of Sponsorship
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hannah Sevian, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project addresses issues related to lack of recognition and value for
community engaged research and caring work, along with inequitable service loads
shouldered by women faculty and faculty of color. Importantly, these issues are
widespread in higher education and have been demonstrated to lead to inequities
in the experiences and career advancement of women faculty and faculty of color
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. To address
gender and racial inequities, the University of Massachusetts (UMass) Boston
Communities, Acknowledgment, Recognition and Equity through a Culture of
Sponsorship (CARES) will implement two major sets of strategies, the policy core
and the training core. The policy core will focus on increasing the equitable
recognition of service, community-engaged research, and caring work in tenure
and promotion reviews for tenure-track and non-tenure-track faculty. The
training core will center theater-enhanced bystander training to address and
mitigate gender and racial bias in faculty personnel reviews. The project will
also develop gender and racial equity-focused guidelines for personnel reviews,
bystander interventions and behaviors, sponsorship, and co-conspirator tools. In
addition, the project seeks to develop an institutional culture that values
caring work, service, and community-engaged research which will lead to systemic
change at UMass Boston.

Grounded in the findings of UMass Boston’s National Science Foundation ADVANCE
Catalyst institutional self-assessment, the UMass Boston CARES project’s goal is
to use an intersectional lens to adapt and implement campus wide policy and
bystander interventions to promote structural and cultural changes that increase
gender and racial equity for STEM faculty. The specific objectives of the
project are to implement equity-minded policies and practices related to tenure-
track and nontenure-track faculty personnel reviews and to shift the culture of
the university toward centering recognition and rewards for community-engaged
research, service, and caring work. The project focuses on two cores of
strategies, the policy core and the training core. The aim of the policy core is
to create equitable faculty personnel reviews through a working group process
that will develop and implement equity-minded operational personnel review
guidelines. The aim of the training core is to provide theater enhanced
bystander interventions for faculty and leaders involved in faculty personnel
reviews. The bystander program focuses on issues of implicit bias in personnel
reviews related specifically to the evaluation of caring work, service, and
community-engaged research. The project is also expected to provide clarity
about community-engaged research and caring work, and how those faculty
activities are recognized and rewarded to support the experiences and career
outcomes of women faculty and faculty of color in STEM fields. The project will
lead to systemic change that significantly shifts the structures and culture of
UMass Boston to center equitable personnel review policies, practices, and
processes.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. 
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.