* 2305155
* Collaborative Research: Thermochemistry and Chemical Kinetics of Halide-driven Crystal Structure Control of Manganese and Lanthanide Chalcogenide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Robert Wexler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 176,693.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Emil Hernández-Pagán of the University of
Delaware, Kristina Lilova of Arizona State University, and Robert Wexler of
Washington University in St. Louis will investigate how the presence of halides
(chloride, bromide, and iodide) influences the final arrangements of atoms
(crystal structure) in the synthesis of certain classes of nanoparticles. The
team will employ experimental techniques, including ones that provide
information as the reaction occurs, and computational methods to gain in depth
insight into this process. The particular crystal polymorph often dictates key
properties of nanocrystalline materials and, consequently, the applications for
which these can be used, for example, in photovoltaics, catalysis, and energy
storage. Therefore, having the knowledge and ability to control the crystal
structure is important. The broader impacts of this work are centered around (a)
providing experimental and computational training to the students working on
this project and (b) summer research experiences for undergraduate students from
Puerto Rico that aim to complement the training they receive at their home
institutions to better prepare them for the workforce and/or pursuing a graduate
degree.

The ability to rationally synthesize a given polymorph or phase of a
nanoparticles is desirable as these dictate their mechanical, optical, and
electronic properties. The proposed work synergistically combines experimental
and computational methods to provide a holistic framework for a model system
where halides drive the control of crystal structure/phase in the synthesis of
manganese chalcogenide nanocrystals. This framework will encompass identifying
pre-nucleation molecular species, performing thermochemical measurement of
reaction and surface-ligand interactions, and monitoring the kinetics of
nucleation and growth. A suite of in situ techniques will be employed to enable
such measurements under the reaction conditions. Quantum-mechanics-based
calculations will be used to identify atomic-scale interactions and the
mechanisms that lead to the observed crystal structures/phases. These
calculations will provide input for kinetic and thermodynamic models of
nanocrystal nucleation and growth and, therefore, will produce multi-scale-based
computational guidance for the controlled synthesis of metal chalcogenide
nanocrystals. The studies will be extended to lanthanide chalcogenide
nanocrystals, which have remained largely unexplored despite unique optical and
magnetic properties. This work is anticipated to further increase the level of
chemical understanding of the synthesis of Mn and Ln chalcogenide nanocrystals,
and such insights have the potential to provide guidance to the scientific
community for the synthesis of other classes of materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.