* 2305112
* Polariton and CISS Effects on Photoinduced Electron Transfer from Quantum Confined Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2026
* USD 519,980.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tianquan Lian and a team of Emory
graduate and undergraduate students are developing two novel ways to control
photoinduced electron transfer (ET) from quantum confined semiconductor
nanocrystals (NCs), one of the most important processes in photocatalysis and
quantum information science. Quantum confined semiconductor NCs are promising
novel materials with potential applications in energy conversion and quantum
information science. In this project, the first aim is focused on using
polaritons formed by coupling NCs with optical cavity modes as a new way to
control photoinduced ET. The second aim is focused on NC Donor-chiral Bridge-
Acceptor (D-B-A) complexes for selective transfer of light generated spins using
chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) effects. The goals of the research are:
1) to advance the understanding of the formation and decay dynamics of polariton
states; 2) to directly measure polariton mediated ET in NC-molecular acceptor
complexes in cavity and test theoretical models; 3) to develop design principles
for NCs with both slow electron spin relaxation and fast ET rates; and 4) to
advance the understanding CISS effect in photoinduced ET in NC-chiral bridge-
acceptor complexes.

Molecular polaritons, formed by coupling the molecular electronic or vibrational
transition to a photonic cavity mode have received intense interest in chemistry
since the reports that they can provide a novel approach for controlling
chemical reactions. The proposed effort is focused on polariton mediated
electron transfer because of its potential roles in polariton enabled chemical
reactions. The proposed study will provide much needed experimental data to test
current models of polariton state dynamics and polariton mediated ET, as well as
important insights on how to use cavities to control ET rates for many potential
applications. Controlling electron spin states is essential for spintronics and
quantum information. Although electron spins can be selectively transferred
during transport through chiral materials, this process is not understood at the
quantitative level. The proposed NC donor-chiral bridge-acceptor platform
represents a new approach to combine photonics with spintronics for potential
applications in quantum information processing. The proposed study will lead to
the development of design principles for NCs with both slow electron spin
relaxation and fast ET rates and advance the understanding of the CISS effect in
photoinduced ET in NC-chiral bridge-acceptor complexes. The proposed research
program also offers unique opportunities for training graduate and undergraduate
students and for integrating research with teaching and outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.