* 2305495
* Variants in Biology Education: What can we learn from pandemics?
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Warren Sconiers, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,975.00

From March 23-25, 2023, the 8th Life Discovery – Doing Science Biology Education
Conference (LDC) will convene at Florida A&M University on the theme, “Variants
in Biology Education: What can we learn from pandemics?” This event is co-
organized by the Ecological Society of America (ESA), the Botanical Society of
America (BSA), and the Society for the Study of Evolution (SSE). There are real
impacts on people’s lives and decisions when scientifically based information is
not understood and/or rejected. The conference will draw from socio-behavioral
research which can be applied to pedagogy. The conference theme wrestles with
three key issues impacting teaching and learning which form three thematic
tracks: a) adapting to and teaching disease ecology; b) science misinformation,
and c) research innovation and careers. These tracks will highlight promising
practices, programs, and strategies that can be implemented in the classroom
while fostering a longer term effort to improve biology education and career
readiness. It will also build on the previous conference which focused on
inclusive educational strategies critical to engaging both science and non-
science majors, especially underrepresented minority populations. By
facilitating discovery and exchange of tools and resources for STEM and media
literacy, the event will position faculty to help generations of digital natives
who rely on social media for information to combat false information and extend
far beyond the classroom to students’ homes and communities. NSF funds will
support the connection and participation of under-resourced faculty in
organismal biology and environmental sciences from minority-serving
institutions, community colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions, who
are frequently isolated across the US.

The conference will provide a forum for educators to engage in a discipline-
based national conversation three years after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
inexorably rocked the world. Its impact on education has been no less profound.
The conference organizers will take advantage of this opportunity to use very
real phenomena backed by lived experience to discuss key ideas in ecology and
evolutionary biology that have previously been difficult to teach. At the same
time, this conference will provide a platform for educators to discuss
approaches to teaching the difference between fake news and learning real
science. An exchange of strategies will be beneficial so educators might respond
more effectively in different sociopolitical climates to a fast-evolving
scientific phenomenon and an even faster “viral resistance” to information based
on science. Made visible by the pandemic, innovations in science and research
are introducing new questions that can now be asked and answered. The conference
will highlight opportunities for emerging STEM and STEM-adjacent careers fueled
by technological advancements such as those offered by new RNA research, as well
as key findings in the social sciences which are mobilizing new understandings
of vulnerability and resilience globally. The conference will also extend
education reform efforts propelled by "Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education" (AAAS) a decade ago and highlight recent advances to provide
a cohesive and modern approach to ecology education through ESA’s Four-
Dimensional Ecology Education (4DEE) framework. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.