* 2305616
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: How Does Critical Zone Water Storage Impact Forest Drought Stress Across Complex Terrain?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Karla Jarecke, Jarecke, Karla M
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Climate change is causing more frequent hot droughts, which can lead to extreme
water stress for tall trees in forest ecosystems. The ways that trees deal with
water stress under extreme drought are not well understood. To address this
challenge, this research will address fundamental questions about how water
stored below ground affects tree growth and physiological water stress. Trees
can adapt their physical structure to deal with chronic water stress, but it is
unclear how subsurface water storage dynamics do or do not lead to compensatory
responses in tree physiology. For example, will a tree faced with intermittent
drought make the same physiological adjustments as those faced with perennial
drought? Questions like these are particularly relevant in places where water is
already a limiting factor for tree growth and could become more limiting in the
future. This study will take place in Colorado, USA, where snowpack in montane
forests is declining due to climate warming. By understanding tree water stress
across complex mountainous terrain, the results of this study will be broadly
relevant for scientists and forest managers seeking to improve forest drought
resilience and ensure sustainable management of water resources.

The role of deep “critical zone” water storage in mitigating forest water stress
during extreme drought may be confounded by the way trees adapt structurally and
physiologically to subsurface hydrological conditions. For example, water stored
in deep, highly weathered bedrock may mitigate seasonal water stress in trees.
However, trees with access to deep water storage may be vulnerable to hydraulic
failure during prolonged drought if they have maladapted physiological traits.
This project employs field-based investigations using seismic surveys and
electrical resistivity tomography to gather data on belowground structure and
water storage along hillslope transects in the Boulder Creek Watershed in
Colorado, USA, part of the Dynamic Water Critical Zone Cluster Network.
Information on subsurface water storage dynamics will be combined with tree
ecophysiological measurements to reveal how critical zone water storage
influences forest drought vulnerability and transpiration fluxes in semi-arid
environments. Ultimately, this research seeks to improve mechanistic
understanding of how climatic conditions and subsurface structure regulate water
fluxes across complex mountainous terrain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.