* 2305949
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Assessing morphological, behavioral, and genetic impacts of methylmercury on spiders.
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Madeline Hannappel, Hannappel, Madeline Pratt
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 01/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Specifically, this research will assess the
effects of a contaminant of global concern, Methylmercury (MeHg), on spiders. It
is important to understand MeHg accumulation and its toxic effects on organisms
to accurately assess risks of MeHg contamination. Spiders are exposed to MeHg by
consuming MeHg-contaminated prey and recently were proposed as tools for
monitoring MeHg in the environment; called “sentinels”: organisms that
accumulate a pollutant in their tissues without significant adverse effects.
However, little is known about MeHg toxicity in spiders or other invertebrates.
This project’s goal is to investigate sub-lethal effects of MeHg on spiders
behavior, growth, reproduction, and gene expression. The proposed study will
advance scientific understanding about the impact of environmental MeHg
contamination on individual spiders and predict effects on spider communities,
other invertebrates, and ecosystems exposed to MeHg. The research program will
directly involve undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented
communities and is designed to empower students to pursue scientific careers
through hands-on research experiences, skills development, and one-on-one
mentorship.

Sub-lethal effects of MeHg on spiders will be tested through a series of
laboratory feeding experiments (short-term, long-term, and multigenerational
dietary exposures), and field studies sampling spiders from locations with high
and low MeHg contamination. Spiders exposed to MeHg are hypothesized to show 1)
physical, behavioral, and gene expression effects, 2) different effects by
exposure duration, spider taxa, and spider life stage, and 3) multigenerational
effects on reproduction, growth, and development. Measurements of sub-lethal
effects will include multiple physical and behavioral endpoints (e.g., body
condition, prey capture, size at maturity, and egg production), and gene
expression determined by sequencing spider RNA (transcriptome analysis for
differentially expressed genes). The fellow’s training will include
transcriptome sequencing and data analysis, specifically, methods to identify
and characterize genes associated with adverse effects of MeHg. In addition to
insights into the mechanisms of MeHg toxicity in spiders, this project will
contribute to genomic and transcriptomic knowledge about spiders and inform
future studies outside of contaminant toxicology. This research will benefit the
broader public through planned outreach programs and educational products around
using spiders to studying environmental contaminants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.