* 2305725
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Defining and programming transcriptional activatability in bacterial promoters
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Debora Tenenbaum, Tenenbaum, Debora
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. In order
to survive, cells need to turn different genes on and off at different times.
When and how strongly a gene is turned on depends on the DNA sequence preceding
it and on different regulatory proteins that bind to that DNA sequence and
control gene activity. The project seeks to understand how the DNA sequence
controls gene activity in bacteria and to enable the design of DNA sequences
with predictable activation and predictable sensitivity to regulatory proteins.
By training the fellow in modern Genomics and Artificial Intelligence
techniques, the fellowship will establish a framework for quantitative
mechanistic studies of gene regulation in diverse biological systems. To broaden
the representation of underrepresented groups in Biology, the fellow will
establish a virtual community for Latinx postdocs.

Most regulation of gene expression in bacteria occurs during transcription
initiation. To initiate transcription, RNA polymerase traverses through multiple
kinetic steps, the rates of which are encoded in genomic DNA. However, little is
known about how the kinetics of these distinct steps are programmed by promoter
DNA sequence. The research aims to quantify the kinetics of individual steps in
transcription initiation for thousands of promoters throughout the E. coli
genome, quantify the promoter-specific effects of transcription factors on
transcription initiation kinetics, and quantitatively define the ways in which
transcription initiation kinetics are programmed by DNA sequence. The research
aims will be achieved by combining experimental techniques based on high-
throughput sequencing with Bayesian inference strategies and Deep Learning
methods. In parallel, the fellow will establish a virtual community for Latinx
postdocs that will provide members with resources and support networks, thereby
helping to broaden the representation of the underrepresented Latinx community
in Biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.