* 2305641
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Flexible strategies for multisensory integration inspired by the insect central complex
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Benjamin Cellini, Cellini, Benjamin
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 11/30/2025
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will address fundamental
questions regarding how the brain integrates and transforms sensory information
to improve navigation in new environments. Taking inspiration from the insect
brain, the fellow will develop a comprehensive model that can predict how low-
level changes in brain circuits influence high-level behaviors, from a
mathematical perspective. Broadly, this work will generate wide-spread and
testable hypotheses about brain function. This project will also have an
immediate impact on the design of intelligent robotic systems relying on sensory
information to navigate complex environments, such as in search-and-rescue
situations.

This project will leverage a combination of mathematical and experimental tools
to develop a model of the ‘rules of operation’ governing multisensory
integration in the insect brain. The fellow will focus on anemosensing (sensing
the wind direction), a multisensory task critical for survival in many insects.
The fellow will 1) develop a predictive model of multisensory integration during
anemosensing, 2) validate the model in the real word using a flying robotic
system, and 3) test hypotheses generated from the model in freely flying
Drosophila (fruit flies). Specifically, the fellow will leverage tools from
nonlinear dynamical systems to model how distinct combinations of sensory cues
(vision, proprioception, mechanosensation) can be combined for anemosensing. The
model will then be applied to understand how the brain might reconfigure the
weights of sensory cues. The fellow will validate this model in real-word
scenarios using an autonomously controlled quadcopter equipped with sensors
analogous to that of Drosophila’s sensory systems. The fellow will apply the
model to generate hypotheses about insect flight trajectories during
anemosensing and test these hypotheses in freely flying Drosophila in a wind
tunnel. As a FAA certified pilot, with the ability to supervise individuals
flying unmanned aircraft, the fellow will translate the robotic testing portion
of this project to an activity at a summer camp at a nearby high school.
Ultimately, the aim is to foster an interest in science in young students
through direct participation in hands-on research, while providing the fellow
with experience in mentoring and instruction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.