* 2305652
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: The Evolution of Multiple Stressor Tolerance: From Genes to Whole Organism Performance
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Bethany Williams, Williams, Bethany L
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The study of multiple environmental stressors
is challenging because potential interactions between stressors are complex.
This proposal will provide insights into how tolerance to multiple stressors is
shaped by ecological and evolutionary processes. Additionally, understanding how
organisms respond to multiple stressors bears relevance to questions in basic
ecological physiology and conservation, as organisms are faced with increasing
anthropogenic pressures.

Organisms that survive in environments with multiple stressors provide an
excellent natural system to address these issues. This project will utilize the
fish species Poecilia Mexicana, which exhibits exceptional tolerance to hydrogen
sulfide (H2S) and hypoxia (low dissolved oxygen), to address how multiple
stressors affect gene expression, physiological traits, and organismal
performance, both in terms of plastic responses of individuals and evolutionary
responses of populations. To determine how hypoxia and H2S tolerances are
correlated and shaped by genetic and environmental effects, this project
includes three aims. 1) The fellow will quantify gene expression and
physiological responses to individual and multiple environmental stressors in
both adapted and non-adapted populations. 2) The fellow will test whether
existing plasticity in response to one environmental stressor (i.e., hypoxia)
can increase tolerance to another stressor (i.e., H2S). 3) The fellow will
compare co-tolerance to multiple stressors in hybrids to test whether phenotypic
correlations between traits are maintained when co-adapted gene complexes are
reshuffled in hybrid offspring. In addition to research objectives, this
proposal includes four overarching training objectives that include technical
knowledge, development of job application materials, teaching/mentoring, and
public outreach to help the fellow achieve their goal of obtaining a faculty
position after the completion of this postdoctoral fellowship. Additionally, the
fellow will engage in several community outreach programs at the host
institution to build the local community's enthusiasm for science in an informal
way and to make scientists more accessible to address questions of public
concern.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.