* 2305078
* Elucidating Nitrogen and Chlorine Recycling Mechanisms from Multiphase Photochemistry of Oxidized Nitrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jonathan Raff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 449,598.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Jonathan Raff at Indiana University will study how the pollutant
nitrate and other oxidized forms of nitrogen found on environmental surfaces
(e.g., atmospheric particles, soil minerals, and sea salt) influence air
pollution, which is a leading cause of premature death globally. There is
significant evidence that interactions of nitrate with sunlight can change the
composition of the atmosphere in ways that can lead to poor air quality or
influence cloud formation. The chemical mechanisms involved are still not well
understood. Laboratory experiments will be carried out on well-characterized
models of soil, sea salt and aerosols using sensitive instrumentation that
follows chemical reactions in real time and under real environmental conditions.
This research will help clarify how pollutants in the atmosphere are formed and
destroyed, with potential long terms scientific relevance to the causes of air
pollution, particularly, to the nature of oxidized nitrogen species that might
obtain in the atmosphere from nitrate chemistry. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in this research. The latter will include entering
first-year students from underrepresented groups who will carry out summer
research projects designed to increase their interest in pursuing science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) majors. In addition, the outcomes
of this project will be used in outreach activities to enhance science education
at a local high school.

Under this award, the research team led by Jonathan Ruff at Indiana University
will study the photochemical reactivity of nitric acid, nitrate, and organic
nitrates on environmental surfaces with a focus on elucidating chemical
mechanisms leading to the release and recycling of nitrogen oxides and chlorine
atom precursors that contribute to the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere.
Experimental approaches will involve UV-visible and infrared diffuse reflection
spectroscopy, and photochemical flow reactors with gas phase product detection
by chemical ionization mass spectrometry and chemiluminescence analysis. In
addition to revealing mechanisms of nitrogen oxide and chlorine recycling, the
project will provide the kinetics and photochemical data needed to advance the
ability to model and predict multiphase photochemistry of oxidized nitrogen. The
long term broader scientific impacts of this research include providing a more
complete reaction tree emanating from atmospheric nitrates with a particular
focus on the constellation of oxidized nitrogen species that is produced
photochemically upon interaction with UV/vis light from the sun.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.