* 2305968
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Evolution of Masting as a Mechanism for Forest Resilience under Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Diana Macias, Macias, Diana Stephanie
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Forests cover
nearly a third of all land on Earth, represent the most fundamental and
widespread components of living systems, and are experiencing irreversible
transformations. Long-term changes in temperatures have induced massive tree
die-offs and have limited the potential for recruitment. Nonetheless,
surprisingly little is known about the genetic mechanisms that underlie long-
term reproductive patterns in forest systems. This study explores the
reproductive phenomenon known as masting which involves sudden spikes in
reproductive output among trees over time. The study aims to use genetic
material obtained from two masting piñon pine species to test predictions about
how genetic mechanisms underlying this reproductive strategy relate to warming
trends. The findings will produce a forecasting methodology to predict long-term
resilience of forest systems to temperature change. The project will also
proactively recruit students from groups underrepresented in forestry
disciplines and immerse them in activities that build on students’ real-life
experiences to create meaningful field-based research experiences. Integrating a
youth-centered perspective into the research project will encourage students to
understand themselves as both practitioners of science and as members of the
scientific community.

The study compares the piñon pine (Pinus edulis) and the single-leaf piñon pine
(Pinus monophylla) species that reside in differing geographic regions to
understand the respective adaptations of these species to environmental
gradients associated with temperature. This goal will be accomplished through
three objectives that include (1) identifying gene variants (alleles) associated
with reproductive traits (e.g., seed size), (2) examining how these variants
change over time and terrain (in association with temperature gradients), and
(3) determining if the same genetic loci (where alleles associated with masting
occur) impact reproductive traits in both species; this last objective will
determine how warm-tolerant populations of the respective species have evolved
in response to higher temperature regimes. The Fellow will benefit from training
to create and analyze functional genomic data sets, establishing collaborative
networks related to forest resilience, and strengthening mentorship and teaching
skills. This includes a multi-level, near-peer research immersion experience
that integrates Indigenous knowledge with management skills; Broadening
Participation will include high school and undergraduate students as well as a
summit to elevate these goals across multiple groups of stakeholders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.