* 2305317
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Pairing on-and-offshore observations of paleo-ice streams to constrain and elucidate dynamics of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet (PISCES)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Marion McKenzie, McKenzie, Marion
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Marion McKenzie has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out research and professional development activities at
Colorado School of Mines under the mentorship of Dr. Ryan Venturelli. Dr.
McKenzie seeks to resolve relationships between terrestrial (onshore) and marine
(offshore) records of glaciation. The factors that controlled the Cordilleran
Ice Sheet (CIS) when it covered western North America about 20,000 years ago are
not well understood. Using onshore and offshore records of glaciation, this
project will improve understanding of Pacific Ocean and CIS dynamics through
time. This work also seeks to provide insight into the factors that influence
ice sheet contributions to sea level rise, which will ultimately help in
constraining how ice in modern systems may contribute to sea level rise in the
future. The fellowship funding creates opportunities for undergraduate students
to conduct research. In addition, this project will support development of
educational materials for college-level and Alaska Native Science & Engineering
Program students.

The deglacial history of Cordilleran Ice Sheet (CIS) marine margins over the
last 50,000 years is poorly constrained despite the potential insights this
record may contribute to identifying controls on ice stream stability,
elucidating millennial and global-scale climate oscillations, and characterizing
paleo-current dynamics across the Pacific Ocean. The proposed project will
leverage techniques from the fields of sedimentology, geochronology, geophysics,
and glaciology to constrain the spatiotemporal retreat dynamics of relict ice
streams near the Queen Charlotte Sound. Principally, the researchers will
supplement mapping of glacial geomorphic landforms from LiDAR and bathymetric
elevation data with iceberg-rafted debris (IRD) and offshore marine sediment
geochronology from Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP) cruise 18, site 177 to
constrain the location, behavior, timing, and rate of southwestern CIS ice
stream activity over the last 50,000 years. Pairing on-and-offshore data will
lead to strong temporal and spatial records of paleo-glaciation with
implications for overall CIS modelling, ocean dynamics in the Pacific Ocean, and
millennial-scale climate oscillations to bolster understanding of dynamics,
rates, and magnitude of change in the Earth climate system. Multidisciplinary
techniques used throughout this work will improve understanding of controls on
ice streams suitable for predicting dynamics of future ice loss to ultimately
elucidate the relationship between onshore and offshore records.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.