* 2305218
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Skeletal and behavioral underpinnings of extreme locomotor diversity in snakes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jessica Tingle, Tingle, Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
will help to better understand how animals with a simple body plan (snakes) can
evolve numerous strategies to overcome the challenges of moving through
different environments. The research has implications for ecology and
conservation, since how an animal moves can influence the ability to expand into
new habitats or to cope with a changing one. Additionally, the results will
contribute to the development of bioinspired snake-like robots that will be able
to carry out tasks in terrains inaccessible to wheeled and limbed robots. The
fellow will also contribute to the participation of early-career scientists in
biology by creating a new long-term mentorship program through a scientific
society to promote career development and professional networks.

The fellow will focus on the evolution of locomotor behavior and relevant
morphology in a taxonomically and functionally diverse snake subfamily, the
Natricinae. First, the fellow will investigate the evolution of vertebral
morphology using ÂµCT scans, 3D geometric morphometrics, and phylogenetic
comparative methods. Then, the fellow will use a comparative biomechanics
approach to study within- and among-species variation in locomotor behavior and
performance on a challenging substrate, sand, which exists in numerous habitat
types worldwide. Finally, the fellow will integrate these two datasets
(vertebral morphology and locomotor biomechanics) to examine whether
interspecific differences in the axial skeleton predict choice of locomotor mode
or kinematic differences within a given mode, providing a more integrative
understanding of functional evolution. Training goals and broadening
participation activities for the fellowship include: 1) learning software and
analytical techniques for working with 3D morphological data; 2) building a
strong quantitative skillset for studying locomotor biomechanics, which will
include advanced computational methods for processing and analyzing video data;
and 3) developing a peer mentoring program for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in a professional society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.