* 2305620
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Geomicrobiology in the Critical Zone- integrating subsurface microbial processes across spatial and temporal scales.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Dawson Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Dawson E
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

This EAR-PF project to Dr. Dawson Fairbanks, University of California-Riverside,
explores the role that soil microbial communities’ diversity and functionality
play in combating climate change. The work focuses on the responses of microbial
communities to changing environmental conditions at a range of scales across the
US and Puerto Rico. The goal is a deeper understanding of how soil responds to
global change stressors and how soil types, vegetation, and climate regime
influence the microbes that drive nutrient cycling in soil. Broader impacts of
this work focus on education and outreach. Through lab and field-based student
projects, this fellowship will train and prepare the next generation of STEM
researchers. Public outreach events and science policy literature will provide
information about the results of this project. The investigator will also engage
policymakers through an op-ed about sustainable management practices.

This project aims to understand the drivers of subsurface microbial
functionality across continental scales. Subsurface microbial communities play a
critical role in soil health, biogeochemical cycling, soil formation, and carbon
storage, yet there is still much to learn about these communities, particularly
at a continental scale. This project builds upon previous work, which identified
drivers of microbial biodiversity across a continental scale, with some sites
showing no change with depth and others a complete turnover of microbial
communities. The goal of this project is to understand how subsoil microbial
functionality differs across climate gradients and their impacts on Earth’s
biogeochemical cycling. I hypothesize that soil type, hydrology, and lithology
are critical to determining the depth to which surface influences such as
vegetation and climate drive microbial community composition and activity. This
project will use a combination of molecular techniques, including metagenomics
and metatranscriptomics, to analyze the collected soil samples. I will also
conduct statistical analyses to identify drivers of microbial community
composition and function across different soil types, vegetation, and climate
regimes. By analyzing data collected across the continental US and Puerto Rico,
I aim to identify the underlying factors that determine the functional diversity
of subsurface microbial communities. In order to scale the broad swath of
metagenomic studies across various NSF networks, including LTER, NEON and CZNet,
I will leverage data collected across networks to integrate discoveries into a
larger metagenomic reference database to foster future discovery of novel taxa
and functional pathways. The potential contributions of this project are
significant. It will advance efforts to harmonize molecular information for
microbial taxa and their functional traits, facilitating their integration with
ecosystem-level data. Furthermore, it will enable future metagenomic studies to
leverage environmental data, thereby stimulating further research in microbial
ecology. Moreover, this project will provide valuable insights into the role of
subsurface microbial communities in soil health, biogeochemical cycling, and
carbon storage, which are essential for the development of sustainable
management practices in the face of ongoing climate change. In summary, this
project aims to deepen our understanding of the diversity and functionality of
subsurface microbial communities, identify the drivers shaping these communities
across different regions and depths, and elucidate their impacts on Earth's
biogeochemical cycles. The findings of this project will be crucial for
comprehending the effects of global change stressors on soil health and carbon
storage, thus informing future sustainable management practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.