* 2305683
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing precision forestry and rangeland technologies (MT, ID, ND, SD, WA, WY)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Scott Whittenburg, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 987,278.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on precision
forestry and rangeland management. It will be a new economic driver in the
Northern Rockies/Northern Plains region by applying technology, tools, and data
to the emerging field of precision forestry and rangeland management. This
project, led by the University of Montana, brings together researchers and
partners from the Plains University Innovation Alliance, the Montana Wood
Products Association, the Nature Conservancy, the US Forest Service, the Bureau
of Land Management, and the American Indian Higher Education Consortium in
addition to state Climate Offices, economic and workforce offices in the Montana
Governor's Office, and venture capital firms. Through this innovative
partnership between public institutions, Tribal Community Universities, and
private industry, the team will create a dynamic economic development ecosystem
and an expert knowledge base that will address critical issues related to land
management with national and global relevance. As a key aspect of the effort,
the Development Award will demonstrate the application of recent and emerging
technologies to manage the land to maximize the economic benefit of federal,
Tribal, and private forests and rangelands while minimizing ecological impacts
such as fire, drought, and flood. Technologies such as lidar, autonomous aerial
systems, satellite imagery, sensor arrays, and predictive modeling can increase
forest and rangeland production by improving the available data for use by land
managers. This will enable more precise policy and decision-making and improve
environmental risk mitigation.

A critical goal of the Development Award is to partner with tribal communities
and Tribal Community Universities, relying upon their knowledge and expertise in
Indigenous ways of knowing. The partners are committed to incorporating Western
and tribal scientific traditions and methodologies into our work, shifting the
research paradigm to include the land management practices of historically
excluded Indigenous communities, which will bring new insight into land
management practices. Working with our industrial and federal partners,
researchers from public universities and TCUs will develop new technologies
translated into commercial use, creating economic development and workforce
opportunities needed to support this vital regional asset. Our workforce
development partners will identify current and projected workforce needs in this
sector and adapt, design, implement and expand new or existing pathways to
training. This Development Award will enable the team to engage in a regional,
collaborative planning process to prepare a future Engine to meet these goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.