* 2305107
* Conference: Maurice Auslander Distinguished Lectures and International Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Gordana Todorov, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 03/31/2025
* USD 49,900.00

This award supports the 2023 and 2024 Maurice Auslander International
Conference, which will be held at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Quissett Campus in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, USA from April 26 to May 1, 2023,
and again in the last week of April, 2024.The Maurice Auslander International
Conference, held annually since 2002, is intended to be a center of activity for
the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras in the United States.
The conference will be a combination workshop/conference/student presentation
event. It will serve three principal objectives: to improve understanding of
basic background knowledge in the field of representations of finite dimensional
algebras and related topics, to keep participants up to date on the newest
developments in the field, and to give young American researchers an opportunity
to showcase their results in front of an international audience.

Maurice Auslander was an influential mathematician at Brandeis University,
widely known for his work in the representation theory of finite dimensional
algebras. The Maurice Auslander International Conference brings together
mathematicians from Representation Theory and related areas of Combinatorics,
Invariant Theory, Commutative Algebra, Homological Algebra, and Mathematical
Physics. Each day of the conference will start with an expository lecture by a
known international expert in various fields of Algebra, Combinatorics or
related fields, keeping to the central theme of Representation Theory. This will
be followed by one or two student presentations explaining the results that the
students have obtained for their PhD thesis. The rest of the lectures will be
traditional conference talks. Information on the upcoming conference, as well as
records for previous years, can be found at
http://www.northeastern.edu/martsinkovsky/p/MADL/MADL.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.