* 2305738
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Chironomid Bioturbation at Future High Temperature Scenarios and its Effect on Nutrient Fluxes and Bacterial Activity
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Roberto Reyes Maldonado, Reyes Maldonado, Roberto
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Chironomid
larvae are aquatic insects that play an important role in mixing and disturbing
benthic sediments in a process called bioturbation. Chironomids are known for
their ventilation activities, an action that promotes oxygenation, nutrient
flux, and bacterial activity in sediments. There is a lack of understanding
about how chironomid bioturbation mediated processes will be affected under
climate change scenarios. This should be addressed to anticipate how
bioturbation induced processes would affect the balance of freshwater ecosystems
in a warmer environment. This project will use an urban aquatic environment as a
climate change surrogate scenario to determine the effect of high temperatures
on the bioturbation behavior of chironomids and their influence on nutrient
cycling and bacterial activity. Determining this will help to propose mitigation
and management activities for freshwater ecosystems in the future, especially
for tropical ecosystems where processes might be more sensitive to small changes
in temperature. This research will also provide training opportunities to
underrepresented individuals to encourage them to pursue a career in aquatic
ecology or any other related field.

The objective of this project will be achieved by studying microcosms maintained
with the sediments and the environmental conditions of an urban stream with
records of high temperature fluctuations in Puerto Rico. First, the Fellow will
integrate flow velocity microelectrodes, conductivity, and color tracer
techniques to determine if chironomid ventilations are affected by temperature;
then, sediment core incubations will be used to determine if the effects of
bioturbation on nitrogen, phosphorous, and carbon fluxes are temperature-
independent; and last, molecular techniques will be used to determine how
bioturbation-induced microbial activity and community composition are influenced
by warm temperatures. Through the completion of this project, the Fellow will
gain experience as an independent researcher, but will also promote broadening
participation and inclusion in biology by providing lectures and mentoring
opportunities to students and teachers in Puerto Rico. The Fellow will focus on
training interested individuals in field and laboratory techniques, critical
thinking, and communication skills so that they can be prepared when venturing
into any scientific field in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.