* 2305844
* NSF PRFB FY23: Roles of gut microbiomes in herbivorous host toxin tolerance
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Bahareh Sorouri, Sorouri, Bahareh
* Fellowship Award
* Deana Erdner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Microbiomes are communities of microorganisms
that are important for hosts and for the environment. This research will
investigate the role of host microbiomes in digesting plants that produce
toxins. Snowshoe hares and greater sage-grouse are two herbivores that eat toxic
plants. They have similar digestive systems and therefore a similar environment
for their gut microbiomes. Both hosts are the target of conservation efforts
since their survival is threatened by pollution and climate change. Thus,
understanding how herbivores overcome toxin exposure can help protect and
preserve ecosystems. Furthermore, as part of the training plan, the fellow will
broaden participation of diverse communities in science through teaching,
science communication, mentoring, and outreach.

This research will demonstrate that microbiomes perform important functions for
the host as a Rule of Life. The fellow will determine the microbial genomic
functions and mechanisms driving host toxin tolerance using data-driven and
empirical multi-omics approaches. The research will investigate two hypotheses
regarding the gut microbial role in toxin tolerance (i.e., plant secondary
metabolite degradation) for snowshoe hares and greater sage-grouse: 1) the gut
microbiome of snowshoe hares varies over time due to seasonal, dietary changes
in toxicity, and 2) similar gut microbial taxa will drive toxin tolerance in
distinct hosts that specialize on different diets. The project will incorporate
metagenomic and metabolomic analyses on snowshoe hare fecal and cecal pellet
collections from the Bonanza Creek Long Term Ecological Research (BNZ LTER)
program sites near Fairbanks, Alaska. Furthermore, this research will classify
the microbial taxa from metagenomic approaches, then will compare the microbial
pathways responsible for toxin tolerance in sage-grouse and snowshoe hare
cultured gut isolates with transcriptomic and metabolomic methods. Training
objectives for the fellow include strengthening bioinformatic and empirical
skills, expanding expertise of host-associated microbial ecology and physiology,
and incorporating inclusive mentoring and teaching for historically excluded
students. This project is jointly funded by Division of Biological
Infrastructure in the Directorate of Biological Sciences and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.