* 2305121
* Transient Physicochemical Properties of Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2026
* Richard Schaller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2026
* USD 425,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Richard Schaller from Northwestern
University will investigate crystal lattices, surfaces, and surface ligand
behavior of semiconductor and metal nanoparticles to advance understanding of
their physicochemical properties. Semiconductor and metal particles with
nanometer-scale features offer beneficial attributes that can be exploited for
solid-state lighting, displays and photovoltaics to bio/chem sensors. The
studies of this research project will experimentally elucidate equilibrium- and
time-evolution of key properties under conditions that either push nanomaterials
to performance limits or expressly target particle fusion. This project will
support training for future researchers in areas of advanced experimental
methods and data analysis and offers advances in communal knowledge regarding
promising materials systems. Research methods and findings from the lab will be
incorporated into the classroom and presented in public venues. Member of the
Schiller group will engage in outreach to community colleges and public schools.

The response of nanoparticles and surface ligands to intense excitation and
elevated temperature, whether pulsed or sustained, impacts optoelectronic
characteristics as well as influences the solid produced during additive
manufacturing. Planned studies aim to both evaluate this impact but more
importantly offer insights as to evolution of such systems using approaches
spanning transient x-ray diffraction and stimulated Raman to selected area
electron diffraction and nuclear magnetic resonance for a range of excitation
conditions. The proposed effort seeks to evaluate processes and relevance of
ligand re-partitioning, surface activity, lattice disordering, de-mixing of
particular compositions, and evolution of phonon distributions. Insights can
offer means to increase stability of as-designed nanoparticles to extreme
conditions or conversely facilitate incorporation into a sintering ensemble of
particles. Several earth abundant and low toxicity compositions will be
investigated. The overall objective is to discern and learn to predict how
nanoparticle structure and chemical ligand motif impact static and dynamic
physicochemical properties under technologically relevant conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.