* 2305283
* Conference: 39th MU Interdisciplinary  Plant Group (IPG) Annual Symposium
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Ron Mittler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2024
* USD 15,161.00

Pathogens, insects, and different stresses such as flooding, prolonged droughts,
and heat waves, inflict heavy losses to agricultural production worldwide and
threaten global food security. The alarming increase in the frequency and
intensity of these stresses, an outcome of global warming and climate change,
highlights the importance of studying how plants can be made more resilient to
stress. Based on these studies, new varieties of many different crops and trees
can be developed with increased tolerance to different stresses. These would
decrease annual damages associated with different pathogens, and stresses such
as drought, flooding, or heat waves, preventing billions of dollars’ worth in
damages to agriculture, and increasing food security under a changing climate.
In addition to increasing the knowledge base of plant responses to abiotic
stress, training of a new generation of researchers in interdisciplinary
research methods is a must, as novel technologies that mitigate climate change
would most likely come from interdisciplinary research. The current grant will
support an interdisciplinary conference that focuses on how to make plants more
tolerant to stress. The planned symposium will enhance the learning and
networking opportunities afforded to students, postdoctoral fellows, and early
career scientists and expose them to interdisciplinary research. Furthermore, by
instilling the virtues of interdisciplinary collaboration early in students’
careers the conference will extend the benefits to society because the mindset
and approaches needed to tackle big societal challenges will be taught to the
next generation of scientists.

Reactive oxygen species, and the changes they cause in the reduction–oxidation
(redox) state of cells, are key signaling molecules required for the activation
of plant acclimation and defense mechanisms. Dissecting and understanding how
reactive oxygen species orchestrate plant responses to stress will significantly
contribute to the overall efforts of the scientific community to improve plant
tolerance to stress and mitigate some of the current and upcoming harsh
environmental challenges. The 39th University of Missouri Interdisciplinary
Plant Group’s Annual Symposium was therefore developed around the theme of Redox
Regulation of Plant Stress and Development (May 23-26, 2023). This symposium
will bring together experts at the intersections of different disciplines to
educate the scientific community about reactive oxygen species and redox
signaling and the many different processes tightly linked to them. The symposium
will also broaden participation of underrepresented groups. It includes, for
example, a diverse group of speakers, so that students from diverse backgrounds
could see themselves represented. Of the 18 confirmed speakers, 8 are women, and
5 are of non-white ethnicity. Furthermore, early career scientists are included
as invited speakers: 4 assistant professor-level and 1 postdoc, of which 3 are
women and 2 are African American. This will provide a platform for women and
underrepresented minorities to advance their careers by providing visibility of
their work at a world-renowned meeting, attended by numerous distinguished
scientists, two of whom are members of the National Academy of Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.