* 2305873
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the role and interplay of microenvironment, manufacturing, and metabolism on MSC production of extracellular vesicles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Kelly Hines, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 358,858.00

Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are isolated from bone marrow and fat cells.
While they are not stem cells, they exhibit a similar ability to differentiate
into many types of cells. That ability forms the basis for developing treatments
for a variety of diseases. MSCs also generate extracellular vesicles (EVs). The
EVs transport bioactive molecules that prompt cellular-level responses. It is
difficult to manufacture EVs reproducibly. This limits its current therapeutic
potential. Changes in local conditions impact MSC-EV production and function.
Understanding those impacts is the focus of this project. The project will also
promote STEM participation of students from underrepresented groups.

Many challenges contribute to the lack of successful MSC-EV clinical
translation. MSC heterogeneity is a key issue. There are no effective critical
quality attributes (CQAs) that predict how a given batch of EVs will perform.
There are also no standardized manufacturing approaches for EVs. In addition,
there is a knowledge gap regarding the effects of scaling EV manufacturing with
respect to 2D vs. 3D environments. The overall goals of this project are to
understand how 3D structure affects EV production and to identify metabolic
pathways controlling this response. To accomplish these goals, the project team
will: 1) investigate the effects of 3D hydrogel microenvironments on EV
function, 2) determine the effects of manufacturing strategies on EVs, and 3)
define metabolic changes associated with EV production. It is anticipated that
the mechanisms identified will have relevance for MSC-EVs for different
therapeutic applications and for EVs generated by other cell types.

This project is jointly supported by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering
Program in ENG/CBET and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in BIO/MCB.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.