* 2305139
* Collaborative Research: Metasurface-Enabled Broadband Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xingjie Ni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 315,593.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Peijun Guo and his group at Yale University and Xingjie Ni and his
group at Pennsylvania State University are collaboratively advancing the
characterization of chiral molecules (i.e. molecules that display handedness)
and materials. Circular dichroism (CD) is an optical property that can be used
to probe molecular chirality. The Guo/Ni team is engineering metasurfaces –
structures that can manipulate various properties of light, including its
chirality – to significantly simplify CD spectrometers, thereby facilitating CD
spectroscopy and imaging experiments with remarkable sensitivity and high
throughput. The project offers hands-on training to both graduate and
undergraduate students in areas of nanofabrication, light-matter interactions,
and the assembly and adaptation of advanced optical measurement setups.
Moreover, the project aims to motivate younger students to venture into STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields by partnering with the
Yale Pathways and the Office of Science Outreach at Penn State to engage K-12
students to the research.

This collaborative project focuses on the design, fabrication, and evaluation of
metasurfaces for a novel approach to circular dichroism (CD) measurements. The
metasurfaces are designed to span wavelengths ranging from the ultraviolet to
terahertz, portions of which are presently not covered by commercial CD
spectrometers. Several prototypical chiral systems, including chiral molecules,
chiral colloidal nanocrystals, and chiral two-dimensional hybrid perovskites,
are being used for benchmarking the metasurface-enabled optical tools. The
metasurfaces are intrinsically diffractive, hence they enable single shot-
compatible CD characterization, making them invaluable for monitoring
irreversible chemical processes. The metasurfaces can be incorporated in other
optical measurement techniques such as magneto-optic Kerr effect and time-
resolved Faraday rotation. These techniques offer powerful probes for
understanding chemical synthesis and catalysis, energy conversion, and quantum
information science. Students involved in this project will acquire a profound
understanding of nanophotonics, optical spectroscopy, and imaging methods,
offering them valuable, practical insights into these rapidly evolving
scientific fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.