* 2305880
* Collaborative Research: How to manipulate a plant? Testing for conserved effectors and plant responses in gall induction and growth using a multi-species comparative approach.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Ellen Martinson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 281,164.00

A gall is a tumor-like growth on a plant that is induced by another organism
(i.e., bacteria, fungi, nematode, or insects). Insect-induced plant galls
represent one of the most amazing and complex interspecific interactions in
nature, capturing the interest of naturalists, ecologists and evolutionary
biologists for centuries. Increasingly, gall-forming insects also act as
economically important agricultural pests, reducing crop yields worldwide.
Surprisingly, the general mechanisms behind insect gall induction and growth are
unknown. This proposal aims to uncover the evolutionarily conserved molecular
mechanisms of gall formation by harnessing the galling system of cynipid wasps
on live oaks, in which many species of cynipids successfully gall the same
plant. This system allows for powerful natural experiments to test the
generality of how galling organisms manipulate plant genomes and to generate new
hypotheses for investigating plant control strategies against galling herbivores
and other pests that manipulate host plant defense and immunity. Additionally,
galling research has great potential for the advancement of genetic engineering
because gall-formation involves the simultaneous manipulation of thousands of
genes in the plant – not possible with current technologies (e.g., RNAi,
CRISPR). During the course of this research the PIs will co-host a seminar
series and develop a series of labs with collaborators at Texas Southern
University, a historically black college (HBCU); recruit summer undergraduate
researchers at University of New Mexico, a federally recognized minority-serving
institution; as well as actively participate in public engagement of scientific
research in multiple institutions in Houston and Albuquerque.

Previous molecular studies on insect-induced plant galls have focused on one
species at a time, which has created a patchwork of phylogenetically divergent
hosts and galling insects that has made it challenging to identify common
underlying mechanisms behind galling. The study system we have developed
represents a solution to this problem; wherein seven distinct evolutionary
lineages of wasp all form phenotypically unique galls on the same host plant
species. This system gives us the power to reduce the noise from different gall
phenotypes (e.g., color, hairs, size, starting tissue) to determine the core
molecular mechanisms of this interaction. In Aim 1, we will identify potential
effector molecules in seven species of cynipid wasps. Through transcriptomes and
proteomes, the wasp genes needed to induce gall induction will be identified in
the venom gland (responsible for gall induction) and larval salivary glands
(responsible for gall growth). In Aim 2, we will determine the core plant
response to cynipid gallers. By comparing the gene expression of the multiple
gall morphologies to their matched control ungalled tissues throughout
development, we can separate out phenotypic variation across galls to identify
alterations in core genes and pathways required to initiate and maintain gall
growth. In Aim 3, our results in oak will be assessed for conservation in other
galling systems by conducting a large meta-analysis with 20+ previous published
gall transcriptomes including several agricultural pests on soybean, wheat,
rice, grape, and blueberry. This will ensure that our results will inform the
entire galling research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.