* 2305568
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: The effects of grain-scale deformation on helium diffusion and thermochronometric ages of accessory minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Catherine Ross, Ross, Catherine Haggard
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

The Earth’s thermal structure is altered by many processes which show up in
rocks as distinct geochemical and isotopic fingerprints. Thermochronology uses
these isotopic records in minerals to infer thermal histories and the (U–Th)/He
system is one of these tools. This technique’s uncertainties are relatively low
and the method has yielded reproducible, geologically reasonable ages in many
studies. Sometimes, however, the data are “overdispersed”, meaning that the
spread in dates is greater than the quantified uncertainty, which can make
datasets challenging to interpret. There could be several reasons for this, but
one understudied reason is crystal defects. PI Ross aims to investigate this
grain-scale process as a potential contributor to overdispersion by carrying out
a cross-disciplinary study of how these defects within minerals affect helium
diffusion. It has become increasingly important in the geology community to
carefully characterize thermochronology samples to study a wider set of
geological problems including better estimating erosion, constraining plate
tectonics, exploring other planets, and developing energy and mineral resources
for our future. PI Ross will mentor an undergraduate student by working with two
well-established University of Colorado Boulder research training programs aimed
at recruiting and retaining underrepresented students. PI Ross will also
choreograph a dance that helps non-geologists understand how complicated
deformation is accommodated on the atomic scale within a single crystal,
bolstering the connection between the arts and sciences.

Although the thermochronology community has studied many of the factors that
affect He diffusion such as grain size, radiation damage, and anisotropy, there
are still aspects of diffusion kinetics that are not well understood, as
manifested by the overdispersion of many (U-Th)/He datasets. Defects due to
deformation may substantially affect helium diffusion kinetics in minerals and
therefore contribute to (U-Th)/He age dispersion in an underappreciated way.
This project integrates detailed microscopic characterization via scanning and
transmission electron microscopy of intragrain defects, He diffusion experiments
(Continuous Ramped Heating and 4He/3He), and dating via conventional (U-Th)/He
analyses and Laser-Ablation He mapping and spot analyses. By completing a
variety of analyses yielding different types of insights on the same grains, a
direct comparison and quantification can be made between single-grain
deformation, diffusion kinetics, and age. The role that deformation plays in
these processes at the sub-grain scale is understudied, despite frequent
applications of these chronometers in deformed rocks from tectonically complex
regions. The broader impacts of this project are two-fold: PI Ross will mentor
underrepresented undergraduate students and create a “Dance of Dislocations”.

This EAR-PF project has been fully supported by the EAR Tectonics program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.