* 2305688
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Identifying Mechanisms of Plant Symbiosis Control Through Virus Induced Mutant Stacking (VIMS)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Evan Ellison, Ellison, Evan E
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Dr. Evan
Ellison is “Identifying Mechanisms of Plant Symbiosis Control Through Virus
Induced Mutant Stacking (VIMS)”. The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Cambridge and the sponsoring scientist is Prof. Giles E.D.
Oldroyd.

To sustain and expand food production in a growing global population, next
generation crop varieties must be developed that take advantage of natural
systems to improve nutrient capture rather than rely on excessive application of
inorganic nutrients. Fortunately, most crop species can greatly improve their
ability to capture and use essential nutrients through symbiotic relationships
with beneficial soil fungi. This symbiosis, however, is restricted if high
concentrations of nitrogen or phosphorus have been applied to the soil, limiting
the utility. The goal of this research is to characterize unknown signals that
regulate symbiosis under high nutrient conditions; thereby identifying crop
genotypes that use less input while maintaining high productivity. This project
also seeks to democratize and remove financial, geographic and time limitations
of large-scale genome editing projects, which is critical for international
molecular plant improvement. Broader impacts from this project include
generating genetic and technological resources for the plant science community,
educating citizen scientists interested in how gene editing contributes to
reducing fertilizer use, and translating results for crop improvement and
sustainable food production. Training objectives include obtaining hands-on
expertise in applying genetic and genomic tools to address biologically
important questions.

Split root experiments suggest that nutrient suppression of arbuscular
mycorrhizal symbiosis exists through largely unknown systemic process in
addition to local mechanisms. Secreted peptides have been demonstrated to be a
critical component of systemic symbiosis regulation and nutrient response. This
research will characterize systemic peptides that regulate symbiosis with
mycorrhizal fungi in response to differential nutrient conditions. Connecting
multiple environmental conditions to their signaling response will be
accomplished by developing a new method of Viral Induced Mutant Stacking to
rapidly stack targeted mutations across a population. This novel genetic
screening technique will be applied to create a combinatorial population of
peptide mutants and isolate genetic backgrounds enabling symbiosis under
nutrient suppressive conditions. Mutant populations and genetic engineering
reagents generated during this project will be immediately available to
researchers for independent investigations. New technology developed in this
research can be used to study complex, integrated, phenotypic responses while
providing valuable insight into the systemic regulation of symbiosis. Causal
alleles identified using this approach can quickly be incorporated into
agriculturally relevant species for rapid crop improvement. All data, genetic
and molecular resources, and methodological advances will be made freely
available to the general scientific community through public long-term
repositories and upon request.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.