* 2305389
* I-Corps: Intelligent wireless sensor network platform for extended human health monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jan Rabaey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a generic health monitoring platform that enables intelligent
monitoring of physiological signals. This project aims to improve the battery
life and privacy of wearable devices, enabling long-term monitoring for both
personal health and medical conditions. The system applies to a variety of bio-
parametric signals which could be used for general consumer health monitoring
that informs users of their own health, motivating lifestyle changes, and
detecting emergency conditions. The system also has applications in intensive
care to improve the comfort of patients that are being monitored in the long-
term by removing wires while maintaining a long lifetime. Monitoring of specific
signals such as stress, emotion, sound, and motion can provide utility for
military applications including soldier monitoring in the battlefield, soldier
training, and post-traumatic diseases. The system could also be customized for
specialized athletic sport monitoring or even for specialized medical
conditions. For example, patients with chronic conditions like stroke recurrence
could benefit from heart monitoring, temperature monitoring can predict immune
response to viruses so patients can get treatment, and respiration tracking can
predict the risk of an asthma attack. Overall, the system has the potential to
improve health monitoring for the general public, and the ability for patients
with chronic conditions to get treatment in advance of critical events.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an intelligent wireless
sensor network platform for extended human health monitoring through in-sensor
machine learning. The technology uses emerging brain-inspired Hyperdimensional
Computing, which is characterized by very low computational complexity, to
minimize net power consumption improving network lifetime, security, and
privacy. The technology enables integration of a large number of low-power
distributed sensors that wirelessly communicate intelligently detected
events/classes. Current systems either transmit data to another device for
processing, which is very costly in terms of power, or attempt to process
locally with algorithms that are more expensive than the amount saved by
reducing transmission. To solve these problems, this project utilizes the
emerging brain-inspired Hyperdimensional Computing paradigm to minimize net
power consumption of in-sensor computation. This paradigm represents information
with fully binary vectors and thus the encoding of data patterns involves only
simple binary operators such as right shifts, making it extremely
computationally simple. The representation can be used for classification tasks
through encoding training data into a prototype vector per class and then,
during inference, comparing similarly encoded input data against the trained
prototypes to find the closest class. Using this technology, this project can
significantly improve sensor lifetime and also provide security and privacy due
to the local computation. This project aims to develop a platform that takes
advantage of these various elements for long-term monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.