* 2305062
* CAS: Multinary Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Increasing Complexity through Solution-Phase Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Javier Vela, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 489,533.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Javier Vela of Iowa State University
will study emerging and technologically relevant semiconductors comprised of
multiple elements for which this type of chemistry remains underdeveloped.
Because these semiconductors will be made from non-toxic and earth abundant
elements, this research may open new classes of environmentally friendly and
low-cost semiconductors of great potential for clean and renewable energy. To
broaden participation and help build the next generation of highly qualified and
diverse nanochemistry scientists, the Vela group will offer internships to first
generation or under-represented undergraduates, contribute to the career
development of postdoctoral fellows, and prepare first year graduate students to
apply for research fellowships.

Under this award, Professor Javier Vela and his team will utilize their
expertise in the synthesis and spectroscopic study of optically active
nanomaterials to: (1) study the evolution of perovskite chalcogenide
nanocrystals for photovoltaics, (2) develop tin-based quaternary chalcohalide
nanocrystals for optoelectronics, and (3) test ternary tetrahedral nanocrystals
for carbon dioxide reduction. Compared to the high temperature synthesis of
single crystal or bulk semiconductors, the synthesis of nanoscale multinary
semiconductors from solution can be particularly challenging. Unlike unary or
binary nanocrystals, the nucleation and growth of multinary nanocrystals from
multiple precursors in a single, simultaneous step can be entropically
demanding. In fact, metallic or binary seeds often precede the formation,
through interfacial chemistry, of the final multinary nanophase. Further,
multinary semiconductors often adopt more than one polymorph, each of which may
contain mixed-occupancy sites or “coloring” patterns. This project will focus on
multinary semiconductors that, in addition to being defect-tolerant, show
increased stability to conditions of heat and high humidity or under continuous
illumination. Colloidal synthesis from readily available precursors is expected
to serve as a sustainable route into a wide range of functional multinary
nanocrystals. Synergy among structural characterization, spectroscopic studies,
and computation is expected to provide for a better understanding of multinary
nanocrystal polymorphism and structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.