* 2305448
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Does topographic stress connect subsurface to surface through influencing bedrock strength, clast size, and landslides?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Justin Higa, Higa, Justin T
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Justin Higa has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and professional development activities under the
mentorship of Dr. Scott Rowland at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. Dr. Higa
will examine the effects of topographic stress weathering in the valleys of Mt.
Kahālāwai, Maui, Hawaiʻi, USA. Landslides from rocky, fractured mountains are
deadly natural disasters that kill thousands of people every year. Research
suggests that the shape of the land surface, the topography, can alter stresses
within mountains to create some of these fractures and may help cause
landslides. This process, called topographic stress weathering, is a budding
frontier for understanding how fractures form in mountains. These fractures may
weaken rock and generate fragments of rock that fall from steep slopes and
collect in streams. Thus, there is a need to study whether topographic stress
weathering is a major or minor contribution to the number and size of dangerous
landslides on a mountain. Comparing calculations of topographic stress to rock
strength, the size of rock fragments in streams, and mapped landslides may show
how topographic stress weathering might affect landslide hazards. This project
is important because it presents a new way to study natural disasters by linking
topographic stress with field observations. Scientists can use such information
to help protect people from landslides. Higa aims to engage with landowners and
stakeholders of Mt. Kahālāwai to understand how this research can benefit local
communities. Higa will also use this project to partner with Earth science
students and help train a geologic workforce for the next generation of natural
hazard scientists in Hawaiʻi.

Recent studies on topographic stress weathering target how subsurface stress
fields affect the extent and width of bedrock fractures. However, it remains
unclear if topographic stresses are a major control of surface processes and
natural hazards, such as landslides. This project will attempt to understand the
relative contributions of topographic stress weathering versus climate in the
generation of fractured rock and landslides. Previous work suggests that steep,
narrow valleys concentrate fracture-inducing topographic stress perturbations at
valley bottoms, whereas wider valleys may have such perturbations over larger
areas. The study here will build off such work and focus on the valleys of an
extinct volcano, Mt. Kahālāwai (also known as the West Maui Mountains),
characterized by narrow and wide valleys with steep walls, a strong orographic
rainfall gradient, and a lack of regional tectonic activity. First, a boundary
element computer model will be used to predict the spatial distribution of
topographic stresses within valleys of various morphologies (i.e., narrow or
wide) and climates (i.e., windward or leeward). Next, researchers will collect
(1) rebound hammer strength measurements of exposed bedrock, (2) size
distributions of stream clasts, and (3) satellite mapping of landslides over
decadal timescales from these valleys. If topographic stress controls surface
processes, wide valleys may have weaker rocks, smaller clasts, and more
landslides than steep, narrow valleys in similar climates. Then, comparing
models and observations from valleys of similar morphologies but different
climates will classify the effect of precipitation on weathering. Together,
these tests will examine how topographic stress and climate work to erode steep
valleys. Determining connections between topographic stress and geomorphic
transport processes will help quantify the impact of stress-induced fracturing
on various landscape evolution problems, which researchers can implement
worldwide. Thus, this project may showcase a globally applicable method for
examining weathering, erosion, and landslide hazards by establishing a framework
linking topographic stress weathering and field observations.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Science Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.