* 2305753
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Does long-term selection for growth on recalcitrant vs labile carbon impact Streptomyces nutrient use or inhibitory phenotypes?
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Brett Lane, Lane, Brett
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will explore the impact of soil
carbon complexity on microbial growth and interactions between microbes
competing for limited carbon resources. Soil carbon can be broadly categorized
as either readily available for microbial consumption (labile carbon) or
difficult for microbial populations to metabolize (recalcitrant carbon). In
order to utilize recalcitrant carbon, microbes must first break these complex
compounds into their building blocks while also defending these building blocks
from theft by neighboring microbes. To this end, microbes which specialize in
the metabolism of recalcitrant carbon utilize antimicrobial compounds to prevent
their neighbors from stealing these resources. These antimicrobial compounds are
also believed to play a significant role in the suppression of soil-inhabiting,
plant-pathogenic, organisms. As rising global temperatures are anticipated to
increase the relative proportion of recalcitrant carbon within the soil, soil-
inhabiting microbes are anticipated to alter their production of and resistance
to antimicrobial compounds to further their ability to compete for these complex
resources. Through this fellowship, the PI will further our understanding of how
the adaptation of microbes to increasingly prominent recalcitrant carbon will
influence interactions between soil-inhabiting microbes. The results of this
research will be vital in promoting soil health and will ensure the protection
of food crops from soil-inhabiting pathogens. Furthermore, this fellowship will
further the training of the fellow, research personnel, graduate, and
undergraduate students at the University of Minnesota as well as promote the
participation and training of underrepresented groups in science.

In this research, isolates of Streptomyces, a genus of prominent, soil-borne,
antibiotic-producing bacteria, will undergo long-term selection for growth in
petridishes containing a sole carbon source of varying recalcitrance. Isolates
will be dotted on plates and grown until they exhibit sporulation. Spores will
then be transferred to subsequent plates for a total of fifty generations of
selection on either recalcitrant or labile carbon. It is anticipated that growth
on recalcitrant carbon sources, in contrast to labile carbon, will impart
selection for the utilization of a wider range of carbon sources and will
increase the frequency and intensity of constitutive antibiotic production.
Following fifty generations of growth, the fellow will characterize changes in
isolate nutrient use and inhibitory phenotypes as well as genomic and
transcriptional changes associated with carbon metabolism and secondary
metabolite production. The results of this project will provide insight into the
genomic and transcriptional modifications resulting from selection for growth on
carbon sources of varying recalcitrancy. This project will further the fellowâ€™s
training in microbial ecology and genomic analysis as well as mentorship and
scientific communication. The fellow will also recruit undergraduate researchers
to train the next generation of scientists. In addition, the fellow will develop
and conduct outreach events to broaden K-12 participation in science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.