* 2305694
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Human Domestication of Maize as Bio-cultural Coevolution
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Samantha Snodgrass, Snodgrass, Samantha
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Samantha Snodgrass is "Human Domestication of Maize as Bio-cultural
Coevolution". The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California (UC) Davis and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Jeffrey Ross-Ibarra
and Dr. Graham Coop.

Plant domestication and agriculture are key innovations underlying the past
10,000 years of human civilization. Domestication alters how plants benefit
humans, which can result in tight dependencies. For example, maize cannot
survive outside of human cultivation, yet is planted across the globe in
extremely different environments because it is a vital food source for humans.
While archaeology and genetic research have revealed much about when and where
domestication of maize occurred, it is unclear how maize was moved with and
among early farmer communities and which traits were important early versus
later in the process. This project uses population genetics to create methods
addressing these long-standing questions in maize and other crops. Answers may
shed light on why some species are hard to domesticate and will guide efforts to
domesticate new crops. Training objectives include gaining expertise in
statistical population genetics, professional development for managing large,
interdisciplinary teams and establishing professional ties with evolutionary
biologists, anthropologists, and Mesoamerican foodway scholars at UC Davis to
facilitate future collaboration. Broader impacts include developing publicly
available undergraduate curricula focused on introducing biology students to the
field of population genetics and the possibilities opened by big data in both
sequencing and trait-measuring efforts. Given the close relationship between
farmers and domesticates, several researchers have proposed theoretical models
of domestication as bio-cultural coevolution. Current methods to investigate
evolution in such systems typically focus on a single species. This project will
expand upon those approaches by treating humans and maize as coevolving species.
Specifically, project objectives include 1) estimating joint admixture graphs to
better understand how maize moved with and among early farmer communities and
the timing and strength of selection on traits; 2) estimating signatures of
polygenic selection across 200+ traits scored in maize and placing them at
specific time periods within the admixture graph to show selection patterns on
polygenic traits not retained in the archeological record but important to
adaptation such as flowering time; and, 3) applying the results and methods to
the study of other American domesticates to test the generality of domestication
patterns found in maize. All scripts will be publicly available on GitHub and
associated with a publication. All genomic data will come from or be made
available on NCBI and/or CyVerse and aggregated trait data will be available on
a data platform such as CyVerse and/or Dryad.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.