* 2305693
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: A Comparative Genomics Approach to Understand the Genetic Regulation of Apomixis in Rosaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Charity Goeckeritz, Goeckeritz, Charity Z
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Charity Goeckeritz is ‘A Comparative Genomics Approach to Understand the Genetic
Regulation of Apomixis in Rosaceae’. The host institution for the fellowship is
the HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Alex Harkess.

Seeds usually contain a mixture of both parents’ DNA due to a process called
‘meiosis.’ Plant breeders take advantage of meiosis to create new plant
varieties, but sometimes a prized selection must be maintained and widely
distributed, requiring extensive time and resources. Apomixis is a natural
deviation of plant reproduction occurring most often in the rose, daisy, and
grass families that results in clonal seed of the mother plant. Therefore, it
provides a means of preserving elite plant varieties; it also increases the
probability of fruit set. Still, the genetic basis of apomixis remains elusive,
earning it the moniker ‘the Holy Grail of plant breeding.’ The study of apomixis
has been reserved for fast-growing plants, which largely excludes plants in the
rose family (Rosaceae) like apples and blackberries. However, with access to
recent technological advances in DNA sequencing, the study of apomixis in
Rosaceae is within reach. Comparing genomes of species with and without the
capacity for apomixis will help identify the DNA sequences controlling this
phenomenon. With respect to broader impacts, apart from its plant breeding
significance, this work provides an opportunity to communicate the significance
of natural plant diversity with relatable species to the general public.
Moreover, state-of-the-art scientific techniques for this project will be taught
to future scientists, focusing on students at historically black colleges and
universities. Training objectives include obtaining expertise in cutting-edge
functional genomics tools and computational methods.

Apomixis, or asexual seed production, is a convergent trait frequently exhibited
by the Poaceae, Asteraceae, and Rosaceae families. It has captivated researchers
for decades because it can increase reproductive fitness and maintain elite crop
genetics. Thus, apomixis has broad implications for species adaptation and crop
improvement. This project focuses on the genetics of apomixis in Rosaceae, an
area historically understudied due to long generational times. Comparative
genomics will be used to identify the DNA sequences associated with apomixis
with respect to their evolutionary trajectory. First, phased genomes will be
produced for Malus and Rubus species differing in their mode of reproduction.
Second, subgenomes and/or entire haplomes will be grouped using k-mer clustering
and phylogenetically assessed. This will guide genomic comparisons by revealing
any convergent inheritance patterns of apomixis. Lastly, differences between the
two reproductive pathways will be explored through single-nucleus RNA and ATAC
sequencing. Project deliverables include genomic resources for crop relatives
and information crucial for designing apomictic breeding strategies in the
Rosaceae. Data for the project will be available in the Genomic Database for
Rosaceae (www.rosaceae.org), the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s
GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank), and the United States’ Department of
Agriculture Germplasm Resources Information Network (www.ars-grin.gov).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.