* 2305099
* Elucidating Ring Opening Metathesis Copolymerization Thermodynamics of Monomers with Dissimilar Ring Strain Energies
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Justin Kennemur, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2026
* USD 459,804.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Justin G. Kennemur of Florida State
University is studying copolymerization thermodynamics of cyclic monomers in
ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP). Copolymerization of two or more
individual monomers into one macromolecule or polymer offers a divergent means
of producing societal plastics that contain distributed functionality for a
myriad of applications. Specifically, ROMP affords a variety of industrially
relevant polyolefin-based materials through chain growth of strained cycloolefin
monomers using well-established catalysts. This Kennemur team will perform
systematic synthetic, kinetic and mechanistic studies to gain understanding of
how basic thermodynamic principles along with key conditions, such as catalyst
and solvent, ultimately dictate the reactivity ratios of various cycloolefin
comonomers and their sequencing within the macromolecular chains that are grown.
The project will also introduce new biomass-based terpene cycloolefins to
provide a thermodynamic spectrum of medium ring-strain not afforded by the
commonly employed cycloolefin monomers in ROMP. The research team will continue
engagement with the first ever American Chemical Society Division of Polymer
Chemistry and Division of Polymer Materials Science and Engineering student
chapter that is co-established between a historically black college/university
of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) and an R1 research
university in Florida State University. This student chapter will bring together
a highly diverse body of students and faculty aimed at polymer science research.
This unique platform will additionally be utilized to promote the growth of
graduate and undergraduate students towards the development of leadership, both
governed by outreach and the development of a new Florida-based conference,
centered on polymer science.

This project will focus on elucidating ring opening metathesis copolymerization
thermodynamics of monomers with dissimilar ring strain energies. In the first
aim, reactivity ratios of low-strain cyclopentene monomers that are highly
sensitive to slight variations in their ring strain energy (RSE) will be
determined using modern integrated approaches. Determined parameters will then
be correlated to monomer sequencing within the polymer microstructure as a
function of thermodynamic principles (monomer concentration, stoichiometry, and
temperature). The second aim will examine, delta-pinene, and its variant,
apopinene , which have RSEs that are in-between the high strain and low strain
monomers typically employed in ROMP. Fundamental thermodynamic investigations
and copolymerizations of these terpene-based monomers with each other and with
low/ high RSE monomers will also be explored. Finally, the last specific aim
will push the limits of disparity between RSEs by investigating high strain and
low strain monomers in combination. Such investigations have potential for both
alternating and blocky sequencing strategies. Taken together, these studies have
the potential to provide guiding principles for the rational design of
copolymers from readily available cycloolefin monomers; there is the potential
to uncover basic principles that will apply to ring-opening polymerization
(ROMP), in general, and thereby have a significant long-term scientific impact
on polymer chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.