* 2305564
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Novel approaches to evaluating the quality of the global fossil record: the frontier between taphonomy and phylogenetics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Charles Woolley, Woolley, Charles Henrik
* Fellowship Award
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Fossils captivate our imaginations, especially the spectacularly preserved
specimens that decorate the exhibit halls of museums around the world. These
remarkably complete remains of ancient life on display offer us some of the best
clues regarding what earth was like in our prehistoric past. But behind the
scenes in museum collections lie vast treasure troves of valuable scientific
information preserved in the less complete fossils that often never see the
public eye. Although many of these specimens aren’t much to look at, they
nevertheless have the potential to provide scientists with a wealth of
biological, ecological, and evolutionary information to help us better
understand the history of life on Earth. However, paleontologists are still
trying to figure out how to best incorporate them into broader studies of
evolutionary relationships (a.k.a. phylogenetic analyses), or whether to
incorporate them at all. This novel study seeks to test the traditionally-held
hypothesis that incomplete fossils (which represent the majority of known
extinct biodiversity) contain less reliable evolutionary information than their
more complete counterparts. PI Woolley will carry out a first-of-its-kind
sampling of the terrestrial and marine fossil records to uncover potential
universal patterns in the preservation of phylogenetic information of disparate
branches on the animal Tree of Life: corals, sea urchins, birds, and squamates
(e.g., lizards, snakes, and their relatives). The survey will integrate
specimen-based data held in natural history museum collections around the world
with a series of phylogenetic comparative methods, metrics, and tests to
determine the effects of exceptional and not-so-exceptional fossil preservation
on our ability to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of ancient
organisms in Deep Time. This is exciting and necessary work, because results
generated from this research increase the scientific value of incomplete
specimens housed in museum collections within the United States and abroad, and
allow us to include more of Earth’s extinct biodiversity as we continue to piece
together the past. And the more complete our picture of the past is, the more
capable we will be in accurately predicting and managing changes in today’s
ecosystems as our planet continues to warm.

This project supports PI Woolley’s postdoctoral research at a critical but
largely ignored intersection of paleobiological inquiry: taphonomy and
phylogenetics. It is also a project that is rooted in institutions situated at
STEM’s most accessible public-facing interface: natural history museums. The
goal of this project is to apply phylogenetic comparative methods developed
during PI Woolley’s PhD to characterize the quality of the observed fossil
record of ecologically significant animal groups through space and time. The
project will center on characterizing the biases and completeness of the fossil
records of corals, echinoids, squamates, and birds, and then assessing the
phylogenetic information content of these biased records, and thus our ability
to infer evolutionary relationships. The principles of this project unite
disciplines within Paleobiology that rarely overlap: 1) marine and terrestrial
sedimentological realms; 2) invertebrate and vertebrate paleontology; 3)
taphonomy and phylogenetics. As a result, this deliberately global, cross-
disciplinary, first-of-its-kind research directly addresses the theme of the
solicitation: “issues relating to scale”. This project examines how the fossil
record is filtered through geologic, taphonomic, and anthropogenic collecting
biases that are present at local scales within museum collections, to global
scales with aggregated collections databases like the Paleobiology Database. By
assessing the capacity of a biased and fragmentary fossil record to retain
information about evolutionary relationships, a groundwork can be established
for incorporating the vast bulk of the fossil record into more synthetic
paleobiological analyses of biodiversity patterns through time. Characterizing
fossil record biases across such a disparate sampling of ecologically
significant animal groups will also allow us to tease apart record biases that
are clade-, environment-, region-, or time-dependent, versus those that may be
more ubiquitous to fossil preservation in general, thus providing a critical
large-scale context for future taphonomic studies and assessments of fossil
record quality. In addition to supporting the early career researcher PI
Woolley, this project will be incorporated into public-facing museum
programming, college course modules, and undergraduate and post-baccalaureate
mentoring and training. Ultimately, a greater understanding of how bias affects
the quality of fossil records at multiple planes will also provide improved
contextual data to predict and manage the current biotic crisis on land and in
the ocean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.