* 2305837
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Heritable phenotypes and mechanisms through transgenerational plasticity in response to hypoxia in fish
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2027
* Benjamin Negrete, Negrete, Benjamin
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 03/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates the physiological
implications of long-term hypoxia (low oxygen) in marine environments on fish.
Hypoxia is an environmental stressor that is becoming more prevalent around the
world and, compounded with warming oceans, is increasing in duration, severity,
and size. Chronic exposure to hypoxia is particularly threatening as it limits
the ability of fish to generate energy through aerobic metabolism. Additionally,
hypoxia has many downstream impacts, including causing fish to make changes to
their behavior, morphology, physiology, and gene expression. The sum of these
flexible changes can be referred to as plasticity. Marine fish at all life
stages, particularly early-life stages, are susceptible to environmental hypoxia
as not all species can undergo long migrations to oxygenated waters.

The fellow will investigate the plastic response of the marine stickleback to
chronic hypoxia and how these plastic traits are transferred to the next
generation. Populations of stickleback in the same habitats express distinct
phenotypes that differ in their response to environmental stress, suggesting
phenotypic traits are inherited in species from the same genotype to benefit
offspring. This work will explore the changes to the oxygen cascade from the
whole-animal oxygen uptake to metabolic pathways and to genetic control of these
mechanisms. The proposed research will explore whole-animal oxygen consumption
and critical oxygen thresholds using respirometry. This oxygen uptake, and thus
aerobic respiration, will be further investigated in aerobically-demanding
tissues, including cardiac and skeletal muscles, by the sum of metabolic
pathways down to changes in the use of oxygen at the mitochondria. The fellow
will use transcriptomics to look at widespread changes in gene expression that
underpins changes in aerobic respiration and the role of epigenetics in
controlling the expression of specific traits. Through this work, the fellow
will prioritize recruiting and mentoring undergraduates to provide hands-on
research experience and mentorship through navigating college and graduate
school.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.