* 2305959
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Free-Living Amoebae Predation Mechanisms and Fostering Inclusive Communities in Environmental Microbiology through Peer-Mentoring
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Katherine Dowdell, Dowdell, Katherine
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. Free-
living amoebae are single-celled microorganisms that feed on smaller
microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Free-living amoebae are
important predators in soil and aquatic ecosystems, influencing microbial
communities and contributing to the evolution of bacterial strategies to evade
predation. However, the mechanisms that govern interactions between free-living
amoebae and bacteria are poorly understood. This research will investigate how
free-living amoebae interact with pathogenic and benign bacteria, and how these
interactions shape microbial communities. The research is important because it
will provide insights essential for engineering of microbial communities and
prevention of pathogen growth in soil and aquatic environments. The fellow will
broaden participation of groups underrepresented in biology through the
formation of a postdoctoral peer mentoring group, which will encourage the
retention of postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented groups in science by
providing a venue for peer support and professional development.

This research will investigate how the ubiquitous free-living amoeba
Acanthamoeba castellanii interacts with diverse bacteria, and the resulting
impacts on microbial communities. Specific hypotheses include the following: 1)
A. castellanii utilizes distinct predation mechanisms for different bacteria, 2)
A. castellanii preferentially grazes on benign bacteria versus pathogenic
bacteria, 3) chemotaxis is not involved in A. castellanii predation, and 4)
predation mechanisms employed by A. castellanii for grazing on bacteria in
biofilms are distinct from those used for grazing on planktonic cells.
Hypotheses will be investigated using transcriptomics, advanced microscopy, and
microfluidic chips with live-cell microscopy. The research will provide vital
knowledge regarding predator-prey theory and the interactions between amoebae
and bacteria in environmental systems. It also will inform the fields of
environmental engineering and public health, which require a deeper
understanding of microeukaryotes to effectively control microbial communities
and prevent pathogen proliferation. The fellow will receive mentoring in
analysis of transcriptomic data sets and live-cell microscopy through the
sponsoring scientists. The fellow will also work to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in biology through mentorship of undergraduate and
graduate students in the laboratory and the formation of an interdisciplinary
postdoctoral peer mentoring group, which will provide professional development
and increase a sense of belonging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.