* 2305927
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: The impact of changes in genome structure on diversification in adaptive radiation.
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Inbar Maayan, Maayan, Inbar
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 09/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The aim of this project is to examine how
changes in genetic organization can interfere with reproduction and fast-track
adaptation to the environment, driving the evolution of animal diversity. The
Fellow will use genome sequencing, chromosome mapping, and comparison of
patterns of DNA change among North American lizards to study how chromosome
changes may initiate divergence between groups even when those groups are found
in the same place. In doing so, this work will illuminate how biodiversity
arises and is maintained, findings that are particularly urgent in this age of
biodiversity loss and global change. Through engagement with students at the
Fellow’s host institution and while conducting fieldwork, this work will also
help to expand avenues for participation in science for people of all
backgrounds.

A major gap in our understanding of speciation concerns the mechanisms that
initially disrupt gene flow among adaptively-diverging lineages. This project
will shed new light on this question by investigating the role that changes in
genome organization may play as early drivers of speciation during adaptive
radiation. Over the course of this project, the Fellow will generate high-
quality reference genomes, apply synteny mapping and cytogenetic techniques to
detect signatures of structural changes, and test for evidence of selection and
shifts in evolutionary rates. This work will focus on a clade within Anolis
lizards as a case study to uncover general principles governing major bursts of
diversification as standing genetic variation becomes exposed to different
selection regimes through chromosomal fission and fusion. While carrying out
this project, the Fellow will receive training in the methods involved with the
aims of the study and expand access to scientific training for students through
both research mentorship and institution-based programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.