* 2305513
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Development across evolutionary time at a single-cell resolution
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Christopher Large, Large, Christopher Ryan Livingston
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Development from a single-celled egg to an
adult animal relies on the coordination and control of thousands of genes that
allows them to be turned on and off in the right cell at the right time. How the
regulation of these genes changes between organisms through evolution, and
results in Earthâ€™s diversity of life remains a fundamental and unanswered
question of biology. Comparisons of the gene regulation that controls
development between closely related animals reveals that despite superficial
similarity, how development is controlled can vary significantly. This project
aims to provide insight into the extent by which gene regulation differs across
13 species of closely related and similar roundworms in order to reveal what
allows some genes to change and others to stay the same. Overall, the project
will use these roundworms as a model system to expand our knowledge of how
development evolves across animals more broadly.

The fellow will use single-cell sequencing to measure the spatiotemporal
divergence of gene expression across evolutionary time within the Caenorhabditis
nematodes by comparing the transcriptomes of homologous cells and tissues
between species across embryonic development. Taking a systems approach, the
fellow will help elucidate the constraints on gene regulatory network evolution
by building and comparing molecular atlases of development for 13 Caenorhabditis
species. The multispecies single-cell atlases will allow for the determination
of the rate of divergence of cell and gene expression patterns across the
Caenorhabditis genus to test fundamental models in evolution and development.
Additionally, using the data and knowledge gained through this project, the
fellow will help train the next generation of scientists through a series of
computational biology training workshops for summer undergraduate researchers
from underrepresented backgrounds. The fellow will also directly train a diverse
group of summer undergraduate researchers in the laboratory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.