* 2305697
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing the circular economy for lithium batteries (NV)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Mridul Gautam, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Cooperative Agreement
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,905.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on developing a
region in which workforce and economic development practices, private-sector
innovation, and use-inspired research are coordinated and aligned to support the
economy of the lithium lifecycle. Lithium is a critical element that powers our
society and is necessary for our clean energy future. But currently, much of the
lithium that powers the American economy comes from countries whose political
leadership is unstable or hostile. Because of this and the pressing need to
reliably and cleanly fuel the American economy, the partners and stakeholders of
this Development Award will pioneer supply chain management to control resource
extraction of critical materials, and reinvent, rejuvenate, repurpose, and
recycle lithium batteries. The region of service is defined as the entire state
of Nevada. This region is uniquely suited to support America's lithium
independence because it contains the only operating lithium mine in the US, is
constructing the largest lithium mine in North America, and contains significant
sources of lithium in clay and brine. The main partners for this effort are the
University of Nevada, Reno, the Nevada Governor's Office of Economic
Development, and Truckee Meadows Community College, working with dozens of
companies engaged in one or more states of the lithium lifecycle.

This Development Award will produce a use-inspired R&D agenda exploring
innovative research methodologies for lithium extraction, utilization and
development of batteries, repurposing of used batteries, and rejuvenating and
recycling lithium batteries. A culture of innovation will be cultivated through
opportunities for interaction and technical resources necessary for ideation and
collaboration between researchers, industry, and venture capital firms. The
workforce development efforts will include creating a workforce skills
certificate in lithium battery production and recycling and a Batteries
Technology minor at UNR. Currently, there is no coordinated approach to
translating the innovations taking place at research institutions, industries,
and start-ups into practice in a way that results in economic growth benefiting
the entire region. This Development Award will enable the leadership team to
guide stakeholders and collaborators through a 24-month process of co-creating
ideas, strategies, innovations, and agreements to align partners across
industry, government, and academia on joint priorities for a regional economy
built around the lithium lifecycle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.