* 2305065
* Quantifying the Effects of Disorder and Lateral Interactions on Chemically Modified Carbon Electrodes: Molecular Insights to Rationally Design Electrochemical Performance
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Lockett, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gang-Yu Liu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 510,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Matthew R. Lockett and his students at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are investigating the effect of
disorder and lateral chemical interactions on the properties of chemically
modified carbon electrodes. Carbon-based electrodes are widely used because they
are robust and their chemical, electronic and optical properties are readily
tunable through the attachment of functional groups to their surfaces. Carbon
electrodes will be modified by attaching functional groups with propensity for
lateral interaction and the physicochemical properties of the products will be
characterized. The molecular insight gained from conducting this project is
expected to inform the rational design of electrochemical systems for important
applications, such as sensing, catalysis, electronics, and chemical separations.
A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
advanced synthesis and measurement techniques and several community outreach
activities are planned with a focus on promoting diversity, equity, and
inclusion with a special emphasis on promoting LGBTQ+ participation in
scientific research and in society as a whole.

Under this award, the Lockett research team will develop new carbon-based
electrode materials with controlled composition using chemical vapor deposition
techniques. Electrode surfaces will be chemically modified with functional
groups that can readily exchange electrons with the surface. New instrumental
methodologies, including scanning probe and single molecule fluorescence
microscopies, will be developed to characterize the surface structure and
physicochemical properties of the modified electrodes. Structure-function guided
studies will be conducted to specifically determine how molecular disorder on
the surface will affect the electrochemical reversibility of model complexes and
the efficiency and selectivity of CO2 reduction catalysts. The datasets obtained
from conducting the experiments will complement existing ensemble techniques
that quantify disorder through lateral interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.