* 2305831
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: Linking spatial variations in cellular chemical energy turnover to tissue growth in a developing organ
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Bezia Lemma, Lemma, Bezia
* Fellowship Award
* Joel Abraham
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will study where energy is used
as an organ grows and develops. This will be accomplished by imaging the energy
in growing organs and then using physics to predict the growth and development
of that organ, thus establishing a “Rule of life.” Such a rule could have far-
reaching implications for studying organs, and this work will provide a new
perspective for understanding organ development. The organ this study focuses on
will be the lung. Broader impacts will include outreach to young scientists
through an annual 8 week summer program through Princeton University (The
Princeton Learning Laboratory) designed for high school students, as well as
training of undergraduate students.

This project explores the hypothesis that the physical forces driving tissue
development are proportional to the local rate of energy production.
Measurements in early embryonic chicken and mouse lung explants will connect
patterns of chemical-energy turnover to mesoscopic tissue morphogenesis. The
project will (1) use fluorescence microscopy of lung explants to measure spatial
variations of energy metabolism, (2) measure the mechanical properties of the
tissue layers in the lung explants, and (3) model the growth of the lung from
the perspective of active matter physics, with a driving force locally
proportional to the rate of energy production. The embryonic lung was chosen as
a model organ because the morphology is distinct and stereotyped within a
species, easily imaged in real-time, and prior work has characterized the
morphogenesis of lung explants. Lungs collected from chicken eggs will make this
research easily accessible for young scientists. Training programs incorporated
into this project include a high school student summer program and subprojects
for university students. These experiments and models will be some of the first
work toward understanding energetics in organogenesis. The spatial
quantification of energy metabolism and material properties generated by this
work will provide a testbed for physical theories that relate cellular
energetics to tissue generation from the molecular level, up the hierarchical
structure of the developing lung, to the whole-organ scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.