* 2305234
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Using paleogeography and the fossil record to characterize the influence of scale on species range trajectories
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Benjamin Shipley, Shipley, Benjamin R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

The range of a species, or where the species lives in geographic space, can
provide information about its role within an ecosystem and across landscapes.
Species ranges are influenced by many factors, including changes in climate,
shifts in ecosystems and communities, and anthropogenic influences. However, the
dynamics of species ranges on geological timescales (for example, across
millions of years) has not yet been fully understood. Furthermore, the study of
species ranges through time is complicated by the influence of past tectonic
shifts and climate change on species ranges. This project, conducted at the
University of Oxford and advised by Dr. Erin Saupe, explores long-term changes
in species range sizes across many different geographic extents, and types of
species. It aims to quantify how species ranges fluctuate over multiple time
scales, evaluate how tectonics and climate influence these fluctuations, and
examine how the dynamics might be driven by relatedness and heritability between
species. This project will provide new avenues of inquiry into the maintenance
of biodiversity through time and will help to forge another link between the
history of Earth and the history of life. During this project, the researchers
will contribute to several programs aimed at increasing diversity in academia
and introducing students to entire process of scientific research in geology and
paleobiology. These programs include the Nuffield Research Placement Program, a
month-long program where the students develop and answer their own research
questions, and the UNIQ program, which sponsors high-school students from
diverse and underserved communities to take short-courses in fields that
interest them. Through these initiatives, the project aims to foster discussion
on the vital importance of earth science in our changing world and to inspire a
new cohort of dedicated earth scientists.

As we enter the Anthropocene, unprecedented climatic and landscape changes are
leading to global extinctions and the reorganization of many species’ ranges
(Barnosky et al. 2011). Understanding how species ranges have changed through
geological time can offer insight into these current and projected future
changes. Furthermore, categorizing the dynamics of species range shifts from
origination to extinction can increase the ability of conservation organizations
and governments to identify and protect species that may be at risk of range
loss and extinction. However, the study of species ranges through time is
complicated by the extrinsic effects of spatial, taxonomic, and temporal scale
(Kemp et al. 2015). Using new methods in paleo-topographic reconstruction paired
with advances in paleontological databases and novel evolutionary hypotheses,
this research extricates these confounding effects and evaluates multiple facets
of range dynamics in the fossil record. The project has three aims: 1) to
quantify how species’ geographic ranges fluctuate over multiple temporal scales,
2) to examine the contribution of tectonic, geographic, and climatic factors in
structuring range dynamics, and 3) to evaluate the heritability of these range
size dynamics and the influence of taxonomic scale on range size fluctuations.
The project will use geo-referenced Paleobiology databases, including Triton,
PBDB, Neotoma, and NOW to characterize species range size through time and to
determine whether the trajectories of range size across a species’ evolutionary
history is consistent across taxa and temporal scale. Next, fluctuations in
range size will be correlated to periods of climate and tectonic changes, using
temporal autoregressive models and stochastic differential equations. Finally,
applying phylogenic data from published sources such as Phylacine, the influence
of relatedness and heritability on range size trajectories will be evaluated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.