* 2305402
* Collaborative Research: Magnetic Clustering using Novel Poly(amino acid) Corrals to Advance Magnetic Particle Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Geoffrey Bothun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 184,994.00

Magnetic Particle Imaging is a non-invasive medical imaging technique similar to
Magnetic Resonance Imaging that can be used to detect diseased tissues such as
cancer in the human body. Successful development of Magnetic Particle Imaging
requires effective, safe, and versatile nanoparticle tracer platforms. In this
award, new tracers are being created by controlling the way small
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles organize into larger clusters using
polymers that are created from natural amino acids. Cluster properties such as
particle spacing and spatial arrangement are used to manipulate and maximize the
tracer response for Magnetic Particle Imaging. This collaborative project will
be conducted by investigators from the University of Rhode Island, the
University of Alabama in Huntsville, and Brown University. This
interdisciplinary and multi-institutional project is an excellent platform for
engaging students and broadening participation, which will be achieved by
partnering with National Science Foundation Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation programs in Rhode Island and Alabama. Students will be trained in
technical, professional, and science communication skills.

Magnetic Particle Imaging is an emerging medical diagnostic technique that
exploits the unique magnetic properties and biocompatible nature of
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles as ‘tracers’ for the generation of
three-dimensional images of tissues. Two key challenges to facilitating research
translation to clinical settings include preparing particle tracers for maximum
exploitation of their superparamagnetic characteristics and their target-
specific derivatization and utilizing biocompatible particle surface coatings
and assembly agents to avoid adverse outcomes. This award involves a new
approach to tracer design based on the controlled clustering of hydrophobic
particles using poly(amino acid) corrals. Specific aims include designing and
synthesizing poly(amino acids) with varying hydrophobic, hydrophilic, and
stabilizing block domains; demonstrating controllable nanoparticle assembly as a
function of poly(amino acid) composition; and evaluating the magnetic properties
of the clusters using a custom magnetic particle spectrometer. The approach to
Magnetic Particle Imaging tracer design is potentially transformative and
expected to help advance Magnetic Particle Imaging as a tool for disease
diagnosis and treatment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.