* 2305636
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Investigating spatiotemporal variability of forearc mantle wedge serpentinization and rheology during non-steady state subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Gabe Epstein, Epstein, Gabe S
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Gabe Epstein has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research aimed at constraining the causes, variability, and
consequences of forearc mantle wedge hydration under the mentorship of Dr. Adam
Holt at the University of Miami. At regions where two tectonic plates converge,
subduction is the process by which the “subducting” plate thrusts beneath the
“overriding” plate and then descends to great depths within the mantle of the
Earth; this process occurs along ~50,000 km of coastline around the world
including beneath the states of Washington and Alaska, the Island of Japan, and
the west coast of South America. Mantle wedge hydration occurs when water is
released from the subducting plate into the section of the Earth’s mantle that
lies above the subducting plate (the forearc mantle wedge) and can only proceed
if this forearc region of the mantle is cool enough for water-bearing minerals
to be stable. Release of water from the subducting plate, and the associated
wedge hydration, may contribute to the localization and intensity of arc
volcanoes (e.g., the “ring of fire” surrounding the Pacific Ocean) and large
magnitude earthquakes. Despite this potential importance of mantle wedge
hydration, the temporal variability and consequences of this hydration are
poorly resolved, often because the dynamic and time-dependent nature of
subduction systems is typically neglected in studies that target these
processes. This project will merge novel computational methods with laboratory
analysis to investigate how fluid release and wedge hydration in forearcs
contributes to subduction dynamics (e.g., the speed and shape of subduction
zones), and the impacts such dynamics have on volcanism, seismicity, water
storage in the mantle, and Earth’s long-term habitability. Utilizing the
research findings, Dr. Epstein will develop a series of accessible, open-source,
online learning modules aimed at broadening understanding of geoscience problems
pertinent to society, welfare, and equity. The design of the modules will allow
for participants (the public and high school to undergraduate students) to
interact with large datasets and manipulate software code. Broadly, the learning
outcomes will be to demonstrate connectivity between geoscience and other
branches of research (natural and social sciences, engineering, art), and to
highlight the myriad research endeavors of modern geoscientists (laboratory,
computational, and field based). The research and broader impact goals will
produce new avenues in interdisciplinary science and will contribute to the NSF
goal of advancement of national welfare by enhancing both the scientific
community’s and the general public’s understanding of natural disasters and the
global, long-term water cycle.

Dr. Epstein will merge open-sourced software (Python, Perple_X, and ASPECT) with
chemical/rheological insights from the exhumed rock record to develop dynamic
models of fluid release and concomitant forearc mantle wedge hydration over a
range of subduction conditions to better constrain the extents, spatiotemporal
variability, and chemical/geodynamic consequences of mantle hydration. The
project goals are: (1) determine the relative timing and extents of wedge
hydration during a subduction zone’s lifetime, and the associated spatio-
temporal variability in mineralogy and viscosity, through geodynamic modeling;
(2) perform microstructural observations of natural wedge serpentinites to
characterize deformation mechanisms over a range of P-T conditions; and (3) use
trace element ratios and stable isotope analysis to determine the relationship
between fluid flow and deformation mechanism. These goals are iterative, with
insights from (2) and (3) feeding back into the geodynamic model (1). Laboratory
chemical (major and trace element, stable N isotope analysis) and
crystallographic/rheologic data (in-situ characterization of deformation
mechanisms, EBSD, and Raman spectroscopy) will be performed on samples
representing mantle wedge serpentinites or close analogs from New Idria
(California, USA; blueschist facies), Cemetery Ridge (Arizona, USA; amphibolite
facies), and the Western Alps (Italy/France; greenschist through eclogite). It
is expected that earliest phase(s) of the thermal evolution of subduction zones
is responsible for stabilization of large volumes of hydrous material in the
mantle wedge, and that the rheologic behavior of this material varies depending
on the extents and distribution of hydration combined with the temperatures and
rates of viscous deformation. Dissemination of the research will include
development of a series of accessible, experiential, online learning modules
hosted as Jupyter Notebooks (via Binder) and geared towards high school and
undergraduate students with the aim of demonstrating the interplay among
geoscience, chemistry, physics, and coding. The Universal Design for Learning
(UDL) educational framework will be utilized to create an accessible and
equitable learning environment throughout creation of the modules.

This EAR-PF award was co-funded by the EAR Tectonics Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.