* 2305964
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Illuminating mechanisms of essential asparagine-linked glycosylation enzymes
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jessica Ochoa, Ochoa, Jessica Micaela
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Amino acids
are one of the essential building blocks of life. All cells use amino acids to
create larger, more complex structures called proteins, with several requiring
additional changes to ensure proper function. In some proteins, one such change
involves the attachment of complex sugar molecules to specific amino acids; this
process is called glycosylation. Once attached, these sugars play roles in
controlling how proteins function and how proteins interact with other
molecules. Without glycosylation, proteins would function improperly, disrupting
essential biological functions. In humans, this can lead to numerous congenital
disorders and cancers. Despite its critical role, little is understood about how
the complex sugars used in glycosylation are generated. Thus, this research
seeks to investigate the enzymes that make these sugars; this work explores
enzyme function by understanding their molecular structures. Because
glycosylation is important for all life, understanding these enzymes will create
new insights that guide future applications in biotechnology, including
designing new therapeutics that target congenital disorders of glycosylation and
cancers. Moreover, this work will facilitate the fellowâ€™s ability to directly
train and mentor diverse trainees navigating their own scientific careers.

This work will enrich foundational knowledge of asparagine-linked glycosylation
(NLG) by defining broad catalytic mechanisms of phosphotransferases and
glycosyltransferases, and formulating underlying principles applicable to NLG in
all domains of life. Using recombinant protein expression in human cells,
structural biology, bioinformatics, and biochemistry, this work will fully
characterize the human phosphotransferase, DPATG1, and its partner
glycosyltransferases Alg13 and Alg14. This work will also investigate novel
interactions between other essential NLG glycosyltransferases. To achieve this,
the fellow will determine the structure of human DPAGT1 in complex with novel
inhibitors by cryo-EM. Then, the fellow will structurally characterize the
DPAGT1/Alg13/Alg14 complex. Lastly, the fellow will leverage AlphaFold to probe
uncharacterized heterooligomeric complexes and define universal mechanisms of
integral membrane phosphotransferases and glycosyltransferases from the NLG
pathway. The fellow will attend cryo-EM training workshops and field-specific
conferences. Lastly, the fellow will build upon existing infrastructure to
create a campus-wide network for students and postdocs from historically
marginalized backgrounds that seeks to build community, professional
development, and connect trainees with existing resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.