* 2305086
* RUI: Towards Robust Sparsity in Nonuniform Sampling Multidimensional NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Rovnyak, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 153,807.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor David Rovnyak and his group at Bucknell University are
developing data sampling technology and principles to accelerate the discovery
of complex molecular structures. Broadly, chemists are studying molecules of
increasing complexity and size, such as complex natural products from which
scientists can develop new bio-inspired drugs, where it is vital to discover the
exact structures of these molecules. A central technique in chemistry that meets
this need is nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). However, the more complex and
large a molecule is, the more difficult it is to solve its structure. Using
statistical and related data science methods, the Rovnyak group is developing
and disseminating next-generation data sampling methods that make advanced NMR
analysis much faster and more accessible to chemists. The work is providing
research opportunities to undergraduate students, including members of
underrepresented groups. The team is also involved in outreach activities,
including summer science camps for high school students and presentations at
regional schools and museums.

Advanced 2D-NMR experiments, often used for detecting long range atomic
connectivities, are required to probe the structure of increasingly complex
proton-poor natural products and bio-inspired molecules. The burden of indirect
incrementation in powerful 2D-NMR spectroscopies leads to very long acquisition
times and extremely low sensitivity. Solutions to the ‘incrementation problem’
of multidimensional NMR have been pursued for about three decades, through a
broad family of techniques known as nonuniform sampling (NUS). In 2D-NMR, NUS is
often not used at all or only conservatively, such as 50% data reduction. This
fails to take advantage of the benefits NUS offers. This work is probing the
barriers to sparser NUS and developing improved 1D-NUS schedules for advanced
2D-NMR experiments beyond the 50% threshold while ensuring high spectral
fidelity. The work includes strategies for ‘super resolution’ NMR spectroscopy
with ultra-high incrementation values. Intuitive and easy-to-use 1D-NUS
schedules will be made widely available with potentially wide impact on the
experimental chemical science community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.