* 2305102
* Improving the LC Separation of Biomolecule Mixtures using Novel Mixed-Mode Gradient Stationary Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Maryanne Collinson, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Maryanne Collinson and her group at Virginia
Commonwealth University are seeking to improve the separation of complex
biological samples by exploring an alternate paradigm in separation science: the
use of mixed-mode gradient stationary phases. These materials are packed into
stainless steel tubes and the strength of the chemical interaction sites on the
stationary phase is varied along the length of the tube. When coupled with a
traditional liquid mobile phase gradient, which displaces the analyte molecules
sequentially as the strength of mobile phase solvent is increased, such
materials have the potential to provide significantly improved selectivity in
the separation of large biomolecules. An important obstacle to realizing such
improved selectivity in practice is the ability to experimentally fabricate
these mixed-mode gradient stationary phases in a controlled and predictable
fashion. This challenge will be addressed in the present work through a
combination of experimental design and simulation via a continued collaboration
with Dr. Sarah Rutan, an expert in the field of chromatographic simulations and
their predictive power. This will project provide opportunities for both
scientific discovery and student training and learning. This research is
expected to advance knowledge in the field of separation science, particularly
in areas that target the analysis of large, biologically relevant molecules
including proteins, peptides, and ultimately monoclonal antibodies that are of
particular interest in the development of novel biologic pharmaceuticals. It
explores an original concept aimed to improve the selectivity of a separation
and ultimately the resolution of chemically similar analytes within complex
protein samples.Students involved in this project will obtain valuable expertise
in the packing of chromatography columns, the modification of silica using
silane chemistry, and its detailed characterization using TGA and other
spectroscopic and microscopic tools. Simultaneously, they will become experts in
LC and the separation of mixtures of biomolecules making them uniquely
employable in the biopharmaceutical field.

In most chemical separations, the gradient is in the mobile phase. An alternate
paradigm puts the gradient on the stationary phase. Recent simulated work has
shown that dual stationary phase gradients when coupled with a mobile phase
gradient can “open up previously unseen selectivities” in the separation of
large biomolecules. In the present work, the challenges associated with the
fabrication and implementation of such mixed-mode stationary phase gradients
suitable for biomolecule separations will be addressed. Through the course of
this work, new approaches will be explored to strategically modify a particle-
packed silica column with a functionalized monochlorosilane (e.g., phenyl, C8,
C4,...) in a gradient fashion. The steepness of the gradients will be varied and
optimized so that when coupled with a mobile phase gradient synergistic
selectivity and/or band compression will be observed in the separation of
biomolecules. Simulation methods will be developed to predict the
chromatographic response and to optimize the conditions for column fabrication.
The gradient lengths and compositions needed to obtain optimum separations will
be obtained by coupling simulations with experiments, thus avoiding the trial-
and-error approach usually used in materials development. Over the long term,
the new column technology and accompanying simulations developed through this
research have the potential to impact the fields of proteomics and lipidomics,
as well as two-dimensional liquid chromatographic separations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.