* 2305911
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: The evolutionary drivers of iridescence
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2024,07/31/2027
* Juliette Rubin, Rubin, Juliette
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 07/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Iridescence has captured the human mind for
hundreds of years, yet its role in animals is still mostly unknown. This
research aims to resolve some of the mystery of this animal coloring by
understanding how it works as an anti-predator defense. To do so, the fellow
will use a combination of approaches, including filming predator-prey battles
between birds and butterflies, altering the temperature while butterflies
develop, and studying the evolutionary history of iridescence. This research
will add to our understanding of the past and future of one of the natural
worldâ€™s most interesting traits. These beautiful animals provide an excellent
opportunity for public education. Using videos from the bird-butterfly
experiments, the fellow will create an exhibit at the Smithsonian Museum to
connect the visitor experience with scientific facts.

To elucidate the evolutionary role and pattern of iridescence in butterflies,
the project will explore three aims: 1) The fellow will video record
interactions between insectivorous birds and experimentally modified Morpho
butterflies to determine whether iridescence dissuades predator attack by
warning predators of the difficulty of capture, or makes butterflies difficult
to capture as a result of a visual illusion. 2) Using different temperature
regimes on Morpho pupae, the fellow will test the developmental plasticity of
iridescence to determine how variable environments affect iridescence quality in
adult butterflies. 3) Using a comparative phylogenetic approach and
phylogenetically-informed models, the fellow will investigate whether
iridescence is constrained to certain lineages, constrained to certain regions
in the world, or concentrated in areas with higher insectivorous bird diversity.
This work will lead to a predictive model of the phylogenetic and biogeographic
distribution of the iridescence trait and how this might shift in response to a
changing climate. Additionally, the multi-component nature of this project will
provide many training and co-authorship opportunities for students and
researchers at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute based on their area
of interest. The fellow plans to offer an R carpentry course at the host
institution, in addition to curating a museum exhibit to maximize scientific
outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.