* 2305833
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Tools for engineering rice gene expression
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Ding, Ding, David
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
David Ding is "Tools for engineering plant gene expression". The host
institution for the fellowship is UC Berkeley and the sponsoring scientist is
Dr. David Savage.

Crop engineering offers a path to address the projected increases in food demand
and challenges arising from a changing climate. Recent gene editing tools enable
this in principle, but their potential for crop improvement is limited by the
lack of understanding of how mutations map to phenotypic outcomes of interest,
including increased photosynthetic capacity, drought resistance, or nitrogen-use
efficiency. Importantly, tuning the expression of particular target genes can
improve such traits, suggesting that understanding and finding genomic mutations
that enable rational tuning of protein abundances could be sufficient for crop
improvement. Overall, this project develops the missing tools to understand
regulatory mutations in plants and could help usher in a new era in which gene
editing technology – in contrast to slow and manual breeding efforts – could
enable the rapid creation of novel crop varieties addressing fundamental food
security and sustainability issues for society at large. The training objectives
for the Fellow include not just further developing technical, analytical, and
synthesis skills, but also communication and teaching skills. The Fellow
currently does and will continue to convey the excitement and usefulness of
scientific inquiry by participating in volunteering opportunities at Mount
Tamalpais College, an organization that provides access to affordable higher
education to students incarcerated at San Quentin State Prison.

In this project, a computational pipeline, coupled with high-throughput
perturbative experimental assays, will be developed to overcome the inherently
slow and low-throughput nature of understanding gene regulatory variants in
plants. By focusing on validated sets of genes, the resulting understanding of
regulatory mutations could enable simultaneous tuning of multiple target gene
abundances with gene editing enzymes, and, since many known target genes
participate in orthogonal pathways, could enable additive or synergistic
increases in desired traits, as well as an improvement towards multiple traits,
in a single step. Findings resulting from this work will be shared through
publications, with any generated raw data, and analysis pipelines made available
to the general public (through the sequence read archive and GitHub:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra, www.github.com) for reproducibility and as
tools. All created materials will be made available upon request. In this way,
everyone will have access to any resources generated from this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.