* 2305018
* Supramolecular Design of Novel Reagents and Organo-Catalysts for Aqueous Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 545,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Bruce C. Gibb of Tulane University seeks
to gain a better understanding of the science of placing molecules within
capsules. More specifically, this storage of “guest molecules” will be used to
facilitate their chemical transformation into new matter. It is anticipated that
understanding these transformations will lead to new efficient and
environmentally friendly synthetic methods, and so contribute to the advancement
of the chemical enterprise. The described work will not only help train the next
generation of chemists, but will also be integrated into community outreach
activities to promote STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
education and positively impact the minority population of Orleans Parish and
Southern Louisiana.

There are two interrelated aims to the work: (a) to contribute to the state-of-
the-art of supramolecular chemistry by helping bridge the gap between the field
and synthetic methodology, and (b) to achieve the synthesis and exploration of
new reagents and catalysts that utilize water and the hydrophobic effect to
enable reactions that occur under mild and environmentally benign conditions.
Specifically, the work will involve (1) a novel iodination process for aromatic
rings to create a mild catalytic process of broad substrate scope; (2) studies
into new yoctoliter (10^–24 L) capsules that are negatively charged at low pH
and will promote or catalyze reactions involving cationic intermediates and
transition states, and (3) the synthesis of new supramolecular capsules
possessing endo-functionality — functional groups that are integrated into the
walls of the inner-space — that will lead to better control of the bound guest.
These three sub-programs aim to help create new supramolecular host-guest
complexes and new platforms for organocatalysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.