* 2305285
* RUI: Mechanistic Elucidation of the Formation of Metal-organic Frameworks: A Spectroscopic, Synthetic, and Computational Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Douglas Genna, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2026
* USD 346,828.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of materials that have shown promise
in several industrially and societally relevant applications including carbon
capture, water purification, and catalysis. Except for select examples, the
development of general and robust large-scale syntheses of MOFs has proven
elusive, limiting broad implementation to the greater community. Current efforts
to optimize MOF syntheses for scale-up often focus on trial-and-error type
approaches that can be time-consuming and costly. With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, Prof. Douglas Genna and his research group at Youngstown State
University combines the tools of synthesis, spectroscopy, and computational
modeling to develop mechanistic models of both successful and unsuccessful MOF
synthesis reactions. These mechanistic models will identify the necessary
chemical species for success and elucidate the deleterious species that lead to
failed synthesis attempts. This information can then be used by the practitioner
to develop robust synthesis protocols for existing MOF materials and provide
opportunity and guidance for the exploration of new chemical spaces while
limiting guesswork. An online lecture series is being developed to increase
scientific and chemical literacy in adults.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

MOFs are a class of materials that continue to show promise in areas such as
catalysis, drug delivery, molecular separations, and energy storage, amongst
others. While exceptional work has been performed on the mechanisms of MOF self-
assembly this remains an under-studied area of research. This project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, focus on understanding the solution-phase mechanism of formation of
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Specifically, MOFs composed of group 13 metals
(Al, Ga, and In) are studied using the tools of synthesis, density functional
theory (DFT), and in-situ Raman spectroscopy. The formation of In-derived
infinite chains and cationic trimers (Objective 1) and anionic Ga-MOFs
(Objective 2) is studied using DFT to identify potential molecular and polymer
intermediate targets for synthesis. The presence of said intermediates in
solution is interrogated using in-situ Raman spectroscopy. Solution-phase and
solid-state non-MOF products of unsuccessful MOF syntheses (Objective 3) are
studied using Raman spectroscopy, powder-X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic
resonance, DFT, and synthesis when appropriate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.