* 2305660
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bryan Ramirez-Corona, Ramirez-Corona, Bryan A
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Bryan Ramirez-Corona is “Duckweed as a multiplexable model to study signal
integration with advanced genomic tools.” The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Washington and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Josh Cuperus.

Plants form the basis of the food webs that sustain animal life. Climate change
and the loss of arable land threaten to drastically reduce agricultural output
and negatively affect food security. Understanding plant molecular responses to
environmental stressors will be important for building resilient crops capable
of sustaining future generations. Existing plant models limit our ability to
understand how plants respond to stressors because they cannot test large
numbers of conditions efficiently. This work aims to solve existing limitations
by measuring plant environmental responses in the smallest and fastest-growing
plant family, duckweed. This work will generate tools and information on
duckweed that will enable other research groups to study plant biology at a
larger scale, speeding up the rate of discovery. Technical and non-technical
expertise gained over the course of this research will prepare Bryan for
establishing and maintaining an independent research program focused on plant
biology. This research will also serve as a background for individual and lab-
level equity and inclusion efforts. These efforts include the dissemination of
scientific knowledge to the general public by leveraging existing social media
outlets and the directed mentorship of diverse students through summer research
programs.

In nature, plants must be content with complex combinations of environmental
inputs, such as temperature, light, acidity, and nutrient availability. However,
traditional plant models are relatively large and slow growing, making it
difficult to study their transcriptional responses to these inputs. To study how
plants modulate cell-type-specific transcriptional responses to combinations of
inputs, duckweed will be used as a scalable experimental model. Duckweed species
are both the smallest and fastest-growing flowering plants and contain
homologous structures to terrestrial plants. Their small size enables them to be
grown in a 96-well format, allowing for the testing of many combinations of
environmental inputs. This work will establish a dataset of control and
condition-specific single-cell gene expression (RNA-seq) and chromatin
accessibility (ATAC-seq and FIBER-seq). Three duckweed species will be tested
under single and combinatorial treatments of temperature, pH, NO3-, NH4+, and
H2PO4-. This work will also establish CRISPR/CAS9 expressing lines for facile
targeted mutagenesis. All sequencing data, transgenic lines, and plasmids will
be made publicly available through NCBI Sequencing Read Archive, Rutgers
Duckweed Stock Cooperative, and Addgene, respectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.