* 2305618
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing food security and climate resilience (MS)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Joseph Whittaker, Jackson State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on alleviating
food insecurities and associated health disparities in the 41-county target
service region that incorporates significant portions of central and southern
Mississippi. The region includes some of the country's most demographically
diverse and economically challenged counties. Twenty-five of the regionâ€™s
counties are characterized by persistent poverty, according to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. In partnership with the University of Southern
Mississippi (USM), Jackson State University (JSU) will lead the development of
the Sustainable Innovation Ecosystem (SIE) Food Industry ecosystem to unlock
talents of the community programmatically, establish convergent food industry
clusters, and align nodes of innovation to inspire, grow and launch new emerging
technologies and businesses by creating a sustainable cycle of innovation. The
resources, expertise, and experience of JSU and USM, combined with their
regional industry and economic development partners, are well-positioned to
build an innovation ecosystem to align research and innovation to address gaps
in three interrelated areas of interest: 1) Agriculture and food access; 2)
Advanced technology and climate resilience for small-and mid-sized farms; and 3)
Agricultural supply chain. The vision of this NSF Engine Development Award is to
develop an innovative ecosystem that: improves health and nutrition, reduces
poverty, creates a diverse talent pool of skilled technical workers, and
improves economic diversity and resilience across the targeted service region.
Use-inspired research and development will address and be guided by the five
dimensions of access to nutritious food: affordability, availability,
accessibility, accommodation, and acceptability. The goals will be centered
around improving the resilience and health outcomes of all Mississippians by
preparing stakeholders to assess, manage, and mitigate the complex and
devastating realities of generational poverty and persistent food insecurity.
The award can create new jobs that advance economic equity within the region by
focusing on creating high-quality job opportunities, strategic workforce
investment and training, small-business creation, and regional clustering of
target firms. This NSF Engine Development award will enable the project to
develop and enhance the Leadership Team and its multi-sectoral partnerships with
local and regional constituents and organizations throughout the region,
supporting the development of concrete plans for translational research
activities, rural engagement, intervention plans, and recruitment efforts around
STEM workforce development with quantitative metrics for success, and an
analysis of needs from each stakeholder and a plan to address them in
preparation for an NSF Engine project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.