* 2305578
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: EAR-PF: Assessing the net climate impact of tropical peatland restoration: the role of methane
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Clarice Perryman, Perryman, Clarice R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Peatlands are globally important carbon stores, containing double the amount of
carbon stored in forests worldwide. Draining peatlands for agriculture and
forestry encourages microbial decomposition of peat carbon, releasing this
stored carbon into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2). Peatland drainage is
particularly widespread in Southeast Asia, where over 90% of peat swamps have
been disturbed, resulting in peatland CO2 emissions on par with regional fossil
fuel emissions. Blocking drainage canals to raise water levels should reduce CO2
emissions by discouraging microbial decomposition. As such, “peatland rewetting”
through canal blocking has been proposed as a low-cost natural climate solution
and many countries including Indonesia have committed to rewetting vast areas of
degraded peatlands to combat climate change. However, peatland rewetting stands
to increase methane (CH4) emissions, as microbes that produce CH4 thrive under
water-logged conditions. Increased CH4 emissions may partially offset the
climate benefits of peatland rewetting due to the high global warming potential
of CH4. Measurements of CO2 and CH4 emissions after rewetting tropical peatlands
are extremely scarce, which is a major limitation for policy and planning. This
research aims to quantify CH4 and CO2 emissions from rewetted peatlands in
Indonesia. Dr. Clarice Perryman will collect new emissions data to assess how
future greenhouse gas emissions vary across different tropical peatland
rewetting scenarios and identify important variables controlling emissions from
rewetted peatlands. The results of this research will help guide peatland
management through determining the spatial scale and timing of peatland
rewetting that will provide greatest greenhouse gas emissions reductions.
Research findings will be broadly disseminated to local communities, partner
NGOs, and the research community via public presentations and research
publications. Dr. Perryman also aims to promote belonging, accessibility,
justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (BAJEDI) in the geosciences through
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students on related research in Indonesia
and at her host institution.

Peatland rewetting is gaining popularity as an effective and low-cost natural
climate solution as rewetting stands to reduce high CO2 emissions from peatlands
drained for agriculture and logging. Even though rewetting reduces CO2
emissions, increased CH4 emissions post-rewetting can cause rewetted peatlands
to remain a net greenhouse gas source with a net positive (warming) radiative
forcing for several decades. Despite the great potential and widespread
enthusiasm for peatland rewetting, field measurements of greenhouse gas
emissions from rewetted peatlands are extremely sparse. This is particularly
true for tropical peatlands in Southeast Asia, including those in Indonesia
which has recently committed to rewetting vast areas of degraded peatlands to
mitigate wildfire risks and CO2 emissions. This research will quantify CH4 and
CO2 emissions from rewetted peatlands in Indonesia. Dr. Clarice Perryman will
use this new data to upscale emissions from plot to landscape level to assess
how future greenhouse gas emissions and net climate impact vary across different
tropical peatland rewetting scenarios. The fellow will measure CO2 and CH4
emissions at peatland sites in Indonesia before and after drainage canal blocks
are installed to assess emissions at sub-daily to annual timescales. Dr.
Perryman will determine abiotic (e.g. hydrology, geochemistry) and biotic (e.g.
vegetation, microbial community composition) factors controlling CH4 emissions
at the plot scale relevant to upscaling emissions to landscape-level using
existing geospatial datasets. Finally, the fellow will apply these new data and
process-level insights to assess the net climate impact of tropical peatland
rewetting at decadal to century scales. Using a variety of methods, including
direct emissions measurements, stable isotope measurements, and microbiome
analyses, this research will improve predictions of how microbial systems
mediating CH4 cycling will respond to land use change in tropical peatlands. The
research will provide critical datasets of CH4 and CO2 emissions and their
abiotic and biotic controls from rewetted tropical peatlands. Dr. Perryman will
engage in knowledge co-production and transfer with communities and partner NGOs
in Indonesia and promote BAJEDI through mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students on related research in Indonesia and at her host institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.