* 2305016
* Generalized Steenrod operations and equivariant geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Prasit Bhattacharya, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 06/30/2026
* USD 319,020.00

Topology is a subject that studies shapes. This subject was revolutionized in
1947 by Norman Steenrod when he introduced the Steenrod operations. These
operations led to some of the most enigmatic results in geometry which
popularized homotopy theory, a subbranch of topology, in the fifties and the
sixties. This project will lead to advances in equivariant homotopy theory, an
enhancement of homotopy theory which is sensitive to the symmetries of shapes.
The resulting equivariant analogs of Steenrod operations will lead to new
applications in equivariant geometry. The award will also be used to stimulate
the research culture and support graduate students at New Mexico State
University. The PI will establish a new method that generalizes the construction
of classical Steenrod operations to equivariant homotopy theory and constructs
equivariant Steenrod operations for all finite groups. Equivariant Steenrod
operations will immediately lead to equivariant analogs of Stiefel-Whitney
classes which can find many applications in the study of equivariant vector
bundles and equivariant smooth manifolds. Atiyah Real vector bundles, which are
important examples of equivariant vector bundles, will be studied. In
particular, the James periodicity number of tautological Atiyah Real vector
bundles will be determined using an equivariant analog of the Adams conjecture
formulated using Atiyah Real K-theory. The PI will also continue to study
periodic self-maps of chromatic homotopy theory and extend them to equivariant
as well as motivic settings.

This project is jointly funded by the Topology program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.