* 2305245
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Transitioning from Anecdotal to Data-Driven Approach for Institutional Change at the University of Toledo
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Anju Gupta, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 246,412.00

The University of Toledo will undertake an institutional self-assessment to
identify potential organizational inequities (unjust or unfair) policies and
practices that result in differential professional outcomes for some STEM
faculty. The ADVANCE Catalyst project will result in a five-year STEM faculty
equity plan tailored to the University of Toledo context and institutional data
that will guide institutional actions to address any issues identified during
the grant. The University of Toledo is located in rural Northwest Ohio, and
challenges with recruitment and retention of STEM faculty are persistent.

The institutional self-assessment and five-year strategic plan will set a
foundation to improve equity for STEM faculty at the institution. This work will
benefit STEM disciplines as well as non-STEM disciplines due to the
interconnected nature of institutional policy. Results of the Catalyst project
will be regularly communicated with the University of Toledo community. The
project is expected to add to our understanding of STEM faculty equity issues at
a rural university.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional assessments and the development of five-year
faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit, institution of higher
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.