* 2305009
* Pendant Photochromic Switches Enabling Fluxional Macromolecular Pi-Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* John Tovar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, John D. Tovar and Arthur E. Bragg of Johns Hopkins
University are investigating how pi-conjugated building blocks with fluxional
electronic structures driven by light absorption can tune the properties of
organic electronic materials. A wide variety of pi-conjugated organic molecular
and polymeric materials are currently being studied as active components for
cutting-edge applications ranging from high-speed transistors to photovoltaic
cells to low impedance neural electrode coatings. This research will involve the
systematic synthesis of several photoswitchable fluxional monomers, oligomers,
and polymers. Computational modeling will then be utilized to examine how
chemical changes introduced into these building blocks affect the overall
properties of the organic materials from which they are formed. Finally,
advanced spectroscopic and electrical measurement techniques will be used to
understand changes in electronic and molecular structures in real time. Such
systematic investigations have the potential to generate fundamental knowledge
that could lead to improvements in cutting-edge applications ranging from high-
speed transistors to energy storage. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research will provide strong training and professional development opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students. The outreach efforts through
involvement with high-school chemistry education in urban Baltimore high schools
will help increase participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
advanced degree programs.

Organic electronics systems stand to impact many areas of contemporary energy
and electrical science, with innovations on the horizon in fields such as large-
area lighting, energy storage, and biomedicine. This project will focus on the
development of pi-conjugated macromolecular systems and polymers containing
stimuli-responsive photochromic units. Strong emphasis will be placed on
understanding how conjugation pathway alteration via electrocyclic reactions can
impact optoelectronic processes. The research strategy will utilize
thienothiophene and other monomer units to synthesize a new set of responsive
pi-systems and investigate the tunability of delocalization pathways within
organic electronic materials. The syntheses will be complemented by
spectroscopic studies using steady-state, ultrafast and other time-resolved
techniques, as well as computational modeling. The general approaches associated
with this research could lead to new strategies to achieve highly polarizable
electronic structures of varied ground state composition, as opposed to the more
common approach of bandgap engineering of specific energy levels. The outlined
concepts have the potential, in the longer term, to be transitioned into
application-specific materials designs such as stimuli-switchable transistors
with externally controllable conjugation pathways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.