* 2305476
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Equitable-Access Flood Modeling for Timely and Just Adaptation in the Near and Long Term
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brett Sanders, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,549.00

Climate change is intensifying flood risks, with profound socioeconomic
consequences. Equitable flood adaptation is designed to offer greater and/or
more lasting benefits to overburdened communities than past projects in a
warming climate. In pursuit of this goal, this Smart and Connected Communities
Integrative Research Grant (SCC-IRG) project develops and tests a new paradigm
of flood adaptation marked by innovation in access to, and use of, an
interactive, fast flood risk simulation tool. The project aims to produce new
knowledge about the role and effectiveness of collaborative models in promoting
social justice and environmental well-being. Widespread adoption has the
potential to make future solutions to be more time-sensitive, equitable, and
effective for different communities and hazard types.

Flooding dynamics are complex and uncertain, decision-making is limited by
social, political, and institutional constraints, and participatory processes
are very time-consuming. This project brings together experts in civil
engineering, adaptation sciences, and regional planning to (a) overcome
technical barriers in flood risk simulation that have been limiting
collaborative exploration by communities, notably the ability to predict flood
impacts at fine resolution and at regional scales for a wide range of scenarios,
and (b) measure if and how a new sociotechnical framework can improve outcomes
such as increasing participation of marginalized populations, shortening
planning timelines, and more equitably distribution of benefits and resources
across groups and neighborhoods over time. Linking a digital engagement platform
to a fast-response flood simulation tool could represent a breakthrough
innovation for more equitably responding to climate change. The framework, if
successful, could be broadly applied at neighborhood to regional scales to aid
in climate change adaptation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.