* 2305799
* Planning: CDP: The Lake Izabal Basin Research Endeavor (LIBRE) Project - Planning Activities to Guarantee Success of a Continental Scientific Drilling Project
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Stephen Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 183,720.00

This NSF continental drilling planning grant seeks to establish a temporary
seismic array in the vicinity of the Lake Izabal Basin (LIB) in eastern
Guatemala to prepare for a deep drilling project in the basin, providing
information on faults and seismicity required for drilling safety and to
optimize the location of several accompanying shallow boreholes. The LIB
contains the longest known continental records of tectonics, climate, and
environmental change in the northern neotropics. The LIB developed around 12
million years ago and today holds more than 4 km of sediment, making it an ideal
location for an International Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP)
project. Additionally, this award will provide for meeting with local drilling
companies to establish the technical and procedural requirements necessary for
successful continental scientific drilling operations and enable early
engagement with local communities and governmental and educational institutions
to ensure smooth drilling planning, permitting, and operations.

Drilling and coring in continental settings through continental scientific
drilling programs has provided answers to compelling scientific questions that
allow us to forecast how global Earth Systems might behave in the future. Long
and continuous records from continental regions are rare and several areas of
the world remain unexplored. One of these areas is Central America, where
geography, topography, geology, and biology have influenced several Earth System
processes through geologic time. The LIB, located in eastern Guatemala, is at a
nexus location to record all these processes in its sedimentary record. The LIB
is a pull-apart basin along the North American (NA) and Caribbean (CA) plate
boundary with continuous sediment accumulation since the Miocene (~ 12 Ma), in
some places with accumulated sediment thickness of over 4 km. The Lake Izabal
Basin Research Endeavor drilling project focuses on: 1) investigating the
longest known continental sedimentary record from the northern Neotropics to
investigate tropical hydroclimate, biological interchanges, paleoseismic events,
and volcanic activity since the Miocene; and 2) establishing a seismic
observatory along the NA-CA plate boundary. This NSF planning grant provides the
opportunity to obtain necessary key preliminary information to guarantee the
success of the drilling project. These include: 1) deployment of a temporary
seismic array to help identify active faults in the region; 2) establishment of
connections with drilling companies in the country, including discussing
technical requirements for soft-sediment coring and safety considerations; 3)
early engagement with local communities, organizations, policymakers, and
stakeholders to ensure smooth drilling planning, permitting, and operations; and
4) producing educational material and meet with educational organizations to
help us plan for the drilling project and spread and multiply our outreach
efforts in Guatemala.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.