* 2305627
* SBIR Phase I:  A Soft, Tip-Growing, Self-Deploying Endotracheal Tube that Enables Visualization-Free Intubation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* David Haggerty, VINE MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,440.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel technology that actively intubates
airway passages while reducing the risks of complications arising from difficult
or failed emergency procedures. Such a procedure is often used with patients
suffering from trauma, hypoxia, or cardiac arrest. The proposed soft robotic
device extends from its tip, imbued with active mechanical intelligence to
autonomously navigate the upper airway enabling visualization-free self-
deployment. The proposed technology contrasts with current semi-rigid devices,
which are pushed from the proximal base of the device by the user. This project
aims to improve intubation success rates, reduce complications, and mitigate
system-wide costs associated with failed airway management. Furthermore, the
technology aims to reduce the navigation and placement skill sets needed to
intubate patients, enabling the potential option for field personnel to safely
and readily provide airway management. The product aims to capture a portion of
the $2 billion annual global airway devices market, ultimately expanding the
market through greater user adoption and use case options.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate proof of concept for a self-deploying intubation device. A soft
robotics system will be developed that aims to achieve a >90% first-pass
intubation success rate. The technical measures include deploying at an
effective pressure (<20kPa), in a rapid manner (15s), with comparable forces to
the tissue (<15N) as expert-guided laryngoscopes, agnostic to user skill sets.
During Phase I, design and engineering will be furthered to enable feasibility
testing and product validation. The design will be optimized for efficacy,
safety, and speed via iterative cadaver testing. Completion of this project will
yield an operational, tip-growing, soft robotic prototype for airway intubation
accounting for human variability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.