* 2305173
* Enabling ion Mobility Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry Methods to Study Conformational Dynamics of Protein Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christian Bleiholder, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 389,999.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Christian Bleiholder and his research group at Florida State
University are developing new approaches to characterize the structural dynamics
of proteins that play critical roles in chemical reactions occurring within
biological cells. These new approaches will combine and enhance the capabilities
of tandem-ion mobility spectrometry coupled with mass spectrometry in
conjunction with computational chemistry methods. Because these approaches can
provide new knowledge on the chemistry associated with both normal and abnormal
cell biology, they may offer novel insight into the functioning of cells and
cell dysfunction, potentially a relevant new tool to provide insight into the
evolution of disease. Impact will be enhanced through interactions with academic
and industrial collaborators, and by broad dissemination of ideas and results
(including software tools) to potential users through websites and workshops.
Students working on the project will be trained in instrumentation,
computational methods, biochemistry, and analysis of complex data.

The dynamic nature of proteins contributes greatly to the chemical reactions of
proteins. However, protein motions are challenging to study in the context of
complex samples or heterogenous protein systems. Ion mobility spectrometry
methods coupled with mass spectrometry (IMS/MS) are well-suited to handle the
complexity arising from presence of proteoforms and enable systematic
measurements of proteomes, but suffer from two major shortcomings: (1) It
remains unclear which aspects of the solution phase protein motions are retained
in the absence of solvent; and (2) it is challenging to unambiguously interpret
IMS/MS spectra in terms of protein structures from their measured
orientationally-averaged collision cross sections. Dr. Bleiholder and his team
will characterize which aspects of solution phase motions of liganded and
unliganded protein systems are retained in the absence of solvent. This
objective is to be accomplished by means of the experimental tandem-trapped
IMS/MS (tandem-TIMS/MS) and the computational Structure Relaxation Approximation
(SRA) methods recently developed in the Bleiholder laboratory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.