* 2305493
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Elucidating the Cellular and Molecular Dynamics behind Nectary Development in Aquilegia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yan Gong, Gong, Yan
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Yan Gong is "Elucidating the Cellular and Molecular Dynamics behind Nectary
Development in Aquilegia" The host institution for the fellowship is Harvard
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Elena M. Kramer.

Nectar is a central bridge between flowering plants and pollinators. The
consumption of nectar and the subsequent transfer of pollen by pollinators are
vital to the reproductive success of most flowering plants. Nearly 90% of all
flowering plants and 76% of domestic crops benefit from such plant-pollinator
interactions. Nectar is produced by nectaries, specialized cellular structures
that are thought to have evolved multiple times independently. The evolution of
nectaries significantly boosted genetic diversity, accelerated speciation, and
expanded the habitats of these lineages. Despite nectaries' physiological,
agricultural, and ecological importance, our understanding of nectary
development is limited to a small subset of flowering plants. This project will
address this challenge by investigating the genetic control behind nectary
development in basal eudicot species of Aquilegia, with the hope of discovering
genetic traits that can be engineered to reduce single pollinator dependence in
crops, an urgent issue worsened by climate change. The Fellow will receive
training in single-cell genomics, development, and evolutionary biology from
this project. To facilitate scientific communication on this topic and promote
community participation, the Fellow will organize a mini-symposium on this topic
and mentor students performing scientific research.

This project focuses on physiologically, agriculturally, and ecologically
important plant tissue - the nectary - and aims to elucidate the cellular and
molecular mechanisms responsible for nectary formation and nectar production.
Specific aims are to 1) profile the nectary gene expression network by single-
cell RNA sequencing and elucidate the genetic circuits underlying nectar
production and secretion in Aquilegia; and 2) examine how different Aquilegia
species adjust the nectar sugar composition to attract different pollinators.
The combination of cutting-edge functional genomics methods and comparative evo-
devo approaches will not only fill the gaps in our knowledge about the genetic
basis of nectary development but also offer insights into the evolution of
nectaries and their regulatory networks. The single-cell transcriptome datasets
and plant genetic material generated from this project will be available to the
public through various community resource-sharing websites.

Keywords: nectary development, plant-pollinator interactions, single-cell RNA
sequencing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.