* 2305854
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 ISOC Symposium on Vehicle Security and Privacy (VehicleSec)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Ziming Zhao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2023
* USD 8,000.00

Ground, aerial, and underwater vehicles such as cars, buses, trucks, airplanes,
and drones make the whole world increasingly convenient and connected. Due to
their growing usage and highly safety-critical nature, security/privacy problems
pose direct threats to passengers, owners, operators, as well as the
environment. With the recent global trends in substantially improving vehicle
autonomy and connectivity (e.g., autonomous driving, drone delivery, vehicle-to-
everything (V2X) communication, intelligent transportation, drone swarm), such
security/privacy challenges are receiving increasing attention from academia,
industry, and policy-makers. To meet this critical need, the ISOC Symposium on
Vehicle Security and Privacy (VehicleSec) brings together an audience of
university researchers, scientists, industry professionals, and government
representatives to contribute to new theories, technologies, and systems on the
security/privacy issues vehicles.

This event brings together an audience of university researchers, scientists,
industry professionals, and government representatives, featuring regular paper
sessions, a demo/poster session to allow academic, governmental, and industry
participants to present posters and/or share demonstrations of their latest
attacks, defenses, and security/privacy tools or systems related to vehicles.
The award supports participation of students without other means of support to
attend the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.