* 2305731
* Defining Reaction Paths for Chalcogenide Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 564,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The use of new materials is essential for societal
advancement, and solid state materials are critical to the modern economy. With
this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in
NSF’s Division of Materials Research, the principal investigator and his
research group develop fundamental principles of synthesis and apply them to the
chemistry of metal chalcogenides, which are important in various scientific
investigations and technologies. Thereby they pursue challenging new directions,
discover and synthesize new materials. The project focuses on controlling
reactions leading to solid state chalcogenides to avoid known materials and
studying their crystal structure, physical properties, and potential
technological impact. This research challenges and enhances scientific
understanding in this field of chemistry and improves existing technological
applications while impacting new ones. For example, the reseach leads to the
discovery of new atomic arrangements and novel semiconductors, quantum
materials, and ion-exchange sorbent materials for environmental remediation. The
project also significantly impacts the training, problem-solving abilities, and
pedagogy of graduate students specializing in solid-state and materials
synthesis. It aids in developing a competent workforce that comprehends the role
of novel materials as catalysts for cutting-edge science and technology.
Moreover, the project presents a range of opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly those from underrepresented communities, to
acquire critical thinking skills that will advance scientific research in the
future.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY The project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, addresses
the development of tools, concepts, and reaction paths, both intellectual and
experimental, to prepare new materials rationally. It is centered around
fundamental science questions: (a) Can new semiconductors be designed by finding
proper reaction paths? (b) Can insights from flux and non-flux reaction studies
aid targeted synthesis? (c) Can distinct reaction paths be categorized for
generalized synthetic methodologies? (d) Can chalcogenides' diverse motifs lead
to enhanced properties? The research pursues new directions that have proven
very challenging to date. For example, the pursuit of new phases by a) stuffing
aristotype structures (in other words, to create new materials by inserting
extra atoms in compounds possessing some of the most common structure types.
Aristotype is a high-symmetry crystallographic structure type that can be viewed
as an idealized version of a lower-symmetry structure), b) stabilizing novel
tellurometallate building blocks in extended structures, c) developing synthesis
of mixed anion compounds oxy-chalcogenides in a rational manner using a new kind
of flux. These aspects represent the cutting edge of chalcogenide solid-state
chemistry. They align with the principal investigator’s ongoing interest in
novel physical properties of new compounds beyond mere structural
characterizations. The benefits of a successful project are broad insights
advancing the cutting edge of solid state and materials chemistry, the discovery
of novel materials with attractive physical and chemical properties and
potential applications, and new knowledge of reaction paths leading to new
chalcogenides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.