* 2305057
* Panoptic Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Abraham Badu-Tawiah, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 485,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Abraham Badu-Tawiah and his research group at Ohio State
University is developing a new mass spectrometry platform to enable the analysis
of all kinds of chemical species in ultra-small sample volumes in a single
experiment, a potentially significant advance in metabolomics-related
technology. Mass spectrometers measure mass-to-charge ratio of chemical species,
a universal parameter that should make this analytical technique widely
applicable across diverse fields. Currently, this capability is realized using
different ion sources for different compounds. The goal of this research is to
develop a single universal (panoptic) ion source that can analyze a wide range
of chemical species. The idea of universality is expanded from the detection of
diverse chemicals to include the analyses of liquid-, solid-, and vapor-phase
samples, all using the same panoptic ion source. The subjects of chemical
instrumentation, new ionization methods, and the processing of ultra-small
sample volumes are well suited for the education of scientists at all levels.
Education-outreach activities are fully integrated and are designed to directly
impact students in the early stages (K-12) of their educational experience. Due
to the simplicity of the proposed experiments, this group is well-positioned to
introduce students – particularly from groups underrepresented in the STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields – to interdisciplinary
science, build their confidence and encourage them to think of science in a
broad, discovery-based manner.

Challenges associated with small volume analysis include inefficient
fractionation prior to analysis, leading to significant matrix effects. The
intellectual merits of this research revolve around the tandem development of
three novel concepts. First, a dynamic electrospray process will enable
temporally distinct ionization mechanisms to be initiated from a single emitter
to ionize different compounds, as well as to offer temporal separation of
chemical species involved, based on solution-phase mobility. Second, the plasma
ionization included in the dynamic spray process will allow analysis of polar
and nonpolar compounds in all three states of matter (i.e., liquid-, solid-, and
vapor-phase samples), thus establishing the first panoptic (universal) ion
source. Third, the specific mechanisms of ion generation (particularly those
based on ambient plasma chemistry) will enable mass spectrometer operation in
four conceivable modes (four quadrant) to detect all possible ion types (M•+,
M•-, [M+H]+, [M-H]+, [M-H]-, [M+nH]n+) originating from the panoptic ion source.
Therefore, a new panoptic mass spectrometry platform will be created in which
the universal ion source will be coupled with a four-quadrant mass analyses. We
expect this research to transform direct infusion mass spectrometry into a high-
performance analytical system in which low-resolution mass spectrometers can be
used more effectively for complex mixture analysis. This capability is made
possible by enabling online sample processing, including temporal separation and
chemical reactions. The specific reactions selected (e.g., charge inversion,
transesterification, and epoxidation of C=C bonds) have potential to expand the
scope of lipidomics by enabling lipid analysis at multiple isomer levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.