* 2305903
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Quantifying diversity and climate change response in the Chamaecrista fasciculata-rhizobial symbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lillie Pennington, Pennington, Lillie K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Plants will
either need to adapt to changing climates or risk extinction. Research has shown
that there is potential for the symbiotic (mutually beneficial) relationships
between plants and microbes to mitigate the effects of climate change. The
project will test this idea by studying the symbiotic relationship between
bacteria that capture nitrogen from the air and pea plants. The bacteria supply
the plants with nitrogen and receive other nutrients in return. Understanding
how climate change impacts this relationship has broad implications, as there
are many important wild and crop pea species, like peanuts or beans. The results
of this project will be shared with conservation managers of these important
plant species. This work will be done in part with undergraduate students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and high school students
from nearby schools as a part of existing programming at the University of
Georgia, to expand access to research and academia to students from
underrepresented communities.

To evaluate the consequences of climate change for plant-microbial interactions,
the fellow will leverage the ecological model legume Chamaecrista fasciculata,
the partridge pea, and its associated rhizobial bacteria. The fellow will first
collect rhizobial bacteria from populations across the range of the partridge
pea to characterize how rhizobial communities assemble across an environmental
gradient. Then, the fellow will grow plants in manipulated conditions to
evaluate the consequences of elevated temperatures for the plant-rhizobial
symbiosis. Finally, the fellow will sample nodule rhizobial communities and
plant genotypes across a latitudinal gradient and conduct a reciprocal
transplant experiment to test for local adaptation and quantify the interaction
of rhizobial and plant response to climate change. The fellow will receive
training in metagenomic analysis techniques as well as in large-scale project
management and student mentorship. These projects will provide insights into the
degree to which rhizobia could mitigate the effects of climate change, and how
range position affects these symbiotic relationships. The research will have an
impact on broadening participation by involving students from HBCUs and local
high schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.