* 2305592
* ADVANCE Partnership: Leveraging Intersectionality and Engineering Affinity groups in Industrial Engineering and Operations Research (LINEAGE)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Tonya Peeples, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2026
* USD 407,470.00

Professional societies play a critical role in the advancement of PhDs in
academia and industry by setting standards of excellence through policies and
practices. They set the tone for culture and climate within STEM disciplines.
For industrial engineering and operations research (IEOR), the two societies
that establish field norms are the IISE (Institute of Industrial & Systems
Engineers) and INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and the Management
Sciences). Professional organizations shape engineers’ academic identity and
determine what is valued and rewarded in their disciplines. The NSF ADVANCE
LINEAGE project will partner with these global professional organizations to
address systemic causes of inequity for women of color by integrating positive
organizational scholarship (POS) with the Six Sigma DMAIC (Define, Measure,
Analyze, Improve and Control) framework.

LINEAGE will evaluate the hypothesis that through these organizations it is
possible to transform a field and systemically change culture and climate within
the field. Through the co-creation of affinity groups (AG) with IISE and
INFORMS, this project aims to achieve systemic changes in academic workplaces
and the profession that will improve the recruitment, retention, and success of
women of color in these disciplines. This project is informed by prior work to
understand the impact of AGs in academia and industry funded by the NSF
Directorate for Engineering (NSF 2024569). This prior work provides evidence
that AGs have the potential to produce systemic change in academic workplaces
and in the professions. The LINEAGE project focuses on AGs in professional
societies, rather than individual institutions, because 1) women of color are
often the “only” in their home departments, which creates an isolated
environment, and 2) professional societies reach individuals at all stages of
their careers, from PhD to full professors. LINEAGE will partner with the EBJ
NSF INCLUDES funded Aspire Alliance to learn from the iThrive Collective
(intentional counterspaces to address issues identified by underrepresented
faculty).

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education and non-
academic, non-profit organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.