* 2305644
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Machine Learning and High-throughput Reverse Genetics to Identify and Functionally Characterize Peptides Encoded in Short ORFs of lncRNAs
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Alyssa Kearly, Kearly, Alyssa
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2026
* USD 249,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2023. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Alyssa Kearly is “Machine learning and high-throughput reverse genetic
approaches for the identification and functional characterization of peptides
encoded in the short ORFs of lncRNAs.” The host institution for the fellowship
is the Boyce Thompson Institute and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Andrew
Nelson and Aleksandra Skirycz.

Plants produce a variety of small peptides that serve as communication signals
and regulators of critical processes, including plant growth, development, and
responses to environmental change. As naturally derived compounds, they
represent attractive candidates for the development of safer pesticides, food
preservatives, and medicines. Therefore, efforts to comprehensively identify and
functionally characterize small peptides could have tremendous impacts not only
on the general understanding of plant biology, but also on agriculture and
medicine. The improved resources and computational tools for small peptide
prediction to be developed through this project will be invaluable to a more
complete exploration of these biologically significant peptides. Additionally,
the proposed endeavors to generate functional predictions will provide insight
into their roles and potential for cross-application. This work will provide
training in machine learning, transcriptomics, proteomics, and comparative
functional genomics. Throughout the project, the Fellow will engage in
undergraduate mentorship opportunities that broaden access to scientific
research and workshops that will increase her effectiveness as an educator.

Small peptides play critical roles as regulatory and signaling molecules in
plant development and stress responses. Although long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
are defined by their low protein-coding potential, a subset containing small
open reading frames (sORFs) have recently been shown to undergo active
translation, introducing lncRNAs as an unexplored source of small peptides. The
identification of functional sORFs and detection of their encoded peptides
(SEPs) has historically been hindered by biased prediction methods and
limitations of experimental techniques. This has led to the persistent
misclassification of an unknown number of sORF-containing lncRNAs and the
overlooking of the potentially bioactive SEPs encoded therein. This project aims
to develop improved computational tools for the prediction of functional sORFs
and to make strides in functionally characterizing their peptide products.
Through the reanalysis of published ribosomal profiling datasets, the Fellow
will build a database of translated lncRNA sORFs across model and crop plant
species, to be made accessible to the broader scientific community via TAIR
(arabidopsis.org). This database will be used to develop a functional sORF
prediction algorithm trained on experimentally validated translated sORFs and
unbiased by unvalidated gene annotations. Through the use of high-throughput
phenotyping of SEP mutants and proteomic screens to identify interacting
proteins, the Fellow will make functional predictions for candidate SEPs and
assess their conservation. The results of this project will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of plant functional genomics and provide resources for
future sORF and SEP research, while offering insight into the biological
function of as-of-yet uncharacterized lncRNAs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.