* 2305113
* RAPID: Investigating Illegal Dumping During the Course of Debris Collection Operations Following Hurricane Ian
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Juyeong Choi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 75,000.00

Hurricane Ian made landfall as a catastrophic Category 4 hurricane on September
28, 2022, in the southwestern region of Florida. It generated substantial
amounts of debris, exceeding the capacity of local waste management systems.
Delayed collection of debris from public property and rights-of-way incurs
public health and safety concerns. Since affected communities use their own
limited resources for debris removal before the reimbursement by FEMA, it is
critical to accurately estimate and keep track of the uncollected debris
throughout recovery. While various tools are available to estimate the initial
amount of disaster debris, current approaches do not update the estimates as a
debris collection process proceeds over time. Further, illegal dumping - the
disposal of ineligible debris at public sites without legal permission - often
causes such initial estimates to become obsolete and complicates debris
logistics planning and reimbursement management. This Grant for Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project aims to collect ephemeral data on uncollected debris on
public roadways during the course of debris collection operations in order to
investigate illegal debris disposal and its social and environmental impacts.

This project will (i) conduct a sequential survey of affected public roadways
with unmanned aerial vehicles and a LiDAR scanner to capture the amount of
illegally dumped waste over time, (ii) link illegally dumped debris to its
relevant collection trajectories through collaboration with debris contractors,
and (iii) perform online surveys to understand the social and environmental
impacts of uncollected debris, debris disposal methods, and community settings.
The volume of debris at different points in time will be quantified through
machine learning algorithms with aerial imagery and 3-D point cloud data
resulting from the sequential survey. The volume of illegally disposed debris on
each roadway section will then be estimated by comparing the debris volumes at
subsequent times along with the volume of debris collected by haulers over the
elapsed time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.