* 2305482
* Collaborative Research: Early Planet Formation in Embedded Disks
* MPS,AST
* 12/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Patrick Sheehan, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Fabrycky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 109,760.00

As astronomers observe more and more dusty proto-stellar disks, a fuller
understanding of the process of planetary formation becomes possible. This work
is to explore an entirely new method of determining structures in proto-
planetary disks. The team will map out concentrations of carbon and oxygen
isotopes using spectroscopic imaging of CO isotopologues. The team will conduct
a spectroscopic study of existing ALMA observations as well as new observations
to be made by the team. They will examine structures such as spirals, gaps and
rings. They will also determine the gas composition of young proto-stellar
disks, the evolution of composition through different phases of disk evolution
and determine the mass of the central protostar. The results of this work will
provide new observational constraints for models of planetary formation. Two PhD
theses will be completed under this program, both by students from under-
represented groups. This program will also support Hawaiian native undergraduate
students for summer research work both in analysis and in hardware development.
Outreach activities include public talks and summer camp programs for high-
school students.

The team will use a self-developed state-of-the-art modeling code called
Protoplanetary Disks and Stars with Python (pdspy) to extract structural
information about protoplanetary disks from multispectral ALMA imaging. The
pdspy code models multi-wavelength observational datasets, particularly ALMA
images like those to be obtained through the team’s ALMA Large Program, with
full radiative transfer models of physically motivated Keplerian disk + rotating
collapsing envelope systems using Bayesian parameter estimation methods such as
Markov Chain Monte Carlo or Nested Sampling to rigorously sample parameter
space. The team will observe and study protoplanetary disks at different points
in disk formation and evolution, from initial formation into the T Tauri phase
of protostellar development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.