* 2305013
* Collaborative Research: Single-Molecule Electrofluorochromic Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Amar Flood, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2026
* USD 644,658.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research, Professor Takashi Ito and his group at Kansas State
University aims to create fundamental knowledge required to develop new
measurement tools for medical diagnostics and fundamental biochemical studies,
in collaboration with Professor Amar Flood and his group at Indiana University,
Bloomington. This collaborative project aims to develop novel fluorescent
molecules for highly sensitive detection of oxidation-reduction processes, to
examine single molecule measurement techniques for quantification of electrode
reaction kinetics, and to establish a highly sensitive and precise biosensing
method. In depth understanding of electrode reaction processes at the single
molecule level has the potential to provide valuable information to facilitate
improving the performance of electrochemical biosensors and opto-electronic
devices. In the course of these studies, research topics will be integrated into
educational activities via new lab experiments that meet American Chemical
Society accreditation requirements for BS degrees. Efforts to broaden
participation in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
disciplines include a multidisciplinary research symposium targeting students
and professors at primarily undergraduate institutions.

This collaborative project seeks fundamental insights needed to develop highly
sensitive and precise multiplexed biosensors. Specifically, the team seeks to
design and synthesize small fluorescent molecules that exhibit reversible ON-OFF
switching upon oxidation/reduction (electroswitchable fluorophores) and are
suitable for covalent conjugation. In sample applications, potential modulation
will be used for fluorescence quantification of the electrode reaction kinetics
of single electroswitchable fluorophores tethered to DNA probes, with an aim of
improved understanding of the relationship between the single-molecule electrode
reaction kinetics and the performance of folding-based DNA sensors. An ultimate
aim is calibration-free single-molecule DNA sensing which, if successful, would
constitute a significant achievement and have broad scientific impact well
beyond these studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.