* 2305413
* Conference: Women in Algebra and Combinatorics. Northeast Conference Celebrating the Association for Women in Mathematics: 50 Years and Counting
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Lauren Rose, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 43,309.00

The Northeast Women in Algebra and Combinatorics Conference is celebrating 50
years since the founding of the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM); it
will be held between April 28-30, 2023, at the State University of New York at
Albany. The conference honors the achievements of AWM in advancing the cause of
women in mathematics for the past 50 years. It will bring together an
outstanding group of women speakers, the members of the Northeast algebra and
combinatorics community, as well as participants from throughout the US and some
international ones. The conference is also dedicated to the memory of Georgia
Benkart, the plenary speaker at the conference's first edition, held virtually
on November 20-21, 2021.

This conference presents an excellent opportunity for mathematicians located in
the Northeast region and beyond to hear talks from renowned women in the fields
of algebra and combinatorics. In addition to providing a platform for speakers
to showcase and promote their research, the conference aims to create an
inclusive environment that encourages collaborations and mentorship
opportunities among participants. The talks will be delivered in a colloquium-
style that is accessible to all, covering a wide range of topics in algebra and
combinatorics. The conference will also include a poster session, as well as a
problem session where attendees can present their research and engage in
discussions about ongoing research challenges. Furthermore, there will be a
panel discussion dedicated to Women in Mathematics. Social breaks will offer
participants an opportunity to network with peers and expand their professional
connections. Website: https://www.albany.edu/~sdc/AWM21/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.