* 2305781
* CRII: OAC: Cyberinfrastructure for Machine Learning on Multivariate Time Series Data and Functional Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Shah Muhammad Hamdi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 132,965.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

From weather analysis to brain region activity analysis, from traffic flow
analysis to financial trend analysis, multivariate time series (MVTS) data have
been used extensively in predictive and exploratory tasks for numerous domains.
MVTS instances represent states of dynamical systems and natural events using
multiple time series of interdependent variables. Functional networks leverage
the interactions of MVTS variables by finding higher-order relationships among
them. The appropriate choice of data representation (MVTS or functional network)
poses a challenge in machine learning (ML) efforts that can affect the
performance of downstream tasks such as classification, regression, and
clustering. This project will develop cyberinfrastructure that is public, web-
based, and Graphical User Interface (GUI)-enabled and enables both novel and
previously developed predictive, exploratory, and generative tasks on both data
representations. The project serves the national interest by promoting the
progress of solar physics science through facilitating solar flare prediction
from MVTS-based solar magnetic field data and advancing national health through
improving prediction models for neurological diseases (e.g., Schizophrenia) from
fMRI-based functional brain networks. The research outcomes, including the
cyberinfrastructure developed and ML models designed, will provide an
opportunity for interdisciplinary research involving undergraduate students
including those from underrepresented groups, for course curriculum development,
and for high school outreach activities.

MVTS instances are formed from the time series records of multiple sensors. In
functional networks, the nodes represent the variables, and the edges represent
the statistical similarity of the time series of the corresponding nodes. While
in the MVTS representation completeness of data is preserved, noisy or missing
data in time series due to events such as faults in sensors can compromise the
performance of downstream ML tasks. Functional network representations help
leverage multi-hop relationships of the variables, but the threshold-dependent
sparsity in network construction can make ML models lose important features.
Machine learning challenges of MVTS and functional network datasets include the
appropriate choice of data representation and the limited number of training
samples (especially in the medical domain). This project will provide a unified
framework for performing (un)-supervised ML tasks on both data representations
through application and customization of contemporary ML modes such as
matrix/tensor decomposition, sequence models, Graph Neural Networks (GNN), and
dynamic graph embedding. The project will also provide a framework for
augmenting datasets with synthetic training samples through autoregressive,
autoencoder-based, and adversarial models. The project will design and implement
a web-based system that contains modules for data import and preparation,
representation learning, data augmentation, validation, result visualization,
and for exporting derived and synthetic datasets. The web platform will be
hosted in the public domain, and its GUI-based front end will enable researchers
to apply back-end ML models without explicitly programming using ML libraries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.