* 2305847
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: A community guided assessment of parasitic threats to fish health
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Raymond Allen, Allen, Raymond Lance
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Lac du
Flambeau Indian Reservation, located in northern Wisconsin, is home to the Lac
du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians and to over 250 freshwater
lakes containing fish, invertebrates, aquatic plants, and pathogens. The Lac du
Flambeau Tribe owns and operates the William J. Poupart, Sr. Fish Hatchery,
which is responsible for raising and stocking hundreds of thousands of
culturally and socially important fish to lakes within the reservation
boundaries and throughout the Great Lakes Ceded territory and has duties to
assess fish health in the hatchery and reservation lakes. This research, in
collaboration with the Lac du Flambeau Fish Hatchery, aims to increase the
knowledge of infectious pathogens threatening fish in area lakes and within the
hatchery at multiple stages of fish and pathogen development, and begins to
address questions on the long-term health of freshwater fish populations in the
region in terms of a changing climate, and human-induced changes in lakes. The
fellow will broaden participation of Indigenous peoples in biology as part of
the research and through activities in conjunction with the Society for the
Advancement for Chicanos/Hispanics & Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) and
the Summer Internship for Indigenous Peoples in Genomics (SING).

This project will do a broad assessment of fish pathogens throughout the region
to determine what pathogens are present at what severity and determine parasite
host development and severity across time. The fellow will first survey
harvested and trapped fish (cisco, muskellunge, shiners, walleye) organs for
parasites and seasonal infections rates by microscopy and DNA barcoding. The
project will also investigate known tapeworms in northern Wisconsin and evaluate
how their infection levels correlate with lake classification, intermediate host
presence, and fish age and size. The final goal of this project is to
investigate the development and life cycle of walleye tapeworm species. The
fellow will establish lab and outdoor systems to culture both Bothriocephalus
cuspidatus and Diphyllobothrium latum through their life cycles to develop a
place-based model system to understand parasite and host interactions. The
fellow will broaden participation of Indigenous peoples in biology by hosting
Native American interns and Indigenous-focused seasonal workshops and will
engage long-term with the Lac du Flambeau Nation and its community members. The
fellow will also continue affiliations and trainings with the Society for the
Advancement for Chicanos/Hispanics & Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) and
the Summer Internship for Indigenous Peoples in Genomics (SING).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.