* 2305737
* NSF PRFB FY 2023: The genomics of local adaptation of larval settlement in a biofouling marine invertebrate
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sydney Birch, Birch, Sydney
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Holgado
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Many animals in marine ecosystems have a
larval stage that transforms into a juvenile. The factors that impact how and
where larvae choose to settle are largely unknown. Biofilms composed of algae,
bacteria, and other microbes produce various chemical cues that larvae may
detect with their sensory system to make settlement decisions. This research
will use the cnidarian Ectopleura crocea, E. crocea, a biofouling species common
to New England marine structures and docks, to determine how biofilms impact
larval settlement. This award will ultimately deepen the understanding of how
larval settlement and costly biofouling may change in the face of climate change
and will provide insights into conditions that lead to local adaptation.
Additionally, this award will allow the fellow to learn new techniques, gain
experience mentoring undergraduate researchers, and participate in outreach
programs to engage with and support the diverse community in Charlotte, North
Carolina.

The fellow will study how the composition of microbial communities in biofilm
differs by location and influences larval settlement, assessing local
adaptation. The fellow hypothesizes that distinct populations of E. crocea are
locally adapted to specific biofilms, where larvae are cueing in on adult-
associated microbes. The first aim will investigate the larval settlement
response of E. crocea larvae from different populations in the Gulf of Maine to
unique biofilms by performing reciprocal transplant larval settlement
experiments across a panel of localities. It will characterize the composition
and function of the microbes in the biofilm. The second aim will examine the
genomic population structure of E. crocea and the microbes associated with
adults from different populations. The fellow will correlate these results to
the larval settlement study to gain insight into genotype-phenotype
interactions. The third aim will test how increased temperatures impact
microbial communities in biofilm across localities and how that impacts the
settlement of larvae from different populations. Through the mentorship of the
sponsoring scientist, the fellow will gain training in laboratory and
computational skills in population genetics and microbiology. The fellow will
participate in and co-organize activities at UNC Charlotte to broaden
participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.