* 2305108
* CAS: Sequence in Brush Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2026
* USD 566,820.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tara Y. Meyer of the University of
Pittsburgh is preparing novel brush copolymer materials with 2-dimensional
sequence control and studying the combined effects of both backbone and
sidechain sequence on the hydrolytic degradation profiles. Polymer brushes are
type of macromolecules in which the main polymer chain is grafted with
additional polymer chains of varying density. They have useful properties
including wormlike conformations, compact molecular dimensions, and notable
polymer chain-end effects due to their compact and confined structures. As such,
the brushes are promising polymers for biomedical devices, chemical sensors,
drug-delivery systems, and tissue engineering. In this research, chemical
reactions will first be used to prepare polymer brushes with biodegradable and
biocompatible side chains consisting of different sequences of lactic and
glycolic acids. The prepared brushes will then be utilized in degradation
studies with the aim to investigate the effects of different brush architectures
and 2-dimensional sequences of side chains on the degradation rate. The
activities associated with this research are designed to broaden participation
and enable training of undergraduate and graduate students in polymer chemistry,
organic synthesis, and catalysis. The interactions with a Charter 1 NOBCChE
collaborative consisting of six institutions, including three historically black
colleges & universities (HBCUs), will continue to focus on fostering long-term
relationships among members with the goal of working together to support the
success and retention of students from underrepresented groups in chemistry.

This research will focus on controlling sequences in brush copolymers containing
biodegradable and biocompatible "alpha-hydroxy acid derived" sidechains. In the
first objective, one- and two-dimensional sequence controlled norbornene based
brushes will be prepared using ruthenium catalyzed ring-opening metathesis
polymerization. Grafting through methodology optimized for lactic and glycolic
acids side chains will be utlized. The second objective will focus on the
synthesis and characterization of cyclic brush copolymers with two-dimensional
sequence control including variants that can be ring-opened using an entropy-
driven polymerization to create alternating brush-linear multiblock copolymers.
Lastly, the combined effects of sequence and architecture on hydrolytic
degradation rates, with the goal of developing a mechanistic understanding of
the degradation in sequenced brush copolymers, will be investigated. Fundamental
studies related to understanding of the interactions between polymer
architecture and degradation have the potential to lead to improved design of
brush-based drug delivery vehicles. Additionally, the synthesis and
characterization of the brush-linear multiblock copolymers associated with this
research could impact applications that require polymers with tissue-like
properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.