* 2305293
* Bond Dissociation Energies and Electronic Structure of Small Transition Metal and Lanthanide Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Michael Morse, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2026
* USD 515,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Morse of the University
of Utah is using laser spectroscopy to study the electronic structure and
chemical bonding in small molecules that contain d- and f-block metals, with
emphasis on providing highly precise values of bond dissociation and ionization
energies. These measurements will be useful for developing accurate and
efficient computational methods for larger systems relevant to the catalytic and
technological applications of the d- and f-block elements. Dr. Morse will
examine the broad trends in chemical bonding as one moves across the periodic
table in this work, and will investigate whether the dissociation energies of
metals bonded to chemically related p-block elements, such as silicon and
germanium, are strongly correlated. Professor Morse and his students will use
resonant two-photon ionization spectroscopy to study neutral d- and f-block
molecules, and cryo-cooled ion photodissociation experiments to study metal-
containing cations. In addition to training the graduate students who are
directly involved in this project, Dr. Morse also organizes a biannual workshop
for high school chemistry teachers, where he presents on physical chemistry
topics that they have selected. Other speakers also present on chemical
education research and educational psychology.

In this project, the Morse group will employ laser ablation of a metal sample in
a pulsed supersonic expansion of helium with small amounts of a reactant gas to
generate a molecular beam of the species of interest. They will then use a one
laser pulse, which is scanned, to excite the molecule electronically and a
second laser pulse to ionize the molecule. Ions will then be detected using
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Molecules with a high density of electronic
states, such as the open d- and f-subshell molecules, fall apart on a
subnanosecond time scale when they are excited above their dissociation energy,
causing a sharp drop in ion signal. This provides a highly precise measurement
of the bond energy. The Morse team is also able to use the high density of
electronic states in these species to measure ionization energies to high
precision. Employing a different instrument, the research team is using similar
methods to measure the threshold for dissociation in a range of d- and f-block
cryo-cooled ions. The bond dissociation energies of the neutral molecules and
their cations can then be combined with the ionization energies of the neutral
molecules and of the metal atoms using a thermochemical cycle to confirm the
accuracy of all four measured values. These studies are likely to be
particularly useful for the development of density functional theory methods for
accurate computations of molecules containing the d- and f-block elements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.