* 2305411
* The geometry, rigidity and combinatorics of spaces and groups with non-positive curvature feature
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jingyin Huang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 217,280.00

Groups are fundamental abstract symbolic systems in mathematics arising from
different branches of mathematics, physics, chemistry and computer science. For
example, groups appear in the study of shapes of geometric objects, crystals and
quasi-crystals, structure of roots of polynomials, cryptography, algorithm
design etc. The study of finite groups, i.e. groups with finitely many elements,
has reached a fairly mature stage, accumulating to a complete classification of
finite simple groups. However, most infinite groups are fairly mysterious and
hard to understand. In the 1980s, Gromov proposed a geometric approaches to
group theory. One idea was to realize the mysterious group as a collection of
symmetries of some geometric objects with interesting curvature properties,
allowing us to study groups from the viewpoint of geometry. This has evolved
into a very active field called geometric group theory. This proposal aims to
study problems in the frontier of geometric group theory, and seeks applications
to some long-standing problems in topology. The proposal also aims to provide
resources for training graduate students and postdocs working in the area at the
Ohio State University, with an emphasis on supporting under-represented early
career stage mathematicians at OSU working in this filed.

This proposal is concerned with rigidity and curvature properties of some
infinite discrete groups from the viewpoint of geometric group theory, combined
with ideas and techniques from ergodic theory, metric geometry, metric graph
theory and combinatorial group theory. The project has two more specific
research goals. The first is to make progress on a major conjecture on Artin
groups, using a new strategy motivated from ideas in metric graph theory. The
second is to understand fundamental forms of rigidity for discrete groups,
namely quasi-isometric rigidity and measure equivalence rigidity. The project
emphasizes the close connections between these forms of rigidity and the
curvature properties of singular metric spaces and groups. Several classes of
groups of fundamental importance are studied, including Artin groups, CAT(0)
groups, graph products etc.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.