* 2306345
* Viscoelastic Cytoskeletal-Membrane Mechanics: Hybrid Discrete-Continuum Stochastic Approaches
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Atzberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,755.00

Cells are the fundamental units of life. In cell biology, many biological
functions require the generation and coordination of complex mechanical events
distributed throughout individual or populations of cells. This includes the
generation and control of cellular motions in response to environmental signals
of toxins or nutrients, generation of forces during cell division, and
regulation of growth within tissues. Understanding of the roles of conditions
arising in diseases, development of therapeutics and vaccines, engineering of
bioreactors, and development of novel materials calls for advanced quantitative
methods for studying cell mechanics. A central challenge in cell mechanics is to
understand the principles by which larger scale mechanics arise from the smaller
scale molecular-level events. This project develops new mathematical modeling
paradigms and simulation software tools for investigating cell mechanics over
multiple scales. This includes contributions from cell membranes and the
cytoskeleton, which are structures providing the mechanical support maintaining
the cell shape and internal organization. The methods capture contributions
including the roles of the geometry, elastic structures, fluid mechanics, and
fluctuations. Outreach activities are planned for engaging diverse and under-
represented students at the University of California Santa Barbara and in the
local community. This includes working with local area K-12 schools and colleges
on programs to engage students on topics in the sciences, mathematics, and
computation. Educational activities are also planned providing unique
opportunities to train the next generation of researchers and students on recent
emerging quantitative methods at the interface of mathematics and biology. The
project addresses challenges in cell mechanics by providing new theoretical and
computational stochastic approaches for handling molecular-level interactions
and kinetics spanning over a hierarchy of scales. This includes regulation of
the viscoelastic mechanics of protein-laiden lipid bilayer membranes,
cytoskeletal filament rearrangements driven by cross-linked motor proteins, and
cytoskeleton-membrane interactions. The project develops new stochastic
computational methods for capturing both continuum and discrete contributions
from the elastic mechanics, hydrodynamic coupling, geometry, and fluctuations.
Stochastic numerical methods and efficient solvers and samplers are developed
for handling the geometry of curved surfaces and general bulk domains. The
methods draw on results from differential geometry and formulate unstructured
discretizations building on finite element methods and meshless approaches. The
methods will be used to study mechanisms underlying the mechanics of
cytoskeleton-membrane interactions and in vitro active soft materials consisting
of reconstituted cytoskeletal elements. This includes processes playing
important roles in blebbing during initiation of cell motility and the
generation of cytoskeletal forces. For the introduced modeling approaches and
computational methods, software tools also will be developed and released with
C++/python interfaces allowing for performing general simulations and analysis
of phenomena in cell mechanics, complex fluids, and soft materials.

This project is jointly funded by the Mathematical Biology and Computational
Mathematics Programs at the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Physics of
Living Systems Program at the Division of Physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.