* 2306152
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of the Miraflores El Niño Flood on the Chiribaya of Far Southern Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Susan deFrance, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 19,085.00

The goal of this project is to study the impact of a coastal drought and a
subsequent flood caused by the climatic anomaly known as ENSO (El Niño Southern
Oscillation) in a coastal region. This project reconstructs both the cultural
and environmental history at a coastal archaeological site and then place the
site within the broader archaeological history of the region. In this region a
prolonged drought followed by catastrophic flooding caused the abandonment and
reduction of coastal populations. To date, research on this region has focused
on societal collapse due to environmental change. In contrast, this project
acknowledges the challenges associated with climatic changes, while also
emphasizing the ingenuity of people in unpredictable landscapes. Archaeology is
particularly well placed to continue research on this drought and flood event,
while putting it within the broader context of cultural adaptation and change.
The project provides localized environmental data on what coastal peoples
experienced over a ca. 300 year period. Additionally, it adds to the
archaeological knowledge of landscape use and reuse in an area with an extended
period of human history. The project focuses on professionalization and training
of members of an international research team that will further disseminate their
research on these topics.

This project focuses on a period of major environmental and cultural changes.
Though research has been done at other sites to understand the impact of the
coastal drought and flood, this project is the first regional scale analysis of
this period of regional prehistory. Specifically, the research addresses two
main questions: How did coastal peoples adapt to unpredictable climate
conditions? And what was the collective impact of the drought and El Niño floods
on the coast? To answer these questions the research team uses a combination of
archaeological, geological, and biological research methods. The researcher
leads a team of archaeologists, geoarchaeologists, and palynologists (pollen
analysts) to conduct archaeological excavations, artifact analysis, sediment
sampling and analysis, and pollen sampling and analysis. These interdisciplinary
researchers address the convergence of environmental and human forces to
understand agricultural and irrigational adaptations that allowed people to be
resilient following these climate disasters. This team will develop a local
record of environmental change that will be accessible to others conducting
climate change research in multiple arid environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.