* 2306824
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Switching Structures at the Intersection of Mechanics and Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support research
at the intersection of structural mechanics and network theory. Switching
structures -- systems made of bars connected via pin-joints, where some of the
bars can be dynamically switched ON and OFF -- will be introduced to engineer
load-bearing structural systems that emulate the complex behavior of switching
networks, where edges connecting the nodes evolve, adapt, switch, and blink.
Switching networks are known to exhibit exotic dynamics; for example, at select
switching frequencies, networks switching between unstable states can gain
stability. This rich dynamic repertoire opens interesting opportunities in
structural engineering. For example, can one create structural systems that, due
to the presence of switching elements, can recover stability as they are about
to collapse? Can one leverage the time-varying properties of switching
structures for vibration attenuation? The answer to these questions requires the
development of new fundamental knowledge about switching structures. The
research will develop new knowledge by blending the disciplines of structural
mechanics and network theory, and by identifying common modeling tools between
them. In turn, this knowledge will allow to assess the potential applicability
of switching structures in structural engineering and beyond. Just as structural
mechanics can be transformed by network-theoretic advancements, network theory
could immensely benefit from the creation of mechanical systems that can be used
to validate network-theoretic conjectures. The educational activities are also
at the intersection of networks and structures and leverage the contrasting
identities of the institutions involved (public and private, suburban and urban,
yet merely 50 miles away from each other) to help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and contribute to the formation of forward-
thinking, interdisciplinary engineers.

The primary objective of this project is to establish a network-theoretic
framework to study switching structures. Such an objective will be achieved by
formulating a mathematical backdrop of switching structures, which recognizes
some of the attributes that make them unique among other network systems. This
mathematical backdrop, together with finite-element simulations, will be used to
chart the stability of switching structures, and their response to static loads.
These theoretical endeavors will allow to unveil the origin of islands of stable
behavior at intermediate time scales that have been recently observed in
switching networks, but whose physical underpinnings are not yet fully
understood, Finally, this project will provide significant steps towards
exploring the feasibility of switching structures, by realizing tabletop-scale
prototypes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.