* 2306047
* Glyoxal-Based Caging for Temporal Control of Nucleic Acid Function
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Jennifer Heemstra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 444,812.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Jennifer Heemstra of Emory University is
studying a new approach to reversibly “cage” nucleic acid sequences in order to
control their function. Nucleic acids play a critical role in information
storage and catalysis within cells and the ability to control these functions
can significantly advance the study of important biological questions, such as
when and how nucleic acids are sequestered in cellular compartments known as
biomolecular condensates. Methods exist for controlling nucleic acid function,
but still have limitations with regard to what types of nucleic acids can be
caged and the time scales for decaging and restoration of activity. The Heemstra
lab has found that glyoxal provides a versatile and cost-effective approach to
addressing many of these limitations, and the proposed research will explore new
methods for achieving additional control over the location of caging and speed
of reactivation. These methods will subsequently be applied to study the
trafficking of short RNAs to biomolecular condensates. The proposed research
will positively impact society by advancing biotechnologies by addressing
fundamental questions related to the development of nucleic acid sensors and new
potential approaches to gene editing. The research has the potential to provide
tools to study the role of biomolecular condensates in neurodegenerative
diseases such as myotonic dystrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
This project will also contribute to the development of the scientific workforce
by providing professional development and educational resources to STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) students.

The overarching objective of this proposal is to explore glyoxal and related
analogues for selective caging and stimuli-responsive decaging of nucleic acids.
Achieving temporal control over the structure and function of nucleic acids
would provide a powerful tool to study their properties in vitro with the goal
of deploying such methods in living cells to study biological function. While
numerous caging methods have been reported, significant limitations remain with
regard to the types of nucleic acids that can be caged and the time scales upon
which they can be reactivated. The approach taken here, using glyoxal, is
distinct from other approaches in that it enables post-synthetic caging of
nucleic acids through reaction with the Watson-Crick-Franklin face of
nucleobases. This temporarily disrupts base-pairing, leading to denaturation of
structure and loss of function. Conveniently, caged oligonucleotides are stable
at room temperature, but caging is reversed over hours to days at physiological
temperature. We propose to further develop this approach and apply our method to
understand the role of RNA in liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) to form
biomolecular condensates. Specifically, we will pursue the following three
objectives in parallel: (1) Develop “chemical lithography” for selective caging
of specific segments of long RNAs; (2) Explore modified bis-aldehyde reagents
for nucleobase cloaking of DNA and XNAs; (3) Utilize glyoxal-caging to study the
role of snRNA structure and protein binding in the formation and RNA trafficking
of Cajal bodies. The proposed research is expected to benefit society by
providing tools to advance biotechnology and through the creation and
dissemination of educational and professional development resources for
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.