* 2306596
* SCC-PG: Bridge: An AI-Enabled Platform to Support Coordinated Care for Children with Autism
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Mimi Xie, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,999.00

Children with autism spectrum disorder (CWA) often engage in severe problem
behavior, and thus require long-term care with individualized clinical
assessment, treatment, and intervention. Applied behavior analysis (ABA)
therapy, considered an evidence-based best practice, can be time-consuming,
resource intensive, and prone to human bias. This Smart and Connected
Communities Planning Grant (SCC-PG) project seeks to co-design an AI-based
solution for collecting behavior data for automatic measurement of severe
behaviors (e.g., frequency, intensity, latency, etc.), assisting diagnosis and
treatment decisions, and communicating to patients and families in real-time for
early intervention.

The project team partners with a range of community stakeholders in a pilot
study in San Antonio, TX for coordinated care of CWA through an AI-augmented
platform. The planning process begins with identifying key platform parameters
including data types, privacy concerns, main function modules, and expected
performance. Different AI algorithms are examined for fusing multi-modal data to
inform ABA. Post-survey and focus groups are conducted to uncover the effects of
incorporating the IoT-Edge-Cloud prototype into clinical practices. The project
has the potential to improve health outcomes for autistic children and the well-
being of their families.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.