* 2306404
* Interaction of Low-Energy Positrons with Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* C. Surko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 746,385.00

This research project focuses on science with positrons (the antiparticles of
electrons). Positrons play an important role in basic science, including atomic,
plasma and astrophysics, biology and medicine. Positrons also have many
technological applications such as new techniques for mass spectroscopy, the
characterization of materials, and positron emission tomography (PET), the
latter to study metabolic processes and for drug design. While some aspects of
positron interactions with matter are well understood, there are many
outstanding questions. When positrons and electrons collide, they can
‘annihilate’ – i.e. their energy, originally in the form of mass, is converted
into gamma rays. The research group has shown that positrons briefly – typically
for less than one hundred millionth of a second - bind to most molecules before
undergoing annihilation. The present project will carry out a more detailed
study of the binding of positrons on various molecules. These positron binding
studies are relevant to positron surface states on materials and the fate of
positrons in PET and in the interstellar medium. In terms of scientific
education and training, the research actively involves students and young
researchers at all levels, from the planning of experiments to the dissemination
of research results. The project involves small-scale experiments that are an
excellent training ground for scientific and technical personnel. The work is
communicated broadly, not only to physics audiences but also to those involved
in plasma, chemical, and materials science, and gaseous electronics research.

In previous research, the group showed that positrons bind to molecules. Two
important intellectual challenges related to this phenomenon are to develop
methods to treat electron-positron correlations and to better understand the
role of vibrational dynamics in positron annihilation processes. One focus of
the project is to gain a better understanding of positron binding to molecules,
the magnitudes of binding energies, and what they depend upon. A second
objective is to gain a better understanding of mechanisms for positron
annihilation in molecules. This process proceeds by means of vibrational
resonances and results in annihilation rates orders of magnitude greater than
expected in simple collisions. The experiments will be conducted with a tunable,
state-of-the-art, high-energy-resolution positron beam, developed by the
research team, that is now coming to full capability. This device is expected to
play an important role in making high-resolution measurements as a function of
incident positron energy. It is expected to provide new insights into the
critical role of molecular dynamics in resonant positron annihilation. The
research group’s experimental work has motivated complementary theoretical work
by groups around the world with the goal of gaining a more complete and
fundamental understanding of resonant positron annihilation and positron-
molecule binding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.