* 2306285
* Research Initiation: Embodied and Student-Centered Robotics in the Professional Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Hongbo Zhang, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,683.00

The global robotics technology market size is expected to grow three times from
2021 to 2030. There is, however, a limited workforce pipeline to sustain the
rapid growth of the industry demands, leading to increased workload and
decreased quality of output. To resolve these challenges, this project will
investigate effective engineering educational methods to prepare future robotics
engineers. The research will leverage industry partners’ needs to formulate the
industry requirements for robotics engineers. The research will immerse learners
in engaging learning environments emphasizing human-robot interactions for
effective learning of robotics technologies. Various real-world robotics
engineering tasks will be used through the learning process. A virtual reality
application will be developed to create immersive learning environments to
explore the development of robotics software, hardware, motion control, and
object manipulation. Hands on activities and projects will be used in the
classes to boost the learning efficacy of the robotics technology. Iterative and
rigorous evaluation will ensure the learning outcomes to maximize the impacts on
the formation of engineering workforce of robotics.

The project will use embodied learning and user-centered design for the
practical integration of robotics into engineering education for the formation
of engineers. For this goal, embodied learning and user-centered design will be
developed and assessed through user studies and class learning settings for
their performance, to improve robotics engineering education. The project will
answer two research questions; (1) To what extent the student-centered design
influences the formation of engineers? and (2) To what extent the embodied
learning influences the formation of engineers? To answer the first research
question, student-centered design techniques including persona and user journey
maps will be used to identify the gaps in robotics skills between industry
partners’ requirements and students’ knowledge. To answer the second research
question, the effectiveness of embodied learning in robotics education will be
assessed. The proposed embodied learning will address the difficulties of
conventional computation-centered robotics workforce training methods. Embodied
learning will reduce the need for abstract and conceptual thinking capabilities
of students required by the conventional computation-centered learning approach.
Embodied learning is expected to reduce frustrations and increase joyfulness,
growth of knowledge retention, and improved problem-solving skills. Motoric
engagement embodied activities including gesture, posture, locomotion, and
manipulation of robotics tasks will be used during the learning. Perceived
immersion embodied activities such as using a virtual reality app to perform
robotics tasks will be also evaluated for their effectiveness in learning. The
semester-long electronics and instrumentation as well as control and
optimization courses will be used to explore the effectiveness of applying
embodied learning in robotics software, hardware, and motion control with
multiple difficulty levels. Two workshops will use robotics platforms, student-
centered instructional design, and embodied learning protocols to showcase the
effectiveness of embodied learning. The user-centered robotics instructional
content will be hosted on a Web portal for public use. Dissemination activities
will contribute new knowledge to the robotics engineering education community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.