* 2306327
* Asymptotic Analysis of Almost-Periodic Operators of Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Roman Shterenberg, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 219,951.00

Quasi-periodic structures have been attracting increasing interest over the last
thirty years. This interest is due to the importance of these media in solid-
state physics. Until the 1970s all materials studied consisted of periodic
arrays or were amorphous. In the last decades a new class of solid-state matter,
called aperiodic crystals, has been found. An aperiodic crystal is a long-range
ordered structure but without lattice periodicity. It is found in a wide range
of materials: organic and inorganic compounds, minerals (including a substantial
portion of the earth's crust), metallic alloys (under various pressures and
temperatures), and even some proteins. The 2011 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
recognizes the discovery of quasicrystals, in which atoms are ordered over long
distances but not in the periodically repeating arrangement of traditional
crystals. The present research is focused on the investigation of the properties
of such quasi-periodic structures using appropriate mathematical models. This
study will lead to the understanding of the mechanism of electrical conductivity
in modulated crystals, especially, of the phenomenon of the metal-insulator
transition.

The proposed activity will lead to research in different classical as well as
modern areas of mathematics and theoretical physics. This research combines
powerful apparatus from the theory of partial differential equations, complex
analysis, and others. Considered subjects are at the interfaces between pure
mathematics, theoretical physics, and engineering. The proposed activity covers
some old and new questions for almost-periodic structures which have a lot of
applications in physics and engineering. The methods and constructions are quite
intricate and are of great interest to both mathematicians and physicists. The
proposed research will lead to a better understanding of some very important
questions in quantum mechanics, hydrodynamics, the theory of quantum networks,
spectral theory, spectral geometry, the theory of photonic crystals, and many
others. The prospective results can explain or/and predict some effects which
appear in experiments. Obtained improvements of different methods can be applied
to the investigation of other mathematical and physical problems. The proposed
effort also includes integrating the research into the undergraduate and
graduate curricula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.