* 2306961
* Travel: Support for U.S. Students to Receive Training on Research Cyberinfrastructure at the 2023 Annual Modeling and Simulation Conference (ANNSIM)
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Philippe Giabbanelli, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 7,000.00

This award supports up to 7 U.S.-based graduate students whose training on the
research cyberinfrastructure will substantially benefit by attending the Annual
Modeling and Simulation conference (ANNSIM), which is the flagship conference of
the Society for Modeling & Simulation (SCS). ANNSIM will train students by
providing access to expertise through twelve tracks. In particular,
cyberinfrastructure training will be provided through presentations of
simulation software tools in the Annual Simulation Symposium as well as model
libraries, repositories, and data formats in the Theory and Foundations track.
Since advanced networks are important for cyberinfrastructure, ANNSIM also
provides a track on telecommunication systems, which covers topics such as
software defined networking, edge computing, or green and energy efficient
communications. Improving the use of existing datasets and software, while
supporting advances in networking, software developments, standards and
certifications, will contribute to cyberinfrastructure research. In addition to
these twelve tracks, ANNSIM includes several in-depth tutorials, taught by
international experts in their field. The twelve tracks and the tutorials ensure
that attendees are well-aware of advances in information technology systems
through advanced software, data, networked systems, and simulation environments.
By providing access to leading experts, ANNSIM ensures that the next generation
of scientists has the tools, motivations, and career aspirations to contribute
to cyberinfrastructure. Every NSF-funded participant will be matched with a
mentor chosen among the experienced scholars in attendance, which will help
build a professional network.

This award contributes to cyberinfrastructure training by supporting the
attendance of up to 7 US-based students at the Annual Modeling Modeling and
Simulation conference (ANNSIM). The conference will include a direct learning
component by providing multiple tutorials, so that students can develop skills
in specific software packages or apply advanced techniques relevant to the
research cyberinfrastructure. This research can range from software for digital
twins to datasets and libraries in model-driven system design. The conference
gives particular attention to students (e.g., PhD Colloquium with presentations
followed by interactive poster sessions), which helps them connect with leading
researchers to identify better tools and/or additional datasets for experiments.
A barrier in cyberinfrastructure training students is not necessarily a lack of
existing tools or repositories, but a lack of awareness about these tools.
Keynote speakers in simulation conferences have a reputation for informing and
motivating students in contributing to the cyberinfrastructure, for instance by
covering methods and software for system and application performance. Attending
these talks will ensure that students have specific directions to apply the
tools that they have gained onto open research problems in the
cyberinfrastructure. Students will submit articles and receive feedback from the
technical program committee in each track. The selection committee seeks
students who are enrolled in an eligible US-based accredited college or
university, lack access to sufficient funding to attend the conference, and have
an accepted submission. The committee will make special efforts to encourage the
application of members of under-represented groups and form a balanced mix of
award recipients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.