* 2306173
* I-Corps: High Intensity pulsed light for the removal of off-flavor compounds in aquaculture effluents
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2024
* OSVALDO SEPULVEDA VILLET, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new technology to increase the production of an aquaculture
enterprise by reducing fish mortality and producing higher quality farmed fish.
Aquaculture industries are increasingly concerned with seafood with off-flavor
compounds (aromatic byproducts of microbial metabolism) that are concentrated
during intensive recirculating aquaculture and during bioaccumulation in the
tissues of fishes. These compounds confer undesirable muddy tastes and smells.
Off-flavor compounds in seafood drastically lowers market prices, thus, large
commercial aquaculture facilities place fish into secondary processes
(depuration) to lower the concentration of these compounds by fasting the fish
in clean water that is discarded. This practice results in dramatically higher
water use and expense, delays in getting product to market, and increased
operational costs.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a high intensity pulsed
light lamp for disinfection of recirculating aquaculture water, municipal
wastewater, industrial wastewater, and runoff water. The technology can also be
used for preventing off-flavor in farmed fish. This technology is more effective
for water disinfection than comparable ultraviolet (UV) technologies and is
positioned to eliminate off-flavor compounds from aquaculture effluents, an
increasing concern for salmon and other land-based, intensive recirculating
aquaculture producers. The novelty of the system is that it delivers germicidal
UV and full-spectrum light in a more powerful manner than the typical low power
mercury UV lamps currently used. This technology contains inert Xenon gas,
limiting the possibility of a lamp break. Additionally, the lamp runs "naked" in
the water without a surrounding flow tube used in current UV systems. The
ability to omit the surrounding flow tube puts the lamp in direct contact with
the water, improving efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.