* 2306672
* Applications of Algebraic Geometry to Multivariate Gaussian Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Aida Maraj, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 56,286.00

The present project aims to do an in depth analysis on the algebraic and
geometric structure of two main types of Gaussian models that are commonly
chosen in applications: colored Gaussian graphical (CGG) models and Brownian
motion tree (BMT) models. CGG models are for modeling interactions among random
variables, taking in consideration possible similar traits, and BMT models are
Gaussian models for the evolution of continuous traits in mathematical
phylogenetics. The investigator will then use this information to compute the
complexity of the maximum likelihood estimate problem for each model, a key
issue when analyzing data. Some elements of the project will involve
undergraduate students majoring in STEM disciplines, especially those from
underrepresented groups with limited educational resources. The investigator
will use algebra, geometry, combinatorics, and symbolic computations to better
understand statistical models and make advancements on their maximum likelihood
estimate (MLE) problem. For Gaussian models this starts by identifying Gaussian
distributions with their covariance or concentration matrices and analyzing the
polynomials vanishing on these matrices. The maximum likelihood degree (MLD) of
a statistical model, which computes the complexity of finding the maximum
likelihood estimate (MLE) of a statistical model for given data, relies on tools
from algebra and geometry such as optimizing over an algebraic variety,
intersection theory and polyhedral geometry. Specific questions that this
project aims to answer are: (1) determine features in a phylogenetic tree that
affect the maximum likelihood degree of its BMT model and connections to the
algebraic degree of the vanishing ideal for the BMT model, (2) classify CGG
models with toric structure; that is, with toric vanishing ideal or with
vanishing ideal that turns toric after an appropriate linear change of
variables, (3) find formulas for the maximum likelihood degree of CGG models and
for the maximum likelihood estimate function of CGG models with MLD one. The
investigator emphasizes CGG models with the algebraic structure of a toric
variety because the bimonial equations of a toric statistical model can be used
to fasten computations on the MLD of the model, produce Markov bases, contribute
in hypothesis testing algorithms, and the polytope associated to the toric model
is useful for studying the existence of MLE.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.