* 2306079
* LSAMP BD: University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Juan Ramirez-Lugo, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,075,000.00

With support from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
this Bridge to Doctorate Activity will offer 12 talented students from multiple
LSAMP alliances the opportunity to pursue doctoral degrees in STEM fields at the
University of Puerto Rico-RÃ­o Piedras, Puerto Rico (UPRRP). Puerto Rico LSAMP
(PR-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) fellows will receive multidisciplinary
training in high-impact research practices while enrolled in one of the
following graduate programs at UPRRP: Biology, Chemistry, Chemical Physics,
Physics, Environmental Sciences, Computer Science, Engineering, Geology and
Mathematics. The work produced by BD Scholars will advance a plethora of
research efforts that address many complex scientific issues with high societal
impact, including understanding and mitigating the impacts of climate change,
developing novel technologies, and leveraging computational tools to understand
the natural world.

The implementation of the 14th cohort of BD scholars will help to further
develop and maintain a highly competitive STEM research enterprise required to
advance Puerto Rico's economic development, and to meet the national need for
diverse STEM professionals. Specifically, the PR-LSAMP BD Program aims to
increase enrollment and retention of students in STEM from the LSAMP population
with a focus on Afro-Caribbean students who are US citizens or nationals. Upon
completion of the program, BD fellows will become role models for other students
from underrepresented groups across the Nation, to become the next generation of
STEM professionals. BD fellows will become STEM ambassadors by presenting their
research at local conferences such as the Puerto Rico Interdisciplinary
Scientific Meeting (PRISM), at national conferences of their disciplines, and
will undertake outreach activities by visiting public high schools to offer
their experience and knowledge on STEM fields and careers. As the recruitment
pool of LSAMP baccalaureate recipients includes a high proportion of individuals
from underrepresented minority populations, the project anticipates that LSAMP
Bridge to Doctorate Fellows will be students from these groups. Therefore, the
project will contribute significantly to broadening participation in academe and
science research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.