* 2306967
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Flexible &amp; Open-Source Models for Materials and Devices
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Oliviero Andreussi, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2023
* USD 121,009.00

The project will develop first principles materials modeling software that can
approach multiple length and time scales (multiscale). This software will be
capable of modeling systems as complex as entire devices and materials of
mesoscopic sizes. Over the course of the project the principal investigators
plan to develop an open-source python-based software aimed at standardizing and
generalizing multiscale simulations methods. This will enable the use of
computer modeling in the design of new compounds, materials and devices. The
goals are to render multiscale simulations reproducible and accessible by the
broader community. In that context, the project will address the notion of "lab
2.0", by which computer simulations replace laboratory experiments in tasks such
as materials design and costly combinatorial searches for viable chemical
processes. The software will be self-optimized using machine learning and
exploit linear workflows approachable by nonexperts. Education and diversity
will be promoted by direct participation of underrepresented minorities from
high schools and colleges in hackathon workshops and summer research programs.

An approach that leverages the long-range multiscale capabilities of continuum
models with accurate short-range atomistic descriptions of specific
interactions, and that exploits the ideal scalability of quantum-embedding
techniques, will be investigated. The main driver of the proposed implementation
will be a Python codebase which will carry out the part of current software that
is not computationally heavy, but instead is code heavy where many lines of code
are needed in typically non-object-oriented languages. This is key to obtain the
desired cluster-topology-agnostic workflows. Longstanding problems related to
computational scalability and code stiffness will addressed in a three-pronged
approach aimed at developing (1) modular tools implementing modules with highly
object-oriented codes (e.g., quantum, classical atomistic, and continuum
solvers), (2) hybrid tools implementing combinations of modular tools in a way
that best exploits high-performance computing architectures, and (3) hyper tools
implementing a high-level data-enabled optimization strategy that generates
optimal workflows combining several hybrid tools, thereby making the software of
broad applicability and accessible to nonexperts. These goals will render
multiscale simulations reproducible and accessible by the broader community. The
project will address the "lab 2.0" paradigm, by which computer simulations
replace laboratory experiments in tasks such as materials design and
combinatorial searches for viable chemical processes. The resultant software
will be self-optimized using machine learning and exploit linear workflows
approachable by nonexperts. Education and diversity will include the direct
participation of underrepresented minorities from high schools and colleges in
hackathon workshops and summer research programs.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.