* 2306929
* CAREER: Multiscale and Machine Learning Approaches for Electrified Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Oliviero Andreussi, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2025
* USD 444,959.00

Dr. Oliviero Andreussi of the University of North Texas is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry and from the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory (CMMT)
program in the Division of Materials Research. He will develop and apply new
computational tools to the characterization of chemical processes at solid-
liquid interfaces. The project combines hierarchical models and machine-learning
techniques to provide accurate and inexpensive descriptions of aspects that
control the operation of chemical devices, such as batteries, fuel cells, and
sensing devices. The developed techniques are aimed at the systematic virtual
screening of materials for electrocatalysis, starting from the emerging class of
two-dimensional materials. The development of a computational mindset to address
emerging technological problems represents the key educational component of the
project. The educational component extends the use of computation to visualize
science and to make it accessible and attractive to the public. Hackathon
workshops will be adopted to engage younger researchers in computational
thinking. The team will also use and develop visualization tools to expand the
impact of the research to other fields and disciplines.

Dr. Oliviero Andreussi is developing accurate and transferable approaches for
modeling solid-liquid interfaces. To accomplish this goal, this project features
an integrated research and education program focused on extending continuum
models of electrochemical environments by embedding a first-principles
description of materials. Dr Andreussi and his research group are pursuing new
developments in hybrid multiscale approaches and machine-learning strategies of
environment effects. The research improves the transferability and accuracy of
simulations of wet and electrified interfaces. These new methods and techniques
are applied to study the effects of complex embedding environments on the
emerging class of two-dimensional (2D) materials. The developed computational
tools allow a systematic screening of existing and proposed 2D materials to
explore exfoliation strategies, to verify their stability in complex
environments, to characterize their (electro-)catalytic activities, and to
identify their role in sensing devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.