* 2306533
* Target Infusion Project: Geospatial Data Systems-Policy Analysis Curriculum Enhancement Project (GDS-PACE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tammy Greer, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 397,999.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to infuse geospatial systems and data analytics into
political science undergraduate education and research at Clark Atlanta
University.

The goal of this project is to develop and implement new undergraduate
geospatial research courses in the political science curriculum, incorporate
geospatial data systems and/or data analytics modules in currently existing
political science courses, and increase geospatial research and data analytics
through faculty-mentored undergraduate research projects. The project will lead
to a mutual relationship between policy analyses in an intellectual sense and
policy implementation in practical terms. The outcome of this project will be
graduates that can solve real-world problems utilizing their understanding of
political science theory and practice coupled with geospatial data and data
analytics. This project will also better prepare our graduates for graduate
study and the workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.