* 2306983
* Condensed tannin polymers as a new functional biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ketul Popat, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical abstract Medical implants can cause biological responses such as
bacterial infection and inflammation. In normal healing, body’s immune system
helps to fight infection and remove damaged tissue. Inflammation should be
temporary, and should wane as new healthy tissue is formed, but prolonged
inflammation can delay or prevent healing. Prolonged inflammation can damage not
only the surrounding tissue but also the implant material through a chemical
process called oxidation. In severe cases of unresolved inflammation or
infection implants must be removed or replaced. While much is known about how
foreign materials lead to inflammation, very little is known about how they can
promote the resolution of inflammation and subsequent tissue healing. These
problems could be addressed by development of new materials that promote the
resolution of inflammation. This work proposes a solution inspired by biology.
Plants produce materials called “condensed tannins” that protect plant tissues
from bacterial and fungal pathogens and from the harmful effects of oxidation.
This work will develop new materials for implants based on these condensed
tannins. Condensed tannins will be modified so that they can guide inflammatory
responses, and thereby promote healing, while also imparting antioxidant and
antibacterial activity to implant surfaces. This work will also discover how
these new materials modulate other outcomes related particularly to bone
healing, such as stem cell growth and mineralization, so that the work can be
translated to orthopedic implants. These new biomaterials based on condensed
tannins will be developed from an abundant renewable resource, and they will
provide new strategies for improving healing around implants. This work will
yield new insights into the design of functional biomaterials that promote
healing, reduce oxidation related damage, and fight infections. An international
collaborator will contribute to a graduate course in global engineering and
entrepreneurship. Outreach to the public will communicate how sustainable
materials from abundant renewable resources can solve important challenges in
medicine.

Technical abstract The ideal of a “bioinert” biomaterial has not been realized.
Materials in contact with biological environments adsorb proteins, which can
induce inflammatory responses. Prolonged inflammation can cause oxidative damage
to tissues and materials, and inhibit wound healing, leading to implant failure.
Condensed tannins are a class of plant-derived polyphenols, with excellent
processing characteristics and valuable biological properties. Cellular
responses to materials containing a commercially available, amphoteric aminated
condensed tannin called tanfloc have been reported. This work hypothesizes that
the chemistry of condensed tannins can be modified to modulate important
biological responses to condensed tannin-based materials. This work aims to (i)
chemically modify tanfloc to alter its acidity, basicity, and antioxidant
activity; (ii) use the chemical modification to modulate protein binding,
thereby modulating the polarization of macrophages, cellular inflammation, and
antibacterial activity; and (iii) use the chemical modification to modulate
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation and mineralization that are related to
bone healing. Outcomes on surfaces containing the new condensed tannin
derivatives will be compared to surfaces modified with polydopamine (a
biopolymer with similar catecholamine chemistry to tanfloc), to oligoethylene
glycol surfaces (presenting hydrogen bond acceptors but no acidic or basic
groups), and to other materials commonly used in bone tissue engineering. This
proposed work will produce three new condensed tannin derivatives, containing
either increased (phenolic) acidity, increased (quaternary amine) basicity, or
increased ether (o-methyl ether) functional groups, with well-characterized
polyelectrolyte behavior, antioxidant activity, and degradation kinetics. This
work will elucidate structure-property relationships that demonstrate how
condensed tannin chemistry can be altered to modulate protein binding,
macrophage polarization, phagocytosis, foreign body giant cell formation, and
antibacterial activity. This work will also demonstrate that the chemistry of
condensed tannins can modulate stem cell differentiation and mineralization on
surfaces. The work will broaden participation of undergraduate and masters
students in the research program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.