* 2306489
* Implementation Project: Establishing a Cohesive Community College STEM-Institutional Transformation Academy (STEM-UP Academy Phase III)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Sherry Franklin, Hinds Community College-Utica
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 901,102.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the quality of
their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and research. This project at Hinds Community
College - Utica seeks to address persistence in STEM fields. Diversity in STEM
is compounded by barriers to educational equity, resources, and socioeconomic
disparities impacting the African-American community. The goal of this project
is to increase students’ completion of degrees in STEM by developing bridges
that support students’ matriculation at each educational level. This project
aims to support the critical transitions from K-12 to 4-year institutions. Prior
projects concentrated on building infrastructure; this project seeks to improve
recruitment and retention, enhance student research experiences, advance
innovative teaching and learning techniques, and increase globally-engaged
workforces supporting persistence. Faculty and staff will engage in career
enhancements key to the successful implementation of STEM and Career Technical
pathways. This project is significant in its focus on developing persistence and
higher degree attainment for HBCU students entering a community college.

Participants will include students, faculty, and staff of the institution's STEM
and Career Technical pathways, collaborating institutions, and partners in the
six (6) links and transitions. As students transition to community college, they
undergo a two-week Student Success Camp (SSC) preparing for college courses in a
Summer Bridge Program (SBP). They will enroll in STEM courses during the SBP and
earn STEM-UP Academy Cohort Status (with a 3.0 GPA). This status makes them
eligible for 2-year financial aid to complete a STEM associate’s degree. After
the second semester, they are encouraged to engage in Summer Research programs
or internships at 4-year universities and specified government or industrial
STEM laboratories. They will submit research abstracts and contribute to an
intervention study on the effects of students’ Academy experience. Lastly, two-
year colleges will form 4-year college linkages, advancing research and
collaborative forums as national models for joint efforts. Future redesign of
curriculums for K-12, community colleges, and 4-year institutions is posed as a
logical nexus resulting from a blend of research and workforce experiences. This
project may serve as a model for enhancing persistence rates in STEM at
community colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.