* 2306113
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Dialogue and Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Casey Kennington, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2024
* USD 2,244.00

The Dialogue and Robots workshop addresses the issues of spoken language
processing for human-robot interaction since communication between robots and
humans presents multiple novel challenges. To address these challenges the team
will bring together roboticists, spoken dialogue systems researchers, human-
robot interaction researchers, computer scientists, speech scientists and
technologists and natural language processing researchers to understand how to
use various knowledge sources so that robots can more naturally and effectively
interact with people. Success in this area will help a broad application of
social robots to the benefit of society, including working with and alongside
people in homes, schools, hospitals, and workplaces. The expected result of
Dialogue and Robots workshop is the stimulation of interdisciplinary
collaborations that focus on solving problems in speech communication that
currently limit the effectiveness of social robots in various situations.

The workshop participants' discussions cover a range of problems, from the
basics of the platforms to technical challenges in robotics, human-robot
interaction, spoken dialogue systems, and natural language processing. Topics
include processing multimodal data, situated reasoning, achieving common ground
in human-AI collaboration, building trust in collaborative systems, and
applications of such systems for social good. The workshop will result in
whitepapers that define concrete research projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.