* 2306532
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing autonomous systems technologies in the Northern Front (ND, SD, MT, ID)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Mark Askelson, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 992,699.00

This Regional Innovation Engine Development Award provides support to develop a
plan for a comprehensive ecosystem to advance autonomous systems in four
northern-tier states. North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Idaho have a
shared interest in serving the needs of rural and tribal communities, and more
broadly the nation, by developing and fielding autonomous systems in critical
sectors including transportation, agriculture, mining, energy, defense, and
health care. Autonomous systems provide significant benefits, including
increased safety, efficiency, resiliency, and inter-operability, while also
addressing challenges such as workforce shortages and economic disparities in
rural and tribal areas. This region is poised to build and deepen an autonomy-
based innovation ecosystem given the strong needs/demands, its deep expertise in
use-inspired needs, its existing capabilities across its critical sectors
(transportation, agriculture, etc.), and its strong partnerships with
stakeholders who require or engage with autonomous systems, with government
agencies that establish policy and regulations, with industry, academia, and
government organizations, and with economic development organizations that
enable realization/commercialization. The project's academic partners are the
University of North Dakota, Montana State University, the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology, and Boise State University, which will partner with the
Tribal Nations Research Group in Belcourt, ND. These partners, combined with
stakeholders (communities, industry sectors, etc.), government agencies that
establish policy and regulations, and suppliers of AS solutions (industry,
tribal leadership, academia, government, economic development organizations),
comprise the NFASIDE leadership team, ensuring that all aspects that are
critical to the realization of the benefits of autonomous systems are
incorporated.

This project will identify needs/use cases, develop, and translate autonomous
systems into practice. Key enablers include clear delineation of
needs/opportunities, consolidation of a team that has both deep and broad
expertise in key areas, early engagement with stakeholders to ensure realization
viability within desired timeframes, extensive utilization of digital
engineering to accelerate development, close coupling of development stages,
clear pathways to translation/commercialization, and workforce development that
serves all stakeholders -â€” especially under-represented populations across the
educational spectrum from high schools to post-doctoral programs. This effort
will coalesce the NFASIDE team to provide an organizational and operational
structure and a roadmap for realizing a self-sustaining and productive AS engine
that drives the rapid realization of autonomous systems' benefits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.