* 2306012
* All-Aqueous Printing of Viscoelastic Droplets in 3D Space
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Liheng Cai, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2026
* USD 319,476.00

Analogous to pixels of two-dimensional (2D) pictures, voxels –– in the form of
small cubes or spheres –– are the basic building blocks of three-dimensional
(3D) objects. In principle, the location, composition, and properties of
individual voxels and voxel-voxel interactions can be precisely defined to match
the artistry of biological tissues. Realizing voxelated bioprinting would
dramatically expand the capability of existing 3D bioprinting technologies,
which largely rely on the assembly of one-dimensional (1D) bio-ink filaments.
However, it remains a grand challenge to generate, deposit, and assemble
individual droplets on-demand in 3D space. This project seeks to establish the
foundational knowledge and to provide a new way of precisely manipulating
viscoelastic droplets in 3D space. The knowledge and tools will make a positive
impact on particle synthesis, encapsulation, miniaturized soft robots, and
tissue engineering. By providing opportunities for interdisciplinary research
and organizing local scientific activities, this program will train students
from diverse backgrounds to be next-generation scientific leaders in soft matter
and complex fluids. Through outreach interactions with local high schools, the
PI will leverage the vast number of high-speed videos generated from this
project to increase the pipeline of underrepresented minority students in STEM
fields.

The research goal of this project is to elucidate the nonlinear fluid dynamics
associated with all-aqueous printing viscoelastic droplets in yield-stress
fluids. A printing platform will be developed to study the dynamics of droplet
printing in real time. Moreover, a strategy will be developed to independently
control the viscosity and relaxation time of inks. Using these tools and
materials, three questions will be explored: (1) How to generate a viscoelastic
droplet of good roundness without the help of interfacial tension? (2) What are
the mechanisms for detaching the print nozzle from a viscoelastic droplet? (3)
What are the parameters determining the roundness of a relaxed droplet?
Corroborating experiments with theory and modeling, universal scaling laws will
be developed to predict the dependence of droplet fidelity on printing
conditions and the nonlinear rheological properties of inks. Finally, exploiting
controlled polymer swelling, it will be printed 3D structures consisting of
interconnected yet distinguishable hydrogel particles of different properties.
These studies are expected to help establish the foundational science for
voxelated bioprinting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.