* 2306220
* CAREER: Genetic and epigenetic regulation of meiotic recombination in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Meixia Zhao, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2027
* USD 378,531.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Plant breeding relies on meiotic recombination to combine favorable alleles to
develop crops with high yield and other improved traits. Meiotic recombination
is a process that determines how parental chromosomes pair up and generate
crossovers during sexual reproduction in order to reciprocally exchange genetic
material. This makes one individual different from another due to the new and
unique combination of alleles. However, breeders rarely know which sex direction
of artificial pollination to choose in order to obtain the alleles they need. In
order to help breeders determine the direction of pollination that will most
enhance their breeding, this project will compare the frequency of meiotic
recombination between male and female in corn to understand whether and how
meiotic recombination differs between the sexes. The data generated in this
project will be used to develop two bioinformatics courses for undergraduate and
graduate students who are interested in big data science and advanced plant
science. To broaden project impact, a 5-day “Bioinformatics in Plant Science”
summer workshop with an emphasis on programming skills and cutting edge
technologies will be held annually to train graduate, undergraduate, high school
students, and particularly female students and students from underrepresented
groups. Additionally, high school science teachers will be involved in this
project to help them develop science projects for high school curriculum.

Recombination has been widely recognized for its role in promoting genetic
diversity and largely impacts the efficiency of plant breeding. While enormous
progress has been made to decipher the molecular mechanisms of meiotic
recombination, how genetic and epigenetic factors are involved in this
complicated process, and whether and how recombination differs between male and
female meioses in maize are still poorly understood. This project seeks to
investigate the meiotic recombination during male and female meioses by using
the hybrids of parents of the maize nested association mapping (NAM) population
with the reference line B73. These NAM lines were selected to compare male and
female meioses because they maximize genetic diversity of the entire maize
population. We will first identify the lines that show largest differences with
respect to recombination frequency between sexes (Aim 1) and will generate high
resolution recombination maps of these lines to compare crossovers between sexes
at global and local scales (Aim 2). To determine the causes of such differences
between sexes, we aim to elucidate genetic and epigenetic factors important for
regulation and control of meiotic recombination (Aim 3). In addition to using
the NAM hybrids, a mutant in a RNA directed DNA methylation pathway will be used
to particularly dissect the roles of epigenetic modifications in meiotic
recombination (Aim 3). This project includes an integrated education portion to
broaden the impacts that will be beneficial to graduate, undergraduate, high
school students, particularly female students and students from underrepresented
groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.