* 2306512
* Targeted Infusion Project: Microbiome Data Science Infusion to Improve Undergraduate Research, Pedagogy, and Workforce Preparation
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Melton, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Saint Augustineâ€™s University seeks to implement
curricular enhancements in biology by incorporating plant microbiome course-base
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). In addition, there are efforts to
bolster the research capacity of the institution by establishing a Microbiome
Research Laboratory, including the necessary equipment to support next
generation sequencing experimental analysis.

There is evidence to demonstrate CUREs an effective approach to positively
impact undergraduate student learning and workforce training outcomes. This
project describes efforts to leverage the significance of microbiomes in
promoting homeostasis in biological and environmental ecosystems, by developing
a sustainable microbiome CUREs framework, and examining the impact of CUREs
integration on student perceptions and outcomes. Specifically, CUREs modules
will focus on the phyto-microbiomes and consist of discovery-based
investigations on the composition and function of microorganisms associated with
annual and perennial flowers and other plants. The establishment of the
Microbiome Research Laboratory at Saint Augustine's University advances the
technological capacity, thereby creating a foundation for a cost-effective and
sustainable model research system. Together, the Microbiome Research Laboratory
and CUREs modules will facilitate the integration of microbiome data science and
additional computational biological investigations in the STEM curriculum,
precipitate interdisciplinary research partnerships, and enhance faculty-
mentored research programs. Exposure to innovative microbiology, molecular
biology, ecology, plant science, and bioinformatics protocols will augment
undergraduate readiness for post-graduate opportunities. It is anticipated that
data from CUREs efficacy studies on underrepresented students will inform the
STEM education research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.