* 2306271
* Research Initiation: Development and Initial Validation of an Engineering Empathy Scale
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Bobette Bouton, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 192,573.00

The problems engineers are called to solve are complex, not just from an
intellectually rigorous perspective, but also from the myriad of societal,
ethical, and human elements that must be considered in the solution. To this
end, empathy is an essential skill needed by engineers to understand these
complex problems and provide solutions that meet the needs of society. Empathy,
however, is devalued within dominant engineering culture and largely not
included in collegiate engineering formation. To correct this gap in engineering
formation, more researchers must study empathy in engineering and create
interventions and tools related to empathy training for engineers. To be able to
assess and equip a more empathetic engineer, empathetic capabilities relevant
and specific to engineering must be measurable. The aim of this project is to
create an Engineering Empath Scale (EES) to measure empathy in pre-career
engineers, practicing engineers, and engineering educators. Through the use of
engineering specific empathetic scenarios, the EES will overcome a current issue
in engineering formation, a disconnect between knowledge of empathy generally
and its role within the discipline of engineering. Through knowledge of the role
of empathy within engineering, engineers will be better able to understand the
context, values, and driving forces of their work and relate to and communicate
with those impacted by their work. These traits will allow engineers to better
holistically serve society. This project will also introduce the PI to the field
of engineering education and increase the number of researchers studying empathy
in engineering. Currently, few studies describe scenarios of empathetic displays
within engineering practice and education and no quantitative scale exists to
assess an engineer’s empathetic abilities in engineering specific scenarios. The
development of the EES will be driven by two key research questions: How is
empathy conceptually perceived, experienced, and shown in engineering specific
situations? and Can engineering specific situations be used to measure empathy
in engineering students, faculty, and practitioners? Theoretical guidance for
development of the EES comes from the three constructs of empathy: cognitive,
affective, and behavioral, and a model for empathy in engineering. Using this
framework, the research team will conduct semi-structured focus groups with
practicing engineers and engineering educators to obtain detailed descriptions
of empathetic thoughts, emotions, and displays within the specific context of
engineering practice and education activities. Focus group narratives will be
analyzed to produce overarching themes of empathy in engineering. The themes
that result will be used to develop a large set of questions regarding empathy
in engineering specific scenarios. This initial question set will go through
expert and novice review and coding agreement between panel members will be used
to select the question set for initial validation. Initial validation and
reliability of the EES will be determined through confirmatory factor analysis
of engineering students’ responses to the EES. Accomplishment of this proposal
will result in a quantitative assessment tool, the EES, to be made publicly
available so that engineering educators, and companies that employee engineers,
can use the tool for reflection and indication of empathy training
effectiveness.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.