* 2306964
* Conference: Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and Biotransport Conference (SB3C 2023); Vail, Colorado; 4-8 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Stavros Thomopoulos, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,433.00

This award will support the Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and
Biotransport Conference (SB3C), Vail, Colorado 4-8 June 2023, with a theme of
Building Interfaces Across Tissues, Disciplines, and Communities. A hallmark of
the SB3C is a focus on student and trainee involvement (approximately half of
attendees are trainees). The conference will highlight student achievements in
research through a Student Paper Competition as well as connect trainees with
mentors through events such as the Diversity Mentor-Mentee session. Funding will
be used to offset registration and travel costs for undergraduate and graduate
students majoring in a STEM field, with special consideration given to members
of groups underrepresented in STEM. Registration costs for the students selected
to participate in the BS Student Paper Competition and MS Student Paper
Competition will be waived, which will enable students who might not ordinarily
be able to attend the conference to compete in these research competitions. The
conference will also feature a Diversity Reception and Diversity Mentor-Mentee
Workshop, led by a professional facilitator.

The SB3C is a leading bioengineering conference held annually that promotes
state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and scientific discourse in
bioengineering; showcases research from students and trainees; and provides
essential networking and mentoring opportunities across disciplines and levels
of seniority. The conference will include over 40 podium sessions, 4
plenary/award lecture sessions, 10 workshops, and numerous reception and
networking events. The objectives of the conference are: (i) enhance access to
bioengineering research and education opportunities, particularly for
underrepresented groups (ii) improve interfaces across basic research and
translation, including biomechanics, bioengineering, and biotransport; and (iii)
develop emerging bioengineering fields with high translational potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.