* 2306391
* Origin and Evolution of the Polar Planets
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sarah Millholland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2026
* USD 506,618.00

Many planets around distant stars have been found with strange orbits
characterized by large differences between the axis of host star rotation and
the orbit of the planet. A team led by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
will explore the origins of these planets. The work will yield predictions that
are testable with observations by the James Webb Space Telescope. The team will
undergo on-site visits to local high schools and middle schools in the Boston
metropolitan area, with a focus on the most diverse and economically
disadvantaged districts using a portable planetarium system to give engaging
astronomy presentations that allow students to experience the wonders of a dark
sky without having to travel to a professional planetarium or a remote location.
The educational program will be focused on Solar System objects, nearby stars,
and planets. The visits will broaden students’ perspectives about Earth’s cosmic
context and inspire students to pursue STEM subjects in college.

A sizable fraction of the polar planets are warm Neptune- or super-Neptune-sized
planets orbiting cool stars. These polar Neptunes share a variety of
distinguishing characteristics: moderately eccentric and polar orbits, locations
in or near the so-called hot Neptune desert, puffy atmospheres that show
evidence for mass loss in many cases, and evidence for exterior massive
companion planets in many cases. The team will perform a comprehensive
theoretical analysis of the polar to fully understand the origins of both their
orbital and physical properties. Analysis will follow the long-term orbital
evolution of planets to see whether resonance can explain present-day orbital
properties after gigayears of evolution that follow an initial resonance
encounter. The team will study the response of the planets’ interiors and
atmospheres to tidal heating to explain present-day observations and will couple
the orbital and interior models together to derive holistic constraints on the
polar Neptunes’ origins and long-term evolution. The work will yield predictions
that are testable with atmospheric observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.