* 2306424
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: The Radar Echo Telescope for Cosmic Rays and Neutrinos:  Toward a Transformative Technology for Neutrino Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Steven Prohira, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 02/28/2025
* USD 297,439.00

This project will develop the prototype of the Radar Echo Telescope for Cosmic
Rays and Neutrinos ready for installation at Taylor Dome in Antarctica. Radar
echo detection is the process by which radio waves are reﬂected from an object
in order to measure its properties, including position, direction, and spatial
extent. High-energy particles interacting in a dense material like ice produce
cascades of charged particles and a dense cloud of ionization, which reﬂects
incident radio waves, allowing for remote detection of high-energy particles
such as neutrinos. Such radar echoes have already been observed in a test-beam
measurement. This work will establish the technical aspects of this
transformative detector technology for neutrinos with energies of 10 peta-
electron-volts (PeV) and beyond. Expanding access to scientiﬁc thought and
activities at a young age is a key step towards expanding general scientiﬁc
literacy and training future scientists from all backgrounds. The NSF-supported
ASPIRE program at The Ohio State University for high school women will be
extended to involve the radar detection of meteors. Students will design,
construct, and use an antenna to detect a faint radio signal, inspiring
curiosity and creativity.

The first installation to be planned will be the Radar Echo Telescope (RET) for
Cosmic Rays (RET-CR,) which will detect cascades from ultra-high-energy cosmic
rays (UHECR) and develop the techniques for the future RET for neutrinos, RET-N.
UHECR are well studied and make an ideal, in-situ ‘test beam’. The optical
Cherenkov detector IceCube has detected neutrinos above 1PeV, and its upgrade
will extend this to ~10 PeV. The RET targets neutrinos with energies in the
10-100 PeV range, for which there is no existing technology with greater
sensitivity. Detecting a statistically signiﬁcant population of 10-100 PeV
neutrinos is crucial to probe the sources of UHECR and to measure neutrino-
nucleon interactions at center-of-mass energies >100 TeV, both open experimental
questions. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.