* 2306300
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development and Implementation of courses in Deep Learning for Industrial and Societal Applications
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chung Ng, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,605.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The primary objective of this project is to establish a data science
course sequence focusing on deep learning for students majoring in physical and
social sciences at Morehouse College.

This project goals are to 1) establish a three-course data science sequence
focusing on emergent modeling techniques in deep learning, and 2) create a
collaborative in-house training opportunity to bring together the academic
knowledge gained in the classroom and apply it to practical real-world
applications. The data science course sequence will be composed of a two-
semester course for junior or senior students and a one-term collaborative in-
house hands-on training opportunity. In the two-semester course, the students
will learn the fundamental principles of machine learning and deep neural
network. They will learn to use typical open-source software frameworks such
TensorFlow or PyTorch to solve the assigned exercises. Simple hands-on projects
in objective detection and segmentation will be introduced. The students will
have the opportunity to use a Jetson Nano GPU to run an autonomous toy-like
vehicle. The one semester term project course aims to give the students the
opportunity to team up with the collaborative partners to work on real world
data science problems. A synergy data science project will be established via
knowledge delivery and practical experiences that prepares students historically
underrepresented in STEM for the demands and challenges of the existing
workforce in the society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.