* 2306290
* Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Ablowitz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

Wave motion is fundamental in nature: Light waves impact the way people see,
sound waves allow people to hear, and water waves are critical to the motion of
ships and tidal energy. This project is focused on nonlinear wave propagation,
that is the study of large amplitude or high-power signals, and aims to enhance
the ability of scientists to develop insight and understanding of large
amplitude waves and of the associated dynamics of wave energy transfer. The
results of the investigation will benefit applications of nonlinear wave motion,
which include tsunamis, rogue or freak waves, high power lasers, and the
propagation of large changes in pressure waves such as those that occur in shock
waves and blast waves.

For linear waves or small amplitude waves a substantial theory is available and,
in many situations, exact solutions can be found. For nonlinear waves the
available theory is less developed and there are relatively few nonlinear wave
equations for which exact solutions are known. However, the so-called Inverse
Scattering Transform method has been used to find solutions and understand
important properties of the underlying equations and has led to a wide class of
solutions of physically significant nonlinear wave equations. This method can be
used to find so-called solitons solutions, stable localized waves which have
special interaction properties and have been found to apply widely, for example
in water waves, electromagnetic waves, lattice dynamics, magnetic waves, and
elasticity. The investigator will consider extensions of this method to new
classes of nonlinear equations, such as fractional nonlinear wave equations and
their soliton solutions. Fractional equations themselves have numerous
applications, including to the study of amorphous materials. Additionally, the
method will be applied to study the properties of a class of multidimensional
solitons, that is lump-type waves that vanish in all directions, which are
relevant also for equations that arise in quantum mechanics and optics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.