* 2306613
* Inverse Design and Mechanics of Hybrid Filler Composites with Solid and Liquid Inclusions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Krithika Manohar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,835.00

Polymer composites with hybrid fillers are produced by a complex synthesis
process involving two or more inclusions with different morpholoies and physical
properties that often leads to laborious, time-consuming, low-yield, and
expensive efforts. Furthermore, the uncertainty regarding their mechanical load
capacity and susceptibility to premature failure hinders widespread adoption.
This award supports fundamental research to inversely design composite materials
with solid and liquid phase fillers while investigating their failure under
large deformations. By building a comprehensive and interpretable machine
learning model, this project will enable efficient and reliable synthesis of
composites with targeted properties. The new knowledge will promote the
utilization of soft multifunctional composites in emerging applications, such as
self-powered wearable electronics, biomonitoring systems, and soft robotics.
This award will also support the development of a diverse workforce through
outreach programs and creation of free educational online content on topics of
advanced mechanics and artificial intelligence.

The objective of this research is to perform inverse design of “hybrid filler
composites” with solid-liquid fillers and investigate their failure under large
deformations. Embedded liquid-phase fillers add complexity to the mechanics of
multiphase composites while offering unique advantages such as enhanced
toughness and conductivity. To enable the rational design of these
multifunctional materials, data-driven models will be formulated, incorporating
a wide range of composite descriptors including filler composition, shape,
volume fraction, solid to liquid filler ratio, and polymer matrix. In the
modeling framework, data-driven embeddings will be utilized to reduce the design
search space and expedite the discovery of optimal parameters. Predicting the
failure of these heterogeneous materials is extremely challenging due to the
presence of dissimilar filler phases and their complex microstructures.
Therefore, sparse feature selection will be employed to identify the most
dominant factors contributing to failure. The new insights will be applied to
synthesize composites with designed properties, and the resulting data will be
used for model validation and iterative feedback. This research will create a
comprehensive data library for soft multifunctional materials, revealing the
relationship between their descriptors and mechanical failure while establishing
a universal framework for the efficient design of multiphase materials with
engineered properties and failure characteristics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.