* 2306193
* Kinetically Activated Subsurface Micribial Sampler (KASMS)
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Eric Boyd, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 112,404.00

Earthquakes and their after shocks generate energy in the form of seismic waves,
heat, strain, fractured rock and chemical reactions producing hydrogen gas. Can
the repeated energy pulses from seismic activity stimulate subsurface life that
generates methane and acetic acid? Does this microbial activity impact the
frequency and distribution of after shocks? In 2017 the International
Continental Drilling Program (ICDP) supported DSeis (Drilling into Seismogenic
Zones) project will examine a previously unknown fault zone responsible for the
2014 5.5-magnitude Orkney earthquake, South Africa's largest earthquake in over
50 years. At a depth of 3 km in the bottom of Moab Khotsong gold mine,
geophysicists and geomicrobiologists will join forces to drill down an
additional 600 meters into this still-active fault zone, analyze core samples,
install seismic instruments and deploy a Kinetically Activated Subsurface
Microbial Sampler (KASMS). KASMS is a novel, portable, autonomous fluid sampling
and preservation device that will be triggered by seismic events along the fault
zone. The data from this study will significantly advance our understanding of
the type of earthquakes that are associated with ultra-deep mining,
hydrofracking and fracking brine injections and thus better inform safety and
environmental regulations. The high-resolution temporal data will provide the
first picture of how subsurface microbial communities respond to environmental
stimuli, such as hydrogen gas pulses. If a substantial biomass enhancement is
found within the fault zone, then similar ancient fault zones exposed on the
surface of Mars may be selected for the Mars 2020 rover mission, the first step
in the Mars Sample Return mission series. With the involvement of geophysics,
geology, rock mechanics, and geomicrobiology students from Japan, South Africa,
Switzerland, Israel, Germany, India, Australia and the United States, DSeis and
this project will stimulate cross-disciplinary international STEM education.
Through videos of the coring and sampling activity and of the installation and
operation of KASMS, and downhole videos of the borehole, DSeis and this project
will relate to the public how science is conducted in one of the most extreme
environments on the planet and what subsurface life says about the origin and
evolution of life on Earth and possibly other planets.

This two-year project will design, construct and deploy KASMS, the first fully
automated sampling device for geochemical and microbiological studies. KASMS is
comprised of a borehole-deployed U-tube fluid sampling system and a discrete
sensor array for monitoring the wellbore environment. KASMS will also contain
two osmo-samplers combined with mineral coupons to collect biofilms within the
fault zone. Unique to the KASMS system is the capability to autonomously respond
to seismic events and capture a time progression of fluid samples. These samples
will be analyzed for aqueous geochemistry, dissolved gas concentrations and
isotopic values, and they will be subsampled using two types of filters with
preservatives, one for SEM/TEM microscopy and the other for
metagenomic/metatranscriptomic/metaproteomic analyses. During the year that
KASMS is deployed at Moab Khotsong gold mine, experiments will be performed with
positive and negative controls: samples collected before and after small
magnitude seismic events within the fault zone, before, during and after mine
detonations, during mining holidays when the mine is inactive and before, during
and after the injection of hydrogen and methane gas. After one year KASMS will
be retrieved and returned to Princeton University, where it will be available
for deployment to other subsurface microbiology sites.