* 2306449
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancing Retention in the Chemical &amp; Biomedical Engineering Program at Florida A and M University through Integrated Research, Teaching and Retentio
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Desmond Stephens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The goal of this project is to develop interventions that will attract,
retain and mentor students in the Department of Chemical and Biomedical
Engineering at Florida A&M University (FAMU).

Effective mentoring of students at HBCUs plays a pivotal role in their success
and it is critical that innovative interventions are infused into undergraduate
curriculums to successfully retain, and graduate students historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. This project aims to 1) develop curricular
enhancements in collaboration with industry partners, 2) engage students in 3D
bioprinting research projects, and 3) provide students with internship
opportunities at national labs. These efforts will not only retain students in
the Chemical and Biomedical Engineering Department at FAMU, but more
importantly, motivate and help students to see the principles of science in play
in real world applications, thus providing them with the requisite knowledge
base and technical skills to increase job prospects and competitiveness for
graduate school.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.