* 2306099
* Research Initiation : Exploring First Generation Engineering Technology College Students Acquisition of the Engineering Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Jeffrey Kimble, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,319.00

Each year engineering students enroll in college to gain knowledge and develop
skills in preparation for their careers in the field. The successes and
experiences of these students within their engineering education shape how they
see themselves within the profession as they transition from “engineering
student” to “engineer”. While the process of acquiring the engineer identity
looks different for every student, there are certain complexities that emerge
when the engineering student identity is intersected with other identities,
including those that face unique challenges such as first-generation. Unlike
continuing-generation peers, first-generation students who are the first in
their families to attend college are progressing toward the engineer identity at
the same time they are learning to navigate the landscape of higher education
with its complex structures and jargon. These identities influence how students
understand their position within engineering programs. Furthermore, the type of
program a student enrolls in may impact how a student conceptualizes and
consolidates the engineer identity. Engineering technology programs have
historically been associated with a more hands-on approach to engineering
education. As such, the process of acquiring the engineer identity may look
different for engineering technology students compared to peers in engineering
science programs. This study will explore the question of how these two
identities: first-generation and engineering technology students intersect to
influence the formation of the engineer identity. This goal is directly aligned
with research in the professional formation of engineers which seeks to better
understand how engineering education programs develop future engineers.

The research design for this project is a two phase, mixed methods approach. In
Phase 1, we will survey approximately 500 engineering technology students across
two and four-year institutions. Responses will address the research questions of
how self-identified first-generation engineering technology students
conceptualize and consolidate the engineer identity as part of their education
across institutions, as well as address how first-generation participants
understand and leverage forms of social capital in pursuit of their engineering
degree as compared to continuing-generation peers. Additionally, performance
metric data will be obtained and de-identified through the Office of
Institutional Effectiveness at UNC Charlotte for local participants who have
consented to participate as a way to investigate whether discrepancies exist
between first-generation engineering technology students and continuing-
generation peers in the same program. In Phase 2, we will employ qualitative
interviews with a diverse group of 35 first generation engineering technology
students to secure a richer understanding of their experiences. This iterative
approach will allow us to identify potential gaps in Phase 1 while the
qualitative work in Phase 2 will then expand our understanding of the engineer
identity acquisition process. The primary goal of this project is to contribute
to the growing body of knowledge provided by engineering education researchers.
At present, there is limited research exploring the consolidation of the
engineer identity among first-generation students. No existing study has
explored this phenomenon with engineering technology students. We hope to
leverage our research to begin to close this knowledge gap and to disseminate
our findings widely to other engineering educators who serve to support first-
generation engineering technology students as they conceptualize their place
within the engineering profession.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.