* 2306141
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing deep learning into the undergraduate computer science and engineering curricula
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kai Koong, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,997.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The goal of this project is to infuse self-contained deep learning
modules into existing undergraduate computer science and engineering classes at
Tuskegee University (TU).

This project aims to prepare undergraduate students for deep learning/AI
workforce and advanced graduate programs by developing deep learning curriculum
modules composed of lecture slides, demos, hands-on labs, homework assignments,
and quizzes. The curriculum modules will be incorporated into a deep
learning/machine learning focused course, and three elective computer science
and engineering courses. In addition, introductory deep learning workshops will
be developed and open to all students at TU. The project will also support
academic year and summer research experiences, and facilitate faculty
professional development through consultation, annual onsite faculty summer
workshops, and webinars. The open-source educational materials and videos will
be made available on GitHub and YouTube for dissemination, and seminars offered
to K-12 students to raise awareness of deep learning and AI. This project will
contribute to the national need for artificial intelligence research and
workforce development to strategically foster an AI-ready workforce in America.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.