* 2306165
* Collaborative Research: Combining Galaxy and Cosmic Microwave Background Surveys for Precise and Robust Constraints on Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Eric Baxter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 345,303.00

The distribution of matter throughout the cosmos carries information about the
origin, future, and composition of the Universe. However, obtaining high-
precision measurements of the matter distribution is challenging: most of the
matter is in the form of invisible dark matter, making it impossible to observe
directly. Instead, techniques such as gravitational lensing – the bending of
light by gravity – must be used to infer where the matter is. With this research
program, scientists at the University of Hawaii and the University of Chicago
will analyze four different and highly complementary probes of the matter
distribution from state-of-the-art astronomical surveys to obtain precise and
unbiased constraints on the properties of the Universe. The team will use
measurements of galaxy positions and gravitational lensing of galaxies from the
Dark Energy Survey (DES), measurements of gravitational lensing of light from
the cosmic microwave background (CMB) by the South Pole Telescope (SPT) and the
Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT), and finally, measurements from SPT and ACT of
the scattering of CMB light with electrons. By analyzing these complementary
probes in concert, the team will reduce uncertainties on the properties of the
Universe, minimize potential biases in their constraints, and obtain a more
complete picture of the matter distribution. This award will additionally
support development of new teaching modules designed to give high school and
undergraduate students the opportunity to learn from real data and gain hands-on
experience in data science.

Statistics of the matter distribution are predicted by the cosmological constant
and cold dark matter (LCDM) model, and comparing these predictions to
observations is a key goal of current and future cosmic surveys. Recently,
measurements of the late-time matter distribution from galaxy surveys have shown
hints of disagreement with extrapolations of early-Universe measurements that
assume LCDM. This disagreement could result from fundamental problems with LCDM,
or from systematic uncertainties impacting the measurements. Using new data from
DES, SPT, and ACT, the team will measure and analyze cross-correlations between
CMB lensing, galaxy positions, galaxy lensing, and the thermal Sunyaev
Zel'dovich effect in order to perform a definitive assessment of tension with
LCDM, test alternative cosmological models, and enable improved constraints with
future surveys. The broader impacts of the proposal will be to provide training
in data science to high school, undergraduate and graduate students, and to
increase public engagement with astronomical surveys. The PIs will develop a set
of new teaching tools based on Python notebooks that give high school and
undergraduate students the opportunity to learn from real data. These teaching
tools will be implemented in classrooms in Honolulu and Chicago.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.