* 2306372
* SCH: Natural Language Processing for Enhanced Behavioral Counseling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Rada Mihalcea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

As more people seek out counseling help, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
technology can provide support for the growing number of counselor professionals
to deliver quality-focused services. The overarching goal of this project is to
make advances toward a new generation of NLP systems. It is expected to have
significant implications in the way counseling is conducted because it will
provide new ways to evaluate counselor effectiveness and assisting them with
ongoing feedback and coaching in the form of automatic coding, as well as turn-
taking and language suggestions. This will allow counselor professionals and
other health care practitioners to improve the quality of their counseling
through timely and cost-effective feedback. The methodology developed in this
project will establish the foundations toward systems that can provide support
for counseling interactions for a wide range of health care providers from
physicians and nurses to disease management coaches and dietitians.

The project will pursue several new and unique research directions in NLP
inspired by the growing area of behavioral counseling. Specifically, the project
targets the following four main objectives. (1) Create a large dataset of
behavior counseling with extensive annotations, addressing several behaviors and
covering several online and offline sources. (2) Develop methods that combine
the recent advances in neural networks with symbolic representations encoding
counseling strategies, and use these methods to classify counselor behaviors and
predict their most likely future behavior based on previous interactions with
the client. (3) Develop natural language generation models that will assist the
counselors in their conversations, specifically focusing on the generation of
questions and reflections. The methods will consist of generative neural models
that learn from a large counseling dataset while explicitly modeling counseling
strategies and integrating expert knowledge bases. (4) Create and evaluate a
framework for the integration of NLP tools to provide feedback and coaching to
counselors in training. Importantly, the project will incorporate feedback from
domain experts and end users across the entire research pipeline, using focus
groups to identify needs, preferences, and features to include in each design
and implementation stage of the proposed research objectives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.