* 2306221
* Inverse Problems Arising from Kinetic Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ru-yu Lai, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2026
* USD 56,195.00

Recovering a hidden cause, which cannot be directly observed or measured, solely
from its effected measurements is an important scientific problem. This
challenge arises in a wide range of applications, and rich methodologies for
reconstructing this unseen information are employed in various fields, including
geophysics, medical imaging, biology, solar physics, remote sensing and machine
learning. The main goal of this project is to advance the understanding of
reconstructing hidden properties from measurable data. This project specifically
aims to investigate fundamental questions and devise reconstruction methods to
uncover unknown coefficients in kinetic equations, including the Boltzmann
equation, which describes the dynamics of dilute gases with binary collisions,
and the Fokker-Planck equation, used to describe the dynamics in a plasma.
Mathematical tools will be developed to provide a theoretical understanding of
emerging topics on these inverse problems. Moreover, the project integrates
research and education, providing training and research opportunities for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.

The main objective of this project is to conduct fundamental research on
nonlinear kinetic equations and associated partial differential equation models
in both the forward and inverse frameworks. The work consists of three primary
goals. The first goal centers on analyzing three nonlinear time dependent
equations, the Boltzmann equation, the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook equation, and a
transport equation, with the goal of retrieving the unknown collision kernel and
coefficients based on measurements taken on the boundaries. The second goal aims
to uniquely and stably recover diffusion, absorption, and source coefficients
from boundary measurements using the Fokker-Planck equation. The third goal
involves an analysis of the Wigner equation and Schr√∂dinger equations, with the
purpose of understanding the relationship between quantum and classical
mechanics. Due to the wide variety of kinetic equations across applications,
novel ideas and analytical techniques will be designed to suit their distinct
features, such as transport and interaction. This research will improve the
mathematical understanding of inverse kinetic theory and related topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.