* 2306276
* Phenotypic plasticity, genetic variation, and the origins of novel, complex traits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,419,596.00

Biologists have long recognized that an organism’s features (its ‘phenotype’)
can change depending on its environment, but such ‘phenotypic plasticity’ has
traditionally been overlooked in the rush to identify the genes that influence
traits. In recent years, many scientists have begun asking if phenotypic
plasticity might play an important role in fostering the origins of novel,
complex traits. However, this idea assumes that phenotypic plasticity is itself
underlain by genetic variation, but few studies have identified the genetic
bases of phenotypic plasticity in natural populations, especially in
vertebrates. Such data are crucial for clarifying the causes and consequences of
plasticity, including its possible role in the origins––and subsequent
elaboration––of novel, complex traits. The goals of this research are to
identify genetic variation underlying a spectacular form of plasticity among the
tadpoles of desert frogs. The PIs will also determine where this genetic
variation comes from and what component traits it influences. Overall, this
research promises to shed new light on the causes and consequences of phenotypic
plasticity, an emerging frontier that unites diverse areas of biology. In doing
so, this research will help explain how an organism’s genome interacts with its
environment to shape the expression and evolution of complex features.

A longstanding problem is understanding how novelty arises. According to the
plasticity-led evolution (PLE) hypothesis, novel traits arise when a change in
the environment triggers a shift in phenotype via phenotypic plasticity. Yet,
little is known about the genes underlying this process. This research will
identify loci and genetic variation associated with a novel, complex phenotype
that appears to have arisen via PLE. In response to eating meat, Mexican
spadefoot toad tadpoles develop into a novel carnivore morph, which previous
work suggests has evolved via PLE. For this research, the PIs will rear tadpoles
from controlled crosses to identify loci underlying this novel phenotype. With
these data, the PIs will determine if––as predicted by their preliminary
data––many such loci are involved in metabolism and environmental assessment.
The PIs will then rear tadpoles in semi-natural environments that they will
alter ecologically to differentiate loci associated with the carnivore phenotype
per se from loci associated with adaptive environmental assessment and
plasticity. With these data, the PIs will determine if adaptive plasticity and
phenotypes resulting from that plasticity are regulated by the same or––as
predicted by theory––different loci. Finally, the PIs will sequence individuals
from numerous natural populations to clarify the roles of standing genetic
variation versus introgressed variation in the evolution of the novel carnivore
phenotype. Together, these aims will shed new light onto the genetic
architecture of plasticity and thereby help illuminate the genetic mechanisms
that propel PLE.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.