* 2306053
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Contextualizing Engineering Science Courses by Teaching History and Judgement
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Aaron Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 07/31/2025
* USD 47,799.00

Engineering programs have long struggled with balancing curricula that are
rigorous enough to prepare graduates to be capable practitioners and educational
experiences that are engaging enough to retain undergraduate students. Data
suggests that a little more than half of students leave a program after their
first or second year and that many of those students came to dislike engineering
or lost interest in the profession. These findings suggest a mismatch between
what incoming students think engineering practice is and what message they
receive during their first two years of a program. Unlike the other major
professions with which engineering shares a common set of principles (e.g.,
medicine and law), there are very few examples of engineering in popular
American culture, and fewer still that are realistic. Limited studies consider
the impacts of enculturating students via the history of the profession or the
impacts of explicitly connecting engineering science with design, especially
with respect to students’ perceptions of engineering practice. This work will
aim to understand how contextualizing engineering practice can improve students’
intentions to persist in a discipline that historically struggles to retain
them, particularly those identifying as underrepresented minorities and women.
This work will contribute new knowledge about students’ understanding of what it
means to practice engineering and how that understanding changes with exposure
to different types of contextualization (e.g., historical or technical). It will
also contribute new knowledge about how undergraduate students relate
engineering science and engineering judgement with practice as professionals.
With this understanding, changes can be made to undergraduate engineering
education to better retain these underrepresented students and broaden the
diversity of the engineering workforce.

Engineering science courses that occupy the middle two years of a program most
often utilize traditional lecture-based pedagogy and simplified close-ended
textbook problems, which do not typically allow students to engage in the kind
of decision-making that is essential to developing engineering judgement.
Students recognize these problems are not authentic representations of
engineering practice, and even new graduates leaving a program have a tenuous
grasp on the nature of engineering practice. This work proposes a new pedagogy
intended to provide students with context for how engineering science concepts
are implemented in authentic engineering practice and how engineering judgement
is essential in that implementation. Moreover, this work will aim to employ
another pedagogy to provide a more holistic contextualization of engineering
practice by introducing students to the history of the profession. This work
will advance the field of engineering education research by answering the
research question of how students’ perceptions of engineering practice develop
as they progress through a program, and how these pedagogies shape that progress
and/or reframe students’ beliefs about engineering. The proposed research will
employ a mixed-methods approach, specifically a triangulation methodology that
prioritizes qualitative data collections. Primary findings will come from
interviews with students as they progress through their middle two years in an
engineering program at a large research-intensive public university. Based on
students’ accounts, a set of case studies will be developed from the interviews
about how students’ perceptions of engineering practice change longitudinally
and whether the aforementioned educational activities influence that trajectory.
In addition, a larger group of students will be invited to participate in
surveys, which will enable drawing inferences from a broader sample about
intention to persist as well as baseline levels of familiarity with engineering
in general. Outcomes expected to inspire changes in undergraduate engineering
curricula include descriptions of how students’ perceptions of engineering
practice develop, how the proposed pedagogies influence those perceptions, and
how contextualization can contribute to students’ intentions to persist in the
major into the workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.