* 2306042
* CAS: Green Graphitic Carbon from Natural Precursors Using Graphene Oxide Additives: A Combined Experimental and Atomistic Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Randy Vander Wal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2026
* USD 394,939.00

Non-technical summary

Graphite is a critical raw material for the green transition and demand is
increasing in markets including electric vehicles and green energy storage.
Based on current production, demand from these markets will result in a
significant supply shortfall unless new sources are identified. Unfortunately,
petroleum-derived graphite is a nonrenewable resource and requires intensive
energy for conversion to graphite while the supply of mined graphite is limited
and insufficient to meet the growing demand. In contrast, bio-based resources
(e.g., the lignin byproduct from papermaking, cellulosic materials) are
renewable and sustainable precursors for conversion into graphite but these bio-
based precursors contain oxygen which fosters non-graphitizing structure. With
this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, Professors Randy Vander Wal and Adri van
Duin and their research groups at Penn State University will explore an
innovative process towards the graphitization of bio-based precursors called
reactive templating in which graphene oxide additives and controlled heating
will enable the formation of desired graphitic crystalline structure. Atomistic-
scale simulations will be used to identify time and temperature constraints for
this template-assisted conversion into graphite. The templated conversion may
also lower the temperatures required for conversion of bio-based materials into
graphite, saving energy while reducing CO2 emissions associated with the
manufacturing. This project promotes K-12 STEM by contributing demonstrations to
science camps held during summers at Penn State and developing science
engagement activities for after-school events. By hosting first year women
undergraduates during the academic year this project contributes to diversity in
the STEM pipeline. Instructional materials for secondary and post-secondary
educators contribute to workforce development. You tube videos highlighting the
high temperature material conversion into graphite facilitates public
connections with the research. Engagement of an industrial advisor on the
project provides market-based feedback to the project.

Technical summary

Graphitic carbons are ideally suited as electrode materials for battery-based
energy storage systems given their low cost, high electrical conductivity,
stable physicochemical properties, and long cycle life. A bio-based, renewable
and sustainable precursor would displace the oil or coal derived compounds
presently used in the manufacture of carbons for energy storage while reducing
CO2 emissions associated with their production. This project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, investigates the hypothesis that the addition of graphene oxide to
biopolymers redirects the carbon structure from non-graphitizing to graphitizing
during high temperature treatment stages. The postulate is that the biopolymer
matrix radicals cross-link with those on the graphene oxide, rather than with
other biopolymer sited radicals, thereby templating to the graphene oxide and
forming graphitic structure upon higher heat treatment. The targeted biopolymers
include cellulose and extracted lignin, which are both commercially available.
The timescales and temperatures over which structure emerges are delineated by a
combined experimental and atomistic-scale simulation approach. Reactive
molecular dynamics simulations reveal the underlying mechanistic steps and
relative contributions of biopolymer type, O-atom content on GO, and explore
reaction parameters such as temperature over a far broader space than
experimentally feasible, therein providing further experimental guidance for
component fractions and elemental contents. This study also contributes the
first direct comparison between carbon graphitization kinetics via high
resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and atomistic model
simulationsâ€”with connection to electrical conductivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.