* 2306286
* Collaborative Research: Internal and external drivers of orogenic episodicity in the Ecuadorian Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2024
* James Chapman, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 109,466.00

Ecuador contains an important record of subduction-related magmatism and
tectonic environments during the building of the Andes Mountains. This research
will address the roles of tectonic cycles and the accretion of oceanic crust in
regulating episodes of magmatism, crustal thickening, and basin subsidence along
ocean-continent subduction margins. The project will integrate results from a
regional traverse across several sedimentary basins with the record of magmatism
across Ecuador, the narrowest segment of the Andes. A range of analytical
techniques will be employed to determine the timing of major shifts in basin
development, sediment sources, and past drainages, and to recognize periods of
crustal thickening, changes in sources of magmatism, and the influence of
accreted oceanic crust. The study will provide insights into the geologic
processes and geohazards along ocean-continent subduction plate boundaries,
offering information that will benefit society by improving risk assessment and
infrastructure planning. The project will also catalyze new academic
collaborations within the framework of international learning experiences that
will facilitate longer term collaborations between US and Ecuadorian
researchers, including development of shared undergraduate and graduate
geoscience field-course and field-trip opportunities.

Over the past decade, competing perspectives have emerged on the tectonic
evolution of Cordilleran ocean-continent plate boundaries, including the
geologic history of the Andes, the global archetype for Cordilleran convergent
systems. Debate largely originates from contrasting emphases on different
regions (forearc vs. retroarc) and different components (basins vs. magmatic arc
vs. fold-thrust belt) of Cordilleran systems. This project will incorporate
analytical techniques, such as sedimentary basin analysis, isotope geochemistry,
petrology, and U-Pb geochronology, to identify potentially coupled episodic
phases of basin evolution and arc magmatism that may be linked to internally
driven orogenic processes (including underthrusting, high-flux magmatism, and
buildup then foundering of crustal/lithospheric roots), or externally driven
tectonic processes including fluctuating slab dynamics (cycles of subduction
shallowing vs. steepening and associated rapid vs. diminished shortening and
subsidence) and oceanic terrane accretion. Ecuador contains an important yet
underappreciated record of tectonic quiescence or possible extension during what
has been long regarded as uninterrupted Cenozoic shortening, thickening, and
uplift along the entire Andean margin. Such a fluctuating pattern of mountain
building may govern the structural and stratigraphic evolution of many ocean-
continent convergent margins, with implications for the tectonic regimes of
subduction and collisional systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.