* 2306957
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Uncovering eusocial pathways and consequences: Phylogenomics, morphological, and molecular evolution in Synalpheus snapping shrimps.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Tin Chi Solomon Chak, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 10/31/2023
* USD 506,686.00

Typified by obligate group living and reproductive division of labor, eusocial
behavior is considered the apex of animal social organization. Within a eusocial
colony, a single or subset of individuals (queens) perform all reproductive
duties while others (workers) forgo their own reproduction and undertake tasks
related to brood care, nest maintenance, or resource acquisition. This profound
and ecologically impactful behavioral transition has arisen at least 19 times in
animals. Remarkably, nearly one fourth of known evolutionary origins of
eusociality have occurred within a genus of sponge-dwelling snapping shrimps
called Synalpheus. However, why and how eusociality evolved in these aquatic
animals remains unclear and the answers to these questions may reveal potential
universal requirements or consequences relating to advanced social complexity.
This project seeks to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships between species
in this genus to identify morphological and genomic changes that are associated
with the transitions to advanced sociality. The project will generate open
access resources that will be used to test potentially universal “laws” related
to social evolution across animal lineages. The project will also support
numerous research opportunities for undergraduate students as well as
educational content for K-12 schools and web-based channels.

The project will generate genomic and phenotypic data spanning about 130 species
of Synalpheus snapping shrimps worldwide. These data will be used to 1)
reconstruct a dated phylogeny of Synalpheus taxa using phylogenomic methods; 2)
evaluate the relationship between eusociality and molecular evolution; and 3)
recover morphological preadaptations and consequences of eusociality. Genomic
data will be sequenced through targeted enrichment of previously published and
newly developed probe sets. Morphological data will be generated through
traditional microscopy and X-ray based micro-CT-scanning of closely related
species spanning different social organizations. Both genomic and phenotypic
data will be analyzed using phylogenetic comparative methods enabled with
initial phylogenetic products. Project activities will identify patterns of
molecular evolution between eusocial and non-eusocial species to test hypotheses
suggesting that social organization affects rates of molecular evolution via
demographic effects such as reduced effective population sizes and increased
generation time. Through 3D morphometric analyses, the project will work to
uncover morphological preadaptations to eusocial origins, impacts of social
behavior on morphological evolution, and putatively contingent or deterministic
pathways toward convergent phenotypic syndromes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.