* 2306341
* Implementation Project: Enhancement of CUREs-based Curriculum and Immersive Engineering Studio to Enhance Engineering Education and Retention of Underrepresented Engineers at TSU
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Lin Li, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 985,294.00

Implementation Projects in the HBCU-UP program provide support to design,
implement, study and assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the
numbers of students and the quality of their preparation by strengthening
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research.
This implementation project at Tennessee State University seeks to address
issues related to the declining enrollment and graduation of underrepresented
engineers. The goal of this project is to create a five-year pilot engineering
curriculum that includes a pre-engineering program and CUREs-based immersive
engineering studio to enhance underrepresented student retention and graduation
at Tennessee State University. A sociocultural educational research project will
investigate the factors that contribute to the success of HBCU engineering
students. Formative and summative evaluation will be used to evaluate the
project.

The project aims to develop a five-year pilot engineering program at TSU to
improve student completion rates, focused on implementing a innovative pre-
engineering curriculum for incoming freshmen. A STEM Enhancement Institute will
be formed to provide support to students who struggle with their STEM courses in
their pre-engineering program. Students will participate in CUREs and an
immersive engineering studio project every year to enhance their engagement and
empowerment in STEM learning. The immersive engineering studio will use
virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR) facilitated instructional models to enhance
students' visual-spatial ability, create a situated learning environment,
encourage student engagement, and enable data-driven teaching decisions in STEM
classrooms. The faculty team aims to structure an intervention around
engineering curriculum to enhance students' learning commitment, motivation, and
academic performance. The project aims to create a pipeline of trained
undergraduate students with various engineering analysis and design skills,
while also systematically studying the sociocultural factors affecting retention
of underrepresented students in undergraduate engineering programs. Overall, the
project aims to enhance the retention and success of underrepresented students
in engineering programs at TSU through innovative pedagogical practices and
interdisciplinary research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.