* 2306741
* RAPID: Evolution of critical shear stress in the seabed of an urbanized estuary and natural estuary after the passage of Hurricane Ian
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* David Fugate, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 47,637.00

Many contaminants in coastal waters adhere to fine sediments. To predict how
sediment-associated contaminants are transported it is necessary to know how the
sediment moves. The amount of friction by waves and currents that is necessary
to resuspend surface sediments is a key factor for sediment transport. The
amount of friction needed depends on the size of the sediment grains and on
biological processes at the surface of the bed. Algal mats and bacterial films
can make it harder to resuspend sediment. However, a strong physical disturbance
such as a hurricane can break down the mats and make resuspension easier. This
project will study Florida coastal sediments impacted by Hurricane Ian. Time
series samples will show how the sediment bed susceptibility to resuspension
evolves over the course of a year. This will enable improved predictions about
where sediment and sediment-associated contaminants are transported after strong
storms. The study also will examine the difference in the evolution of the bed
between an undeveloped area surrounded by a mangrove fringe and a developed area
that is bordered by seawalls. Prior studies suggest that mangroves trap fine
sediments. Bays surrounded by mangroves have larger sediment grains than bays in
developed areas without mangroves. The fine sediments in developed bays are more
easily available for resuspension. This can enhance the movement of sediment-
associated contaminants, and hurricanes have been shown to mobilize sediment-
associated heavy metals. This study will have broader impacts by helping predict
whether contaminants are likely to be trapped or transported away from regions
that are struck by large storms. The study also will inform coastal development
choices regarding implementation of mangrove fringes at the waterâ€™s edge. This
is timely since many homes were destroyed near the southwest Florida coast and
will soon be restored.

Understanding the critical shear stress of the seabed is necessary to predict
the transport of sediment and sediment-associated contaminants. This is
especially important, but not well studied, after intense disturbance to the bed
caused by storms. The proposed research assesses the evolution of the critical
shear stress of the seabed in two coastal bays in southwest Florida after the
passage of Hurricane Ian. The critical shear stress depends not only upon the
size of the sediment, but the opposing effects of algal mat and bacterial
biofilm production versus bioturbation. A rapid response is essential because
the biological development may also be rapid, and the effect of the hurricane
will be lost if not measured soon. The study will compare how the evolution of
the bed differs in a coastal bay that has had extensive development, including
the replacement of fringe mangroves with hard stabilization structures, with a
nearby but undeveloped bay with no anthropogenic development. The study will
measure the critical stress using a Gust erosion chamber on three replicate
cores from each of the two sites on a quarterly basis. The amount of
bioturbation will be assessed quarterly as well, using X-radiographs of
triplicate cores at each site and beryllium-7 profiles. It is hypothesized that
the critical shear stress will initially increase as bacterial and algal films
develop, then decrease as macrofauna reestablish within the benthos.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.