* 2306577
* Targeted Infusion Project: Implementation of an HBCU Undergraduate Center for Forensic Sciences at Lincoln University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Gallagher, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Lincoln University (PA) seeks to create an
interdisciplinary Center for Forensic Sciences (LU-CFS), enhancing the
institution’s curricular offerings, modernizing laboratory capabilities, and
improving library resources. The project aims to increase the number of well-
qualified, minority student graduates having the foundational skills necessary
to excel in graduate programs and/or forensics laboratories by providing
opportunities for high impact practices such as internships, professional
networking, and interdisciplinary research.

The primary objective of this project is to establish an interdisciplinary
Forensic Science Certificate Program encompassing chemistry, biology,
biochemistry and criminal justice. The course curriculum for the Certificate
Program will be designed in accordance with the Forensic Education Program
Accreditation Commission (FEPAC) academic standards through enhancements of
existing courses, and the development of new courses. Research and internship
opportunities working alongside faculty, practitioners and other forensic
professionals will be developed while creating professional networking
opportunities for students. Laboratory space will be modernized with
instrumentation such as gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS) comparable
to what is used in forensic science laboratories, while existing library
resources will be expanded through addition of key forensic science journals. It
is anticipated that this project may address the disproportionate participation
of African Americans and other minority groups in STEM fields, specifically in
the forensic sciences where underrepresentation restricts full participation in
the criminal justice system and the due process of law.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.