* 2306671
* Broadening Participation Research:  Understanding faculty attitudes, competency, and perceptions of providing career advising to African American STEM students at HBCUs
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Marie Hammond, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 229,837.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
provides awards to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. HBCU-UP broadening participation research projects create and study new
theory-driven models and innovations related to the participation and success of
underrepresented groups in STEM undergraduate education. This award studies STEM
faculty career management skills, knowledge, abilities, and attitudes and their
ability to support underrepresented students’ persistence in STEM. Faculty
members provide advising, guidance, and mentoring for students and are an
essential component in students’ progress toward STEM careers. If faculty
members do not possess strong career development skills and recognize the value
of career advising to their success in working with students, then their ability
to help students is hindered. This study is contributing to knowledge on how and
to what degree STEM faculty members are prepared to manage their own career and
contribute to students’ career development. Study findings are expected to be
foundational to preparing professional development experiences that improve
career advising in STEM faculty and informing policy and practice to enhance
African American STEM student’s persistence, retention, and career readiness.

This foundational education research project uses a psychometric validation and
quantitative, descriptive design to study HBCU STEM faculty and develop a
validated measure of faculty attitudes toward career advising. The study uses
structural equation modeling and general linear modeling to validate the Faculty
Career Advising Attitudes Scale and clarify the construct of STEM faculty
members’ ability to manage their own career and provide basic career mentoring
and advising to their students. Findings will enhance understanding of the
relationship between faculty members’ own career development attitudes,
abilities, and skills and their attitudes toward guiding African American STEM
students’ career development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.