* 2306168
* NSF-GACR: Reactive Interfaces for Degrading Contaminants of Emerging Concern and Pathogenic Viruses in Constructed Wetlands
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Mark Radosevich, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 10/31/2026
* USD 399,657.00

Constructed wetlands (CWs) have emerged as promising and cost-effective nature-
based systems for the treatment of wastewater due to their low-cost, efficiency,
and benefits to the environment. Current CWs have been primarily designed to
remove suspended solids, bulk organics, and nutrients including nitrogen and
phosphorus. However, they are not effective at removing and degrading
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) or potentially harmful viral pathogens
(VPs). As CECs and VPs have become global threats to human and ecosystem health,
their efficient and rapid removal would be critical if a CW system is to be
installed in an urban, suburban, or a rural area to treat contaminated
wastewater. The overarching goal of this NSF-Czech Science Foundation (GAC)
project is to investigate the design, development, and evaluation of a new CW
treatment system designed to remove CECs and VPs. To advance this goal, the
Principal Investigator (PIs) propose to explore the design and integration of
reactive interfaces into CWs, including solid-water interfaces generated by iron
and manganese oxides and air-water interfaces generated by air bubbles, to
promote the simultaneous removal and destruction of CECs and VPs. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of
fundamental knowledge to advance the design and implementation of more efficient
and cost-effective constructed wetland systems for wastewater treatment. The
joint implementation of this project in the United States (US) and the Czech
Republic will broaden the impact of the research with the potential to improve
global water management. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student
and one undergraduate student at the University of Tennessee Knoxville.

Constructed wetlands (CWs) are promising pollution control and environmental
remediation systems as they offer cost-effective, nature-based systems for
wastewater treatment. However, existing CWs are primarily designed for the
removal of nutrients but not for retention and degradation of compounds of
emerging concern (CECs) or viral pathogens (VPs). The goals of this NSF-GAC
collaborative project are to investigate, understand, and quantify how solid-
water interfaces generated by functionalized metal oxides (e.g., iron and
manganese oxides) and air-water interfaces created by air bubbles increase the
microbial/chemical degradation of CECs and removal of VPs under aerobic-
anaerobic conditions in constructed wetlands (CWs). The specific objectives of
the research are to (1) synthesize and/or functionalize iron and manganese oxide
particles to promote binding and degradation of CECs; (2) optimize reaction
conditions for virus binding and removal at solid-water interfaces; (3) optimize
environmental conditions to maximize the removal of CECs and viruses under
varying flow conditions; and (4) validate the CEC degradation and virus
inactivation mechanisms under pilot scale CW conditions. The US team will
systematically assess the capacity of solid, water, and air interfaces to remove
viruses from wastewater in model CW columns. The Czech team will focus on the
chemical and biological reactions and mechanisms controlling the persistence of
CECs in model soil columns, microcosms, and pilot-scale mesocosms designed to
simulate CWs. The successful completion of this research will advance the
fundamental understanding of the synergistic roles of air bubbles and metal
oxides in removing CECs and VPs under varying environmental conditions in model
laboratory and pilot CWs. To implement the education and training goals of the
project, the Principal Investigators propose to leverage an existing NSF REU
site award at the University of Tennessee Knoxville to recruit and engage
undergraduate students from underrepresented and underserved groups in
Appalachia to work on the project. In addition, the PIs plan to develop
activities for local K-12 science teachers as well as training of undergraduate
and graduate students in the US and the Czech Republic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.