* 2306658
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Investigating the Efficacy of Data Science for Environmental Justice based PBL Modules for Improving Diversity in Environmental Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Adrienne Smith, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,112.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. This project at North Carolina Central University (NC Central) is a
collaborative project between computer science and environmental science faculty
at NC Central, social science researchers at Cynosure Consulting, and geography
and biology faculty at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. This project aligns with
the goals of HBCU-UP in its effort to provide support for research that seeks to
create and study new theory-driven models and innovations related to the
participation and success of underrepresented groups in STEM undergraduate
education. The project at NC Central will conduct research on the impact of
introducing social justice-based environmental science project-based learning
(PBL) modules on student interest in environmental science and the declaration
of majors.

The goal of this project is to increase the participation in environmental
science, one of the least diverse STEM fields, among students from historically
marginalized communities. The project innovation will be incorporated within an
existing gateway course at NC Central University (ENSC 1000: Introduction to
Sustainable Planet) by introducing data science for environmental justice
project-based learning (DSEJ-PBL) modules. This project will study whether and
how the innovation increases interest in environmental science using a mixed-
methods approach to measure the efficacy of the innovation and its impacts on
participants, and to provide insight into how the innovation produces changes in
student beliefs, choices, and actions. The website that will be created through
this project will host a repository of detailed DSEJ-PBL modules and associated
tutorials and instructor materials. The research results from this project will
be disseminated to the STEM and Education academic communities through
presentations at seminars and conferences and publications in journals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.