* 2306194
* The Impact of Super-gentrification on Neighborhood Composition
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* John Lauermann, Pratt Institute
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 125,773.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

This project analyzes the impact of ‘super-gentrification’, an intensification
of gentrification processes in already gentrified neighborhoods. The research
asks where and how this process has impacted the racial and class composition of
cities. Traditional gentrification involves middle class migration into working
class neighborhoods. It is based on renovation of pre-existing housing stock and
primarily displaces low income communities. In contrast, super-gentrification
involves further upgrading of already gentrified or predominantly middle class
neighborhoods. It often includes demolition and new construction (e.g. high-rise
luxury housing development) and can produce new kinds of residential
displacements (e.g. displacement of the middle class). Previous research has
shown disparities in these kinds of displacements, so the study pays close
attention to impacts on neighborhood demographic change. Research on super-
gentrification is important because it helps us understand what happens after a
neighborhood has been gentrified; how gentrification can continue and intensify
over time. The study advances social science with a national analysis of super-
gentrification: the researchers will analyze its impact not only in large
coastal cities, but also in smaller cities and suburbs. The project will
generate broader impacts by enhancing research capacity at a Minority Serving
Institution. It will create opportunities to train students from groups that are
under-represented in social science and STEM industries. The researchers will
collaborate with a community advisory board, and will link the research to
community education partnerships with local public schools and libraries.

The research will combine geographic information science (GIS) and qualitative
social science methods (oral histories from residents of super-gentrified
neighborhoods). The research questions are: Where have super-gentrification
processes occurred in cities between 1990 and 2020? How does super-
gentrification interact with spatial patterns of residential displacement? And
how is super-gentrification perceived and experienced in majority-minority
neighborhoods? The hypotheses are, respectively, that super-gentrification has
occurred in a wider geography of cities than those covered in existing
scholarship; that it reduces neighborhood diversity; and that displacement
effects vary based on intersections of various demographic factors in a
neighborhood. The research will contribute to social science research on the
spatial effects of economic inequality, evaluating its implications for
geographies of cities. It builds on existing scholarship with a nationally
comparative spatial analysis of super-gentrification trends, offering a first of
its kind empirical study by mapping degrees of gentrification across a wide
geography of metropolitan areas. It advances research on the racialized
dimensions of gentrification, by analyzing impacts in majority-minority
neighborhoods, processes of integration and diversification in gentrifying
neighborhoods, and emerging themes like middle class displacement and effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.