* 2306886
* Collaborative Research: Advancing a comprehensive model of year-round ecosystem function in seasonally frozen lakes through networked science
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Stephanie Hampton, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2027
* USD 425,311.00

Winter is the fastest warming season in the northern hemisphere. For millions of
the world’s seasonally-frozen lakes, this warming means shorter and thinner ice
cover and changing patterns of snow accumulation on the ice. Because ice and
snow affect many fundamental physical, chemical, and biological properties of
lakes, changes in winter conditions can disrupt lake ecosystems and the services
they provide to humanity. Until recently, lake scientists paid relatively little
attention to winter, meaning we know very little about how lakes work when
covered by ice and snow and how winter conditions affect the rest of the year.
This leaves scientists ill-prepared to predict how changing winters will impact
lakes or to mitigate negative impacts. This study addresses this “winter
knowledge gap” and develops a predictive understanding of how winter conditions
affect the ecological populations, communities, and food webs of diverse types
of lakes. Along with intensive studies of lakes by the core project team, the
investigators are also recruiting researchers from dozens of institutions to
expand sampling to many additional lakes. This ‘Team Science’ approach will
train many aquatic scientists in specialized winter sampling methods, empowering
other scientists to include studies of winter conditions in their research
programs. It will develop a network of winter-hardy aquatic researchers with the
goal of advancing understanding of year-round ecosystem function in the face of
climate change. The project provides education and training opportunities for
multiple graduate and undergraduate students and a postbaccalaureate researcher.

This study combines two approaches: 1) detailed seasonal studies of ecological
processes in 12 lakes by the project’s investigators; and 2) research across at
least 60 other lakes by a network of collaborators. In the first part of the
effort, the investigators are focusing on 12 lakes with contrasting water
quality characteristics and winter severity. The lakes are being instrumented
with continuously-recording temperature, light, and oxygen sensors. The
investigators are also studying water, bacteria, phytoplankton, and zooplankton
throughout the year to determine how plankton populations and communities evolve
through seasons in different lake types. Using stable isotopes and fatty acid
analysis, the investigators are assessing the way food web structure changes
across seasons and the production and cycling of organic matter. For the second
part of the study, the investigators are recruiting a network of researchers to
collect samples from at least another 60 lakes. These collaborators are being
trained in winter research methods and are provided with sampling kits and
instructions for sample collection. Their samples are being analyzed with
samples from the core set of 12 lakes, ensuring compatibility of results.
Collaboration between the co-PIs and their network is allowing for broad
participation in interpretation of data and testing of hypotheses about the way
winter severity interacts with water quality to affect lake ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.