* 2306098
* Unconventional High Surge Impedance Loading Transmission Line
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Mona Ghassemi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 10/31/2024
* USD 285,368.00

To achieve net-zero emission in America by 2050, high voltage transmission
capacity must expand ~60% by 2030 and triple by 2050 to connect further wind and
solar facilities to demand. This expansion requires a capital investment in
transmission capacity of $360 billion by 2030 and $2.4 trillion by 2050. We will
fail to achieve a net-zero America by 2050 unless high-capacity overhead lines
are developed. To tackle this problem, we will (i) develop a revolutionary and
flexible design for transmission lines by shifting phase configurations and sub-
conductors into unconventional arrangements that are geometrically optimized
within the space, enabling a given high surge impedance loading (HSIL) design,
and (ii) create and introduce a novel transmission expansion planning (TEP)
framework, where, given the possibility provided in (i), line parameters that do
not play a role in traditional TEP will now play key roles as variables in this
new framework. This will lead to cost-effective planning scenarios and huge
savings that cannot be achieved through conventional transmission lines. By
combining (i) and (ii), this research plan introduces a new concept that we call
Smart TEP-based Unconventional HSIL Line Designs that will revolutionize power
delivery. The integrated education plan train the next generation of power
engineers needed to maintain the competitive vitality of the U.S. workforce. We
also collaborate with the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity at
Virginia Tech on K-12 outreach activities designed to attract women and ethnic
minorities to the field of electrical engineering.

The proposed research pioneers power transmission loadability enhancement at the
nexus of TEP and unconventional HSIL line design. The original and potentially
transformative idea of engaging unconventional HSIL line designs that address
TEP requirements is the cornerstone of this project. Where conventional
transmission lines fail due to insufficiencies in their self-reactive power
compensation, unconventional HSIL designs can (1) significantly increase power
transmission loadability, (2) be creatively used for extra-high voltage, high
voltage, and medium voltage levels for both transmission and distribution
networks, and (3) decrease the need for lumped reactive power compensators. On
the line design side, a very complex optimization problem will be solved to
determine the optimal size, number, and location of sub-conductors in the space.
Another aspect is that TEP itself has always been a complex optimization
problem. In this research plan, we will complicate it further by making the line
parameters that were fixed and predetermined in traditional TEP now be
variables.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.