* 2306176
* Research Initiation: Understanding Team Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in Undergraduate Engineering Design Projects
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Jinjuan She, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 07/31/2025
* USD 198,651.00

The overwhelming majority of engineering activities in research, design, and
manufacturing are accomplished by teams, and this approach is prevalent across
sectors as varied as biomedical, aerospace, and consumer goods. High task
complexity means that the teams are often multi-disciplinary and quite possibly
global in composition and reach. Managing this inherent diversity is critical to
team effectiveness. This project seeks to advance the research on diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) specific to teamwork dynamics in engineering design
teams by exploring the influence of diversity and equity practices on inclusion
within the undergraduate engineering design process. Additionally, it also aims
to support a community of emerging researchers dedicated to conducting
engineering education research. Students’ ability to engage effectively in
diverse teams is a key competency to advance holistic engineering formation.
Understanding the connection between team-based engineering design and DEI will
be instrumental in shaping current and future engineering professionals, by
helping prepare engineers who are responsive to the evolving needs of the
workforce with a mindset of being equally open and accessible to all. The
findings of this project are expected to help uncover valuable insights into how
engineering teams work and learn together. Ultimately, by strategically
incorporating DEI practices, we can create more functional and effective groups
that positively impact student success, particularly by enhancing the ability of
marginalized students to participate and thrive.

Grounded in the Framework for Participation, this project will develop an
understanding of the differences between high-inclusion and low-inclusion teams
in undergraduate engineering design collaborations, in terms of team diversity
and equity practices, among other factors that influence team dynamics. Further,
critical factors that are associated with the positive and negative outcomes of
inclusion will be identified to build the theoretical framework for the PI’s
long-term research goal to study collaborative design behavior modeling with DEI
considerations. The following exploratory research questions will be studied:
What are the differences between the high-inclusion and low-inclusion teams with
respect to their diversity? What are the differences between the high-inclusion
and low-inclusion teams with respect to their equity practices? What are the
differences in class-related variables between the high-inclusion and low-
inclusion teams (such as student academic levels, collaboration modality, and
project types? This project will utilize a mixed-methods approach to closely
study team members’ behaviors in project collaboration through classroom data
organically collected (i.e., without intentional interventions or influence on
team formation from researchers) over the course of three semesters from more
than 300 students. Together, the quantitative and qualitative analyses will
provide a more comprehensive understanding of what aspects of diversity and
equity have been effective, or ineffective, in promoting collaboration
inclusion. Furthermore, this project seeks to uncover the mechanisms and reasons
behind these findings, providing insights that can inform potential intervention
strategies for promoting DEI in engineering design team collaboration. This
project will be led by a principal investigator who is an engineering faculty
member with mentorship from a team of experienced STEM education researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.