* 2306278
* CIF:Small:Toward a Modern Theory of Compression: Manifold Sources and Learned Compressors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Aaron Wagner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,999.00

Past improvements in our communications infrastructure have been fueled
primarily by increasing our ability to move bits around the world. In contrast,
there has been less attention paid to how data compression can be used to reduce
the number of bits that must be communicated to begin with. Recent advances in
machine learning suggest that the number of bits that we must send to sustain a
teleconference or stream a video is significantly lower than previously thought.
Reducing the number of bits that must be transmitted would enable more realistic
and immersive telepresence. This, in turn, may lead to a reduced need for
travel, including reduced commuting. The resulting benefits would be manifold,
including reduced carbon emissions, reduced spread of infectious disease, and
more flexible arrangements for those balancing work with child- or elder-care.
This project will contribute to the grand challenge of achieving transparent,
secure, inexpensive communications with a full range of telepresence
capabilities.

The impetus for this project is the exemplary performance obtained by Artificial
Neural Network-based compressors on multimedia sources. Although these
compressors have attractive empirical performance, there is little theory to
explain their performance or point the way toward future improvements. The
project will develop a modern theory of data compression that will help explain
why these compressors perform as well as they do, estimate their degree of
suboptimality, and point the way toward how they can be improved. New theory
will be developed focusing on the two most salient aspects of these compressors,
namely their ability to apply nonlinear transforms to the data and the fact that
they are learned from source samples. The project will also increase the
external visibility of researchers and results in information theory and lead to
more diverse workforce through the support of female and veteran Ph.D. students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.