* 2306556
* SCH: Interpretable survival analysis of complex longitudinal data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Yifan Peng, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,168,412.00

Survival analysis is a statistical technique used to predict the time until
specific events occur, such as hospitalization, mechanical part failure, or
customer churn. Its applications in healthcare span across public health,
clinical practice, and medical research. Clinicians face the challenge of
integrating complex longitudinal data from various sources, including text,
images, and lab values, collected at irregular intervals, to predict patient
outcomes. Traditional survival analysis methods struggle with such data. This
project aims to develop novel deep learning techniques, brain-inspired computer
models to analyze complex data, tailored for this purpose. Importantly, these
techniques will offer interpretability specific to the healthcare domain,
bolstering users' confidence in the predictions. Building upon prior work that
successfully utilized X-rays and lab values to predict events like intubation,
death, and ICU admission/discharge, this project will benchmark the new methods
against crucial clinical applications. This interdisciplinary proposal brings
together researchers specializing in computer science, biostatistics and
cardiology to significantly enhance models for survival analysis in a crucial
healthcare context. The research will yield new prediction methods and model
interpretations, demonstrated on open datasets that explore healthcare
challenges. Moreover, the proposal includes support for educational outreach
programs centered around survival analysis. The investigators will collaborate
with existing Cornell Tech outreach initiatives, targeting women and
underrepresented minorities through partnerships with the City University of New
York (CUNY) and the New York City Department of Education. By combining
expertise, this project aims to drive innovation in survival analysis and
promote inclusivity in STEM education.

Addressing large-scale real-world healthcare challenges with survival analysis
necessitates solving complex issues related to data representation and modeling.
While classical survival analysis methods like the Cox model are well-
established, they do not inherently provide solutions for effective learning
from long-term, irregular, and multi-modal inputs, particularly when
interpretability is required. The core concept of this project revolves around a
unified deep learning model for survival analysis, constructed using a
Transformer backbone designed to handle complex longitudinal data. The project
focuses on four key aims essential to this domain: (1) providing a unified
feature representation for multi-modal data, (2) handling long-term irregularly
spaced input, (3) supporting customized model interpretability through
collaboration with domain experts, leveraging their expertise as soft priors,
and (4) integrating this feature representation with more advanced survival
analysis methodologies. The evaluation of these methods will primarily utilize
the publicly available MIMIC dataset, consisting of critical care patient
records. Additionally, the project team collaborates with clinicians working on
heart failure, providing an additional dataset for applied evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.