* 2306506
* Targeted Infusion Project: Creation of a Biophysics minor program for STEM success
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Steven Morgan, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 397,713.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Fisk University seeks to strengthen the university's
ability to recruit, retain, and graduate underrepresented students in STEM by
adding a Biophysics minor to the existing degree programs. The program has the
potential to offer a new pathway for life-science students to discover how
quantitative methods can be applied to life-science applications of physics.

The primary goal of the project is to create a Biophysics minor program for STEM
undergraduate students to gain an overview and applied knowledge of biophysics.
The program is designed to present quantitative modeling and experimental
techniques to a broad cross-section of life-science majors early in their
academic careers. Two new courses will be launched, “Biophysics and
Physiological Modeling” and “Experimental Physics” course, of both of which will
be an extension of the introductory courses, yet broaden student knowledge in
more complex systems including, osmosis, ligand binding and least-squares fits,
diffusion using finite-difference computational methods, equilibrium
distributions and entropy, energy and the Boltzmann factor, and the membrane
voltage potential of transmembrane proteins. Professional development
opportunities for students will be made available through the “Biophysics
Seminar” course, where invited speakers will introduce students to current
research topics in Biophysics research, as well as career opportunities. These
activities, coupled with faculty mentor undergraduate research experiences, are
anticipated to increase students’ broad interests in STEM related fields, and
more specifically biophysics, resulting enhancements in student self-efficacy,
self-confidence, and career readiness in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.