* 2306203
* Quantum Kinetics for Quantum Friction: a Materials Perspective
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Lilia Woods, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The relative displacement between two objects in close proximity, but not
touching, gives rise to friction, a ubiquitous phenomenon resulting in energy
dissipation, which often leads to reduced efficiency and reliability of devices.
The source of this friction is quantum vacuum fluctuations on the surfaces of
the objects, referred to as quantum friction. This project focuses on quantum
friction, and its general scope is to advance the fundamental understanding of
time-dependent processes stemming from the quantum vacuum. The goal is to
develop a theory that can give insights and guidance into ultrasensitive force
and torque experiments that are important for new pathways for harnessing the
quantum vacuum. The project promotes in-depth studies of novel materials and
their optical response properties by finding effective control “knobs” for
enhancing or inhibiting quantum friction. Training students and postdocs is an
important part of this research, which is an excellent platform for new
professionals working on cutting edge problems in a collaborative team. Creating
an environment to involve high school students, which is also envisioned for
this research, promises to attract motivated young people to help with their
college paths in science or engineering.

This research aims at developing a unified kinetic approach that takes into
account on equal footing time, velocity, distance separation, and optical
response properties of the objects that are in relative motion. The method
relies on projection density operator concepts through which geometric phases,
transition rates, decoherence, and dephasing enter into quantum friction
phenomena. Advanced theoretical methods will also be developed to calculate the
optical response of materials to be incorporated in the kinetic description of
quantum friction. The project aims to broaden the meaning of Berry-like
geometric phases in nonunitary dissipative processes associated with vacuum
electromagnetic fluctuations at zero and finite temperatures. In-depth studies
of the optical response of topological and other materials, which is important
especially for uncovering novel plasmon modes-atomic structures relations, will
be carried out in order to uncover practical “knobs” for quantum friction
control. In addition to the force, quantum friction signatures will be
identified in characteristics, such as geometric phases and transition rates, to
expand and diversify future experimental endeavors in measuring this elusive
effect. This research will also give new insights for experimental studies
concerning ultrasensitive force and torque detection as well as detection of
single spins by magnetic resonance force microscopy among others. Such precise
experiments and their proper interpretation are of great relevance for
harnessing the empty vacuum for useful purposes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.