* 2306910
* Singularities and stability in compressible fluids with or without gravity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Juhi Jang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

Fluids and gases manifest a wide range of interesting physical phenomena with
rich applications in science and engineering. Their dynamics is governed by
systems of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) whose study presents
many mathematical challenges. The objective of this project is to investigate
under what conditions solutions to PDEs arising from compressible fluid dynamics
with or without gravity and elastodynamics will develop singular behavior in
finite time, e.g., leading to collapse or explosion, and under what conditions
solutions could exist for all time. Answers to these questions will contribute
to a better understanding of implosions and blast waves, stability and collapse
of stars, long-time behavior of elastic bodies, and other physical phenomena.
The project aims to deepen our understanding of these highly nontrivial
phenomena through novel mathematical methods. The research project will be
integrated by education and outreach activities through student research
projects, mentoring activities, course development and dissemination to a
broader audience.

The focus of this project is the investigation of several systems of partial
differential equations describing compressible flows and elastic systems and
determine whether solutions are stable or develop singularities in finite time.
The main projects include the study of: (i) self-similar stellar collapse and
stability analysis for the gravitational Euler-Poisson system and the Einstein-
Euler system, (ii) strong explosion, converging shocks, cavity, and stability
theory for compressible Euler equations, (iii) uniformly rotating multi-body
system and entropic rotating solutions and stability theory for the Euler-
Poisson system, and (iv) long time dynamics for elastic bodies. The study of
these problems will require the development of new mathematical approaches
relying on mathematical analysis of PDEs, computer-assisted proofs, and the
scaling invariance and self-similarity of the equations under study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.