* 2306504
* Targeted Infusion Project: Using Immersive VR Environments to Improve Student Success for Online Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ahmad Patooghy, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,946.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project aims to implement online, experiential Information and
Electronics Technology courses using innovative technologies such as augmented
and virtual reality at North Carolina Agricultural & Technical University.

The primary objective is to investigate the impact of these courses on student
success, retention, and engagement, particularly among postsecondary students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. This project
contributes to advancing the knowledge of future recruiters and researchers. It
sheds light on the efficacy of augmented and virtual reality to enhance online
STEM education in general and at HBCUs in specific. The merit of this project
lies in its pioneering use of cutting-edge strategies to bolster the enrollment
of students in technology programs at HBCUs and other institutions of higher
education. By promoting innovation and addressing the projected shortage of
skilled STEM professionals in the United States, the project aligns with the
overarching goal of driving economic growth and fostering a more robust STEM
workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.