* 2306799
* Targeted Infusion Project: Providing a Data Science and Analytics approach to the Honors Curriculum at Howard University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* LaTanya Brown-Robertson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,399.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The goal of this project is to incorporate data science and analytics
(DSA) into the honors curriculum and co-curricular experiences in the College of
Arts and Science at Howard University, targeting the disciplines of Chemistry,
Biology, Mathematics, Psychology, Political Science and Economics.

This project’s DSA content development activities will be guided by the
incorporation of Competency-Based Education and Problem-Based Learning, both
regarded as high impact practices that attract and retain high-achieving
students. The project will develop four modules – Introduction to Data Science
and Research Methodology; Data Transformation and Analytics; Data Visualization
and Machine Learning; and Artificial Intelligence – that include exciting and
innovative methods, assignments, projects, and experiences. The curriculum will
prepare over 400 COAS Honors students annually for applied research and STEM-
related graduate school opportunities and ultimately develop a diverse DSA
workforce. The project will also provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students historically underrepresented in STEM and other fields to
address health, economic, and environmental issues impacting local and global
minority communities, using DSA to identify current and future solutions. In
addition, the project will offer a DSA research study abroad experience for two
cohorts of honor student researchers to travel to Ghana to incorporate DSA
research focusing on the three theme areas of Health Disparities, Gender Equity,
and Environmental Justice. The research findings will be disseminated to the
broader research community and policymakers (through conferences and
publications) to bring policies and provide solutions impacting minority
communities globally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.