* 2306057
* Improving High Latitude Foraminiferal Paleoproxies: Insights from Northern California Current Modern and Historical Records
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Brittany Hupp, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wanamaker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,912.00

This project will improve our ability to reconstruct past ocean conditions, such
as sea surface temperatures, in high-latitude regions. These regions experience
a more extreme response to climate change than low-latitude regions. One of the
best ways to study past ocean-climate change is by studying fossil plankton
called planktic foraminifera or “forams”. Forams are microscopic zooplankton
that have existed for over 200 million years and live near the surface of the
ocean. As these organisms grow, they build small shells. The shell chemistry
records the conditions at the time the shells were formed. When the organism
dies, its shell sinks to the seafloor and becomes part of the geological fossil
record. Thus, the chemical composition of fossil shells recovered from deep-sea
sediments can be used to reconstruct the surface ocean conditions in the past.
This study will generate the geochemical-environmental relationships (i.e.,
calibration equations) used to evaluate fossil foram records. The composition of
the shells of living and recently deceased forams collected from the surface
ocean will be compared to the conditions and chemical makeup of the seawater
they are living in. Samples for this study will include an archive of plankton
tow samples from the last decade. Newly collected plankton tow and water samples
from throughout the Northern California Current region off the coast of northern
California, Oregon, and Washington states will also be studied. Although forams
are found globally, this study will focus on constraining geochemical-
environmental relationships for species that live in intermediate- to high-
latitude regions to better predict how these vulnerable regions will respond to
our changing climate. The research team will also investigate how the
composition of foram shells may change throughout the organism’s life cycle.
This study will help ensure that the calibration equations used to interpret
fossil records are accurate. The project includes support for an early career
scientist and for undergraduate students. The research team will share the
results and scientific process of the research with the public through several
public outreach events.

The dynamic Northern California Current (NCC) system has been extensively
monitored for nearly half a century, through a series of hydrographic transects
off the coasts of California, Oregon, and Washington, resulting in a robust
archive of plankton tow samples and concurrent environmental data. This study
will use historical plankton tow samples, and collect new plankton samples, to
further develop a range of trace element/calcium (TE/Ca) paleoproxies for
intermediate to high latitude planktic foraminiferal species living in the NCC.
Species common to the NCC include temperate and high-latitude genotypes of
Globigerina bulloides, Neogloboquadrina pachyderma, N. incompta, N. dutertrei,
and Turborotalita quinqueloba. These species are common in higher latitude
regions, including the Artic Ocean, where temperature change in response to
climate change tends to be greatest. The research objectives are to: 1)
establish Mg/Ca-temperature and Na/Ca-salinity calibrations for understudied
temperate to polar planktic foraminiferal taxa and investigate the potential for
other TE/Ca-environmental relationships, 2) investigate potential vital effects
and mechanisms for TE incorporation in planktic foraminiferal shells as they
transition from life to death, and 3) characterize the d18O(seawater) signature
in the study region and establish species specific seawater foraminiferal
calcite isotopic offsets in order to constrain the depth habitats of the study
taxa, a critical step to establishing calibrations based on data in a “natural
laboratory” setting. The proposed research will further develop novel and
existing planktic foraminiferal TE/Ca proxies for use in paleoclimatic and
paleoceanographic reconstructions, with particular emphasis on improving our
ability to reconstruct past environmental conditions in intermediate to high
latitude regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.