* 2306239
* Research Initiation: The Influences of Engineering and Science Identities among Faculty in the Mentoring of Graduate Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* David O'Neill, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,982.00

Each person has a complex identity shaped by various factors such as their
gender, race, socio-economic status, and background. Additionally, the roles
individuals hold, like that of research engineers who also serve as research
scientists and engineers, contribute to their identity in differing amounts for
different individuals. While previous research has shown the significance of a
mentor's identity in mentor-mentee relationships, no specific studies have
focused on the contributions of engineering and research identities to these
relationships among research engineers. This research project aims to explore
different aspects of identity in Engineering Research Mentors (ERMs), who in
this study refer to engineering faculty at research universities. The project
aims to understand how these aspects of identity influence the mentoring
approaches adopted by ERMs. The ultimate goal is to enhance mentoring practices
in academic engineering research settings, addressing issues such as PhD
students failing to complete their degrees. Fully integrated in this project is
the research initiation objective to train the Principal Investigator (PI) in
mixed-methods research and support their first funded project in engineering
education research. This will not only enable the PI to succeed in future
studies but also lay the foundation for those studies that have already been
conceptualized.

The research goal of this project will be to understand how engineering research
mentors approach mentor-mentee relationships differently based on the degree to
which they identify as engineers and/or research scientists. The overall
research question asked in this proposal is: How do the strengths of Engineering
Identity (EI) and Research Science Identity (RSI) operationalize in Engineering
Research Mentors’ relationships with mentees? To answer this question, we will
quantify EI and RSI in engineering research mentors through a survey with
explicit questions and an implicit association test, followed by in-depth
qualitative interviews, with the following specific aims: 1) Obtain measurements
of EI and RSI in ERMs and explore contributory factors, 2) Determine to what
extent an ERM’s explicit and implicit measures of identity agree, and 3)
Understand the operationalization of these identities in the ERM’s mentoring
relationships. Through these aims, the study will seek to answer the following
four research questions: RQ1: What is the distribution of explicit EI and
explicit RSI of ERMs? RQ2: What is the distribution of implicit EI–RSI identity
bias of ERMs? RQ3: What is the agreement between explicit and implicit
measurements of EI–RSI identity bias? RQ4: How do identity and identity bias
operationalize in ERMs’ mentor-mentee relationships? This work is original in
that: data obtained from these steps will be the first ever measurements of EI
and RSI in the understudied group of ERMs; this work will obtain the first
implicit measurements of EI and RSI in any group of engineers; and these
measurements will both guide qualitative interviews and provide meaningful
context to the findings. Deeper understanding of how an ERM’s own professional
identities affect her/his mentoring will create opportunities for improved
mentorship and refined mentorship-training programs. Interventions to improve
mentoring through program design and mentor development will benefit student
recruitment, retention, and success, all of which will support efforts to
broaden participation in engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.