* 2306739
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Therapeutic and Diagnostic System for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Integrating Data Science, Synthetic Biology, and Additive Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Mohammad Azad, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2027
* USD 327,985.00

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) affect several million individuals worldwide,
and their incidence is increasing. These diseases are characterized by chronic
relapsing and remitting inflammation of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
resulting in debilitating physical and psychosocial symptoms. Currently, it is
known that IBD results from a complex interplay among host, microbial, and
environmental factors. What is not known is how this complex interplay triggers
the disease, which impedes an accurate diagnosis, and the development of
efficient treatments. This project aims at modeling this complex interplay, to
develop a theragnostic (therapeutic + diagnostic) tool that can be safely
delivered to the GI tract to detect and treat IBD. The development of the
theragnostic tool will allow patients with IBD to control their symptoms and
live a healthier and happier life. Furthermore, the IBD theragnostic would be a
proof-of-concept enabling the development of more theragnostic tools capable of
treating other chronic diseases. Besides improving the quality of life of IBD
patients, the proposed project has a strong educational plan to develop a
diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce. First, 25 rising 7th-9th-grade
students from communities underrepresented in STEM will participate in the “Data
Science in Biology Summer Camp”. The goal of the camp is to motivate
participants to consider a career in STEM through application-based learning.
Second, the project will increase the participation of undergraduate students in
research through targeted programs that will motivate them to consider an
advanced degree in STEM. Third, the project will train the interdisciplinary
workforce of tomorrow. The proposed research will attract some of the best young
minds to build a theragnostic tool for IBD. Due to the highly interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed research, graduate students involved in this program will
receive fundamental training in data science, synthetic biology, and additive
manufacturing which will highly benefit their future careers.

To model the complex interplay among host, microbial and environmental factors,
and develop a theragnostic tool that can be safely delivered to the GI tract,
the project integrates data science, synthetic biology, and additive
manufacturing through three main objectives. First, using data science, the
research team will model the complex host-microbes-environment interplay by
using data from the IBD Multi-omics Database, containing records of different
microbially focused profiles at several points in time and environmental factors
such as dietary and smoking habits for several subjects. The successful
completion of this objective will provide insights into critical biomarkers of
IBD, as well as the mechanisms of disease progression, which will be
incorporated to design the theragnostic tool. Second, using synthetic biology,
the research team will exploit the information on key biomarkers of IBD to build
an engineered bacteria able to sense IBD-associated inflammatory markers and
drive the expression of anti-inflammatory effectors. The successful completion
of this objective will result in a theragnostic engineered bacteria able to
perform host-correcting actions against inflammatory responses. Third, using
additive manufacturing, the research team will develop a 3D-printed smart pill
to securely and safely deliver the theragnostic bacteria to target regions of
the GI tract. The successful completion of this objective will result in a
3D-printed smart pill able to deliver the engineered bacteria securely and
effectively to the GI tract. Finally, the synergistic integration of data
science, synthetic biology, and additive manufacturing will be evaluated to
guarantee the successful design of a theragnostic tool for IBD.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.