* 2306041
* Planning: Collaborative: Food Security and Traditional Foods in Urban Spaces
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Julie Beans, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This planning award supports the development of a sustainable, collaborative,
and participatory research program focused on urban Indigenous food systems in
Alaska. As rural residents have migrated to urban centers, such as Anchorage,
reliance on traditional foods has changed and food insecurity has increased.
This work will lay the foundation for the first study of how migration affects
urban Indigenous food security at the household and community levels in Alaska.
The project is structured in three phases and involves development of
partnerships with tribal organizations, local leaders, and scholars to identify
priorities for urban food security research. Planned meetings will focus on
assessing the role of and access to traditional foods in urban settings; how
rural-to-urban migration affects food security; and how research can support
urban food security. Over the two-year duration of the project, the PI team will
network with local leaders, food organizations, and scholars working on
Indigenous food security and food sovereignty in Anchorage. Through a series of
in-person and virtual meetings, network participants will use a participatory
and collaborative approach to identify research and outreach priorities. These
priorities will form the foundation of a future NSF proposal addressing how
access, availability and use of traditional foods affects food security. Broader
impacts include development of a multidisciplinary network of food security
researchers and practitioners with Indigenous representation; a review article
that addresses urban Indigenous food security; and experiential learning by two
undergraduate researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.