* 2306332
* Conference: Random matrices from quantum chaos to the Riemann zeta function.
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Emma Bailey, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 04/30/2024
* USD 15,200.00

This award provides partial support for early career US-based mathematicians to
attend the conference "Random matrices from quantum chaos to the Riemann zeta
function’’. This meeting will take place at the University of Bristol on 5–7th
July 2023. The conference will focus on highlighting recent mathematical
achievements, spanning topics from Analytic Number Theory, to Quantum Chaos, to
Random Matrix Theory. This award will facilitate interaction between early
career mathematicians and the leading experts in the field.

Half a century ago, mathematicians discovered that various behaviors of the
Riemann zeta function can accurately be predicted by particular large Hermitian
random matrices. In the intervening years, ideas from quantum chaos, statistical
physics, probability, combinatorics, and more, have furthered our understanding
of the Riemann zeta function and other L-functions. One of the most recent
advances has been the significant progress towards the Fyodorov-Keating
conjecture(s) concerning extreme values of the Riemann zeta function and of
characteristic polynomials. This conference will bring together experts working
at these interfaces alongside early career researchers, and provide ample
opportunity for learning and discussion.

The conference website is https://web-
eur.cvent.com/event/0c99dff3-c047-4cd1-b82a-dba87f804733/summary?RefId=SOM

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.