* 2306690
* SCH: Human-Centered Reinforcement Learning for Personalized Nutritional Coaching
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Lena Mamykina, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,198,522.00

Chronic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and obesity, place an
ever-increasing burden on individuals and society at large. Health coaching has
emerged as an effective approach to promoting self management. However, there
are not enough coaching professionals to accommodate the growing population of
individuals with chronic diseases. Conversational agents have the potential to
overcome these barriers and make health coaching available to a more diverse
population. One promising data-driven approach employs reinforcement learning
(RL), a machine-learning approach that learns from past interactions and
prescribes sequences of actions for reaching a predetermined goal. However, RL-
based dialogs can be perceived as unintuitive to users, and there is a need for
new approaches to aligning RL-based conversational agents with human reasoning
and expectations. In addition, RL algorithms are opaque and there is a need for
new approaches to generating explanations for RL inferences and actions.

To address these gaps, this project develops a new approach to providing health
coaching with RL-based conversational agents, while at the same time addressing
more general challenges of designing human-centered RL-based conversational
agents. To achieve these goals, this project includes a user study of health
coaching in the context of type 2 diabetes, in which human health coaches will
be asked to provide guidance to individuals with type 2 diabetes via text
messages. The corpus of dialogs collected during this study provides a
foundation for developing data driven computational representation of textual
meal descriptions and for the development of a chatbot that uses RL to produce
conversational structures appropriate for nutritional coaching. Furthermore,
this project uses learned representations of meals to provide individuals with
feedback on their nutritional choices and explanations for this feedback.
Finally, it integrates the human perspective into the RL policy to generate
dialog structures that are perceived as intuitive by humans. The evaluation
study examines the impact of the RL-based health coach on individuals’ ability
to achieve their nutritional goals as compared to other, non-RL-based coaching
techniques. This research is consequential to society at large in several ways.
First, conversational interfaces can lower entry barriers for engaging with
technological interventions in health and wellness for diverse communities and
reduce “intervention-generated inequalities” in health. Furthermore, new
techniques for aligning RL with human reasoning and explaining its inferences
and choices to users can increase its applicability to a broader set of problems
and domains. On a broader level, this research and educational plan take
important steps towards further promoting human-centered approaches to data
science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence education that can have
broader impact on future research in this field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.