* 2306038
* Collaborative Research: Control of Contact Friction of Van der Waals Heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Two-dimensional materials enable creating a new class of nanoscale material
systems by vertical, layer-by-layer stacking, resulting in ‘van der Waals’
heterostructures. This project aims to investigate the structural-mechanical-
electronic coupling of van der Waals heterostructures with the ultimate goal of
enabling friction control at nanoscale contacts. Created knowledge will advance
(1) the design of nano- and microelectromechanical devices serving commercial
and U.S. security needs by removing the constraints of high friction as a long-
standing hurdle for their functionality, and (2) emerging manufacturing
methodologies based on van der Waals assembly. Progress in this field will
improve the sustainability and efficiency of manufacturing processes and thus
increase U.S. industrial productivity and competitiveness. The collaborative
project will train two graduate research assistants. Student demographics at
University of California Irvine provide an ideal opportunity for broadening
participation in mechanics and nanotechnology and contributing to the education
of a diverse STEM work force. The team will take advantage of this opportunity
by recruiting students for research engagement at all levels and will provide
opportunities for student exchanges between their labs. Findings of this
research will be integrated as part of graduate courses at the two universities.

It is hypothesized that tuning the structural-mechanical-electronic coupling in
‘van der Waals’ heterostructures will afford control of friction. This is
expected because the charge transferred-induced interlayer excitons between the
targeted transition metal dichalcogenides monolayers influence the corrugation
of the potential energy landscape at the sliding interface. The objective of
this hypothesis-driven project is thus to establish experimental and theoretical
foundation for van der Waals heterostructures with tunable and controllable
friction. The team will investigate (1) how the intrinsic structure (two-
dimensional materials combination, stacking order, twist angle, interlayer
coupling) of van der Waals heterostructures influences the coupling and
friction; and (2) determine how extrinsic factors like strain and electric field
effect structural, mechanical and electronic properties of van der Waals
heterostructures, and thereby friction. The experimental toolset relies on a
scalable approach to assemble van der Waals heterostructures with twist angle
control; characterization by photoluminescence/Raman spectroscopy and second
harmonic generation; and nanoscale friction measurements correlated with surface
topography, adhesion, and stiffness maps. It is also expected that the effect of
interlayer charge transfer will make friction less sensitive to oxidation, which
will be tested using deliberately oxidized samples.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.