* 2306156
* Research Initiation: Improving engineering mechanics self-efficacy by focusing on abstracting the physical world as a precursor to analysis.
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Nigel Kaye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project will improve the retention of engineering students in undergraduate
programs by helping them make direct connections between their second-year
mechanics classes and the real world in which they live and will work. Second-
year mechanics classes are often one of the biggest reasons for students to
leave engineering because of the abstract nature of typical course instruction.
The team will develop a lab-based mechanics class where students interact with
physical models of real-world engineered structures and learn how to abstract
these physical objects into engineering models. Making this direct connection
between the real world and abstract mechanics models will enable students to see
the value of their studies and improve their motivation to continue in their
chosen profession. Retaining more students in engineering, from a diversity of
backgrounds, will help build the U.S. STEM workforce.

The research team will develop a second-year mechanics class that flips the
traditional approach by starting with the physical world application and
building students’ ability to develop engineering models of physical systems,
i.e., abstracting the physical world into mathematical/engineering models. The
hypothesis of the proposed research is that, by starting with abstraction,
students will build a stronger connection between the physical world and
mechanics modeling. In turn, this will improve students’ perceptions about their
ability to solve engineering mechanics problems and their future-oriented
motivation to be engineers. The specific research questions we seek to answer
are: (1) In what ways does teaching students how to abstract the physical world
affect their self-efficacy in basic mechanics classes, and to what extent do
students build direct connections between the physical world they live in with
the mechanics models they will use in their studies? (2) In what ways does
showing students how to abstract the physical world into tractable engineering
science problems affect their future-oriented motivation, and to what extent do
students make connections between what they are learning and the physical world
they will work in upon graduation? The research team will publish the class
materials online with open access, enabling instructors at other institutions to
adopt the proposed pedagogical approach. This will include the model designs,
class activities, assignments, and assessment tools. The research program will
train the PI and graduate student in engineering education research and will
increase the community of practitioner researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.