* 2306104
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate: University of South Florida, Florida-Georgia LSAMP (FGLSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ruth Huntley, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: Blacks and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared students,
highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.
The need for cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United
States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy.

The University of South Florida (USF), partner institution in the Florida-
Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP), will serve
as the 2023-2025 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) institutional site for the
alliance. The project responds to the need for increasingly interdisciplinary
and global science and engineering to revitalize the nation's talent pool of
domestically trained STEM doctoral scientists and engineers. The 2023-2025
FGLSAMP BD Activity will facilitate increased intellectual exchange and promote
greater diversity and inclusion across all USF STEM departments, build upon both
FGLSAMP's prior successes and USF's preeminence as a global research university,
institutionalize evidence-based practices in the academic and social
integration, comprehensive scholar development, and professionalization in the
sciences of graduate students from LSAMP populations. Measurable objectives for
the 2023-2025 USF FGLSAMP BD Activity will include: 1) recruitment of twelve
(12) LSAMP alumni as BD participants by fall 2023 into STEM graduate programs
(MS or PhD); 2) implementing a hierarchical and peer mentoring program model
along with outreach initiatives to promote BD and undergraduate retention and
STEM research careers; (3) fostering mental health, personal and financial well-
being of the participants;and (4) achieving 100% retention in graduate STEM
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.