* 2306316
* Collaborative Research: Cooperative Processes at Surfaces: Ligand Binding at the Single Molecule Level
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 470,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Ursula Mazur and Kerry Hipps of Washington
State University and Bhaskar Chilukuri of Illinois State University are
exploring cooperative binding events using highly sensitive imaging and
computational methods. Chemical processes such as chemical reactivity and
detection sensitivity depend on cooperativity. Studying these cooperative
interactions requires both surface techniques that are capable of single
molecule detection and computational tools for quantifying the degree of
interactions. Drs. Chilukuri, Hipps, and Mazur and their students will
investigate how single molecules interact with one reactive site and how that
system impacts beyond other nearby domains using both experimental and
computational methods. The interplay among intermolecular, intramolecular, and
substrate-induced effects on chemical reaction cooperativity at surfaces will be
studied and analyzed. High school, graduate, and undergraduate students will be
mentored in research, and an undergraduate course in nanoscale physical
chemistry will be developed.

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements reveal contributions of both
inter- and intramolecular communications to cooperativity on the submolecular
level while density functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics provide a
mechanism for quantifying the role of the substrate, inter and intramolecular
interactions, spatial effects, and spin-spin interactions in producing
cooperativity in axial complexation. Real-time STM imaging will be used to
monitor the reaction between molecules in solution and/or the gas phase and
reactive sites on surface supported metal complexes containing two or more
reactive sites. Reactivity will be monitored as a function of temperature,
reactant concentration, solvation environment, and nature of the support for the
metal complexes. Several approaches will be used to model the STM experiments,
including the grand canonical ensemble to parameterize the energetics of binding
for each distribution over the reactive sites and periodic DFT calculations to
provide insight into how electronic distributions affect binding cooperativity
at reactive sites. Molecular dynamics calculations will be employed to model
solvent effects. By developing a comprehensive model of reaction cooperativity
at surfaces, improved predictability of reactivity in surface chemistry,
catalysis, and sensor development is envisioned.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.