* 2306142
* Regulation of stem cell patterning and activity in Citrus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vivian Irish, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 680,000.00

Non-technical paragraph: Plants grow by the action of stem cell populations,
which give rise to branches, leaves and flowers in a highly regulated pattern
around the axis. This pattern is called phyllotaxy. While most plant species
show spiral phyllotaxy, citrus species present an unusual variation on
phyllotaxy; instead of single branch primordia arising in a spiral pattern, many
citrus species instead produce two adjacent primordia with differing
developmental potentials. One primordium develops into a typical branch, while
the other primordium differentiates as a thorn. Previous work has shown that the
branch and the thorn primordia regulate stem cell activity in different ways.
The goals of this project are to understand how this unusual phyllotactic
pattern is formed in citrus, and to examine the related issue of how differences
in stem cell activity are regulated in branch versus thorn primordia. The
arrangement of leaves, branches, and flowers is a key component of crop yield.
As such, carrying out this work in citrus will support the bioeconomy through
knowledge of the mechanisms controlling growth and yield of this economically
important crop. In addition, this work has the potential to provide new tools
for the engineering of this fruit commodity, as well as providing information on
mechanistic aspects of plant growth and development more broadly. This project
will also contribute to the career development of undergraduate, graduate
student and postdoctoral researchers, as well as provide a means for outreach to
the local New Haven area community and underserved high school students.

Technical paragraph: The plant hormone auxin is transported in a directional
manner and auxin activity at the sites of primordia initiation is thought to
define both the pattern of phyllotaxy and organ outgrowth. Understanding how
auxin signaling interacts with other signaling components to define two
different developmental outcomes, the thorn versus the branch primordium, will
provide insight into stem cell patterning processes and how they translate into
organismal forms. The proposed work includes assessing auxin distribution and
activity in Citrus, as well as multiple experimental approaches to perturb auxin
action in Citrus. These experiments will be complemented by genome wide
evaluation of the thorn versus branch transcriptome, as well as an assessment of
the genome-wide binding sites of THORN IDENTITY1 (TI1), encoding a CYC/BRC1
class TCP transcription factor, that functions to specify thorn identity through
binding to the promoter of the stem cell regulator WUS and downregulating its
expression. Collectively, the proposed experiments will help to define how auxin
signaling influences the decision to produce a thorn versus a branch primordium,
and how such signals interface with the components of the gene regulatory
network regulating thorn versus branch identity. Defining the mechanisms
regulating the interplay between auxin signaling and stem cell activity should
help to reveal new regulatory targets that could be genetically manipulated to
alter plant architecture and influence crop productivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.