* 2306101
* Adversarial Learning Methods for Modeling and Inverse Design of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Atzberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,943.00

The properties of the material world emerges from countless interactions between
molecules and other microscopic structures. Soft materials are those which
exhibit behaviors having a significant dependence on temperature. This includes
liquid crystals used in display technology, gels and colloids used by industry
in foods and consumer products, and constituents of biological systems. Insights
into behaviors and the design of soft materials with specified target properties
poses significant challenges given subtleties in how interactions and
rearrangements at the microscopic level can vary with temperature, density, and
other physical conditions. This calls for the further development of advanced
computational methods for modeling, simulation, and optimization for soft
materials. This project contributes new data-driven techniques and software
tools for soft materials by leveraging and further developing emerging machine
learning methods and simulation approaches. This includes adversarial training
methods for learning representations of materials leveraging computational
properties of competitive games coupled with further development of deep neural
network architectures. The approaches will be used to develop tools for modeling
and designing soft materials with target properties and for improving the
fidelity and efficiency of computational simulations. Open source software also
will be developed and released for use by the community. Outreach activities are
planned for promoting diversity and engaging under-represented students both at
the University of California Santa Barbara and in the local community. This
includes working with local area K-12 schools and colleges on programs to engage
students on topics in computation, data science, machine learning, and
engineering. Educational activities are also planned providing unique
opportunities to train the next generation of researchers and students on recent
emerging machine learning approaches at the interface of engineering,
mathematics, statistics, and data science.

The project addresses challenges in developing data-driven approaches for
modeling, simulation, and design of soft materials. The properties of soft
materials arise from collective microstructure interactions having energies
comparable to thermal fluctuations and from effects spanning a wide range of
spatial-temporal scales. Given the role of fluctuations, collective entropic
effects play a significant role. This presents computational challenges
resulting in expensive large-scale forward simulations to characterize and
design materials. The project develops new machine learning approaches and
software tools for data-driven modeling and simulation of soft materials. This
includes approaches for model reduction by identifying coarse degrees of freedom
from high-fidelity simulations, methods for learning model parameters and force
interactions, and optimization approaches for design of materials with target
properties. The project leverages and further develops recent adversarial
learning approaches to learn implicit generative models and other
representations for improving the efficiency and fidelity of simulations.
Methods are also developed for specific applications for data-driven modeling of
colloidal systems and polymeric materials with target properties. Software tools
also will be developed and released for the approaches to provide general
methods for performing simulations, optimization, and analysis of materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.