* 2306759
* Targeted Infusion Project: Strengthening Articulation and Transfer Collaboration (SATC) for Undergraduate STEM Education at FVSU
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Seema Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 398,058.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Fort Valley State University seeks to increase STEM
students’ transfer rate from a two-year to a four-year institutions in Georgia
and enhance STEM bachelor’s degree attainment among this student population. The
activities include institutional, program and individual level interventions to
ensure alignment and coordination across campus for the direct benefit students.

The project aims to reduce barriers to transfer by leveraging a joint
initiative, “The Complete College Georgia Articulation Agreement” between the
University System of Georgia and the Technical College System of Georgia. This
project goal will be achieved by implementing a collaborative transfer pathway
program for undergraduates, with intentional recruitment strategies targeting
minorities student populations, veterans, and/or non-traditional students, to
promote the seamless transfer of general science education courses and begin
academic support for transfer students even before the transfer occurs. Student
success will be achieved through an enhanced STEM education curriculum, a series
of well-designed summer workshops, undergraduate research experiences and
scientific exchange with peers and other scientists at research conferences.
Students will also receive advisement and career guidance in new and high-demand
STEM fields. It is anticipated that these activities will facilitate career
development, resulting in undergraduates who are better prepared for graduate
studies or professional STEM careers. In addition, participating faculty will
receive professional development training to hone their mentoring and
pedagogical skills. The successful implementation of this project can serve as a
model within the higher education landscape, as it examines the impact of its
programmatic strategy on an historically overlooked population of STEM students
that matriculate from two- to four-year programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.