* 2306226
* Research Initiation: Developing Technical Identity of Construction Engineering Students with Mixed Reality
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Duen Horng Chau, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,997.00

The construction industry continues to be one of the most dangerous industries
in the nation, with a staggering rate of fatalities and non-fatalities. Although
current advances in sensing technologies can mitigate this problem, the
construction industry is experiencing a lack of skilled workforce to implement
sensing technologies. This is partly because, typically, only the workforce who
are technically inclined and identify with the implementation sensing
technologies are engaged in advancing sensing technologies in the construction
industry. It becomes important to seek ways of developing the professional
technical identities of the future workforce, because the way students identify
and see themselves is an indicator of their professional and educational
persistence that often culminates in career success and increased retention of
the skilled workforce. As a first step to address this, this research will
investigate how interactions with sensing technologies in a mixed reality
environment strengthen construction engineering students' professional technical
identity development. The mixed reality environment will allow for hands-on
implementation of sensing technologies on a virtual construction site,
facilitate students’ engagement and interest, and provide a safe environment for
exercising professional agency that promotes professional identity. This
research will be led by a PI, who is a new engineering education researcher but
experienced with sensing technologies and in designing and implementing
pedagogical tools for construction education and will be mentored by an
experienced engineering education researcher who is an expert in STEM learning,
construction education, and professional identity development. By integrating
the PI into the engineering education community, this project will advance the
goal to expand the community of researchers studying the professional formation
of engineers.

This project will seek answers to two research questions RQ1: What are the
professional technical identity practices related to implementing sensing
technologies in the industry? And RQ2: In what ways does a mixed reality
environment driven by technical professional identities influence technical
professional identity development in construction engineering students? The
first research question will involve an understanding of (1) the knowledge and
experiences adopted by these professionals during with implementation of sensing
technologies in the industry; (2) the processes (steps), and (3) the thought
processes (decision-making process) taken by construction professionals to
implement sensing technologies on construction applications. This will be
facilitated through interactions with the mixed reality environment developed
for the implementation of sensing technologies. The results from this phase will
inform professional technical identity practices that will drive the improvement
of the mixed reality environment. The research will implement the mixed reality
environment in two institutions (minority and non-minority serving) with
students from diverse backgrounds such as ethnicity, gender, and race. The
second research question will adopt critical-incident interviews and surveys to
identify how and why the mixed reality environment strengthened students’
professional technical identity development through the tenets of interest,
recognition, and performance. This research will be conducted from a demographic
point of view. The expected research outcomes are in (1) establishing a
theoretical framework that defines the decision-making process and technical
steps adopted by professionals who identify with the technical workforce for
deploying sensing technologies in the construction industry; (2) developing
theories that describe the psychological risks of a multimodal mixed reality
environment designed for professional technical identity development; and (3)
developing substantive theories that explain how and why a mixed reality
environment strengthens professional technical identity development in
construction engineering students. The defined experiences, decision-making
process, and technical steps embodying the professional technical identity
practices will facilitate the recruitment and retention of minoritized students
and, in the long term, increase their retention in the workforce and broaden
participation in engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.