* 2306011
* Density Functional Theory of Molecular Fragments: Strong Electron Correlation Beyond Density Functional Approximations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Adam Wasserman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 529,999.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Adam Wasserman of Purdue University is
developing advanced theories and methods for computer simulation of the
electronic structure of molecules and materials with new capabilities to enable
highly accurate prediction of properties and interpretation of experiment for
these systems. In addition, the new method of density functional theory of
molecular fragments aims to provide computational efficiency for systems of
ever-increasing complexity. Dr. Wasserman and his research group will focus on
improving both the accuracy and the efficiency of these methods for the
challenging systems of the “strongly-correlated type.” These systems in which
electron correlation effects dominate, are typically out of reach for standard
approximations based on Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory, the most widely
used electronic structure method. In addition to the broader impact resulting
from the proposed research efforts, the PI's leadership within the Latin-
American community of Purdue students will continue. Other educational
activities include a bi-annual School and Workshop on Time-dependent DFT co-
organized by the PI and a study-abroad course on “Science and social progress”
that the PI will continue organizing.

Under this award, the Wasserman research group will focus on two major thrusts:
(1) Improving the accuracy of density-functional theory (DFT) calculations for
systems that lie beyond the reach of state-of-the-art density-functional
approximations; and (2) Improving the efficiency of such calculations. This
separation is made possible by the development of recent density-to-potential
inversion techniques that allow for the calculation of numerically exact non-
additive noninteracting kinetic energies. To achieve the first goal, Wasserman
and his group will employ an overlap functional of the fragment densities to
construct and test physically motivated approximations for the inter-fragment
exchange-correlation energy functional. To achieve the second, a two-pronged
approach will be followed in which (a) a semi-local fragment-density functional
will be developed based on exact constraints for the non-additive kinetic-energy
functional; and (b) a trained neural network will be used to incorporate non-
local effects into a meta-generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional
for the full noninteracting kinetic energy functional. All advances will be made
available to the broader scientific community through open-source codes for
density embedding calculations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.