* 2306852
* Stability Theory for Systems of Hyperbolic Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Alexis Vasseur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 340,000.00

This project aims to develop mathematical tools for studying the stability
theory of hyperbolic conservation laws, which model a wide range of physical
systems, including traffic flow and fluid and gas dynamics. These systems often
develop shocks or discontinuities, which pose significant challenges for their
mathematical treatment. The primary objective is to investigate the uniform
stability of viscous approximations of these models, particularly the Navier-
Stokes equation, and design methods to mitigate the destabilizing effect of
viscosity on shocks in fluid dynamics. The project will also offer training and
mentorship opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, to enhance their expertise in modeling, analysis, and
communication. This project will further develop the theory for hyperbolic
conservation laws, by extending the theory of weighted contraction with shifts,
to obtain weak/BV principles, stability of BV solutions with respect to wild
initial perturbations, and inviscid limit of physical viscous models as the
Navier-Stokes equation. The project will build on recent developments in the
theory of weighted contraction with shifts to solve a twenty-year-old conjecture
in the case of isentropic flows. The project will also consider multi-D settings
where the uniqueness of solutions is known to fail. While instabilities are
expected due to turbulence, the lack of uniqueness seriously questions the
prediction abilities of the models themselves. This pathology brings both
opportunities and formidable challenges to the field. This research will develop
a theory to reconcile instability and predictability for discontinuous flows at
high Reynolds numbers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.