* 2306048
* RAPID: Impacts and recovery of natural and managed coastal dunes on a South Carolina barrier island from Hurricane Ian
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jean Ellis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2023
* USD 25,610.00

Sand dunes are a critical component of the coastal-aeolian geomorphic system and
are a coastline defense mechanism in management practice. Given the
anthropogenic actions on the natural and surrounding built environment, it is
becoming commonplace to maintain the dune systems artificially. These ‘managed’
dunes frequently comprise nourished sand with intentionally planted vegetation.
However, little is known about contemporary land-use dynamics of these systems,
despite the relationships to historically studied concepts in aeolian
geomorphology (i.e., impacts of roughness elements on aeolian transport). This
RAPID project will allow the opportunity to collect time-sensitive field-based
data to quantify Hurricane Ian's biogeomorphic impacts and recovery on a managed
and natural dune system and to compare those measurements to the pre-storm
conditions. The project will enhance diversity in STEM by providing support in
an EPSCoR state for a principal investigator and graduate student who are both
from underrepresented groups in the field of geomorphology and land-use
dynamics.

The investigators will conduct one year of field-based data collection to
measure the topographic characteristics and management treatments on coastal
dunes. The field effort will include Terrestrial Laster Scanning and vegetation
surveys. These surveys will build on a dataset collected before Hurricane Ian
along South Carolina barrier islands. The investigators will use the collected
data to test hypotheses related to the biogeomorphic response of managed and
natural dune systems, the recovery trajectories of these dunes, and the
accretion rates on managed dunes with and without fences. This project could
lead to future process-based research on the influence of extreme events on dune
formation and evolution under different land-use scenarios. The results could
contribute both to the scientific and management communities. The project will
involve stakeholder meetings with South Carolina Beach Advocates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.