* 2306064
* Efficient Distribution Classification Tasks via Optimal Transport Embeddings
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Caroline Moosmueller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 87,406.00

Classification allows one to organize data based on similarities and can provide
insight into underlying relationships in a large variety of fields, including
cancer research, survey analysis, and image and text processing. As a result,
the development of efficient algorithms for classification tasks is an important
research area. One approach, machine learning, has proved successful in
classification tasks, but it is usually focused on data points in vector spaces.
In many applications, however, instances of data are naturally interpreted as
entire point clouds, or as distributions, and do not lie in a vector space.
Furthermore, the high dimension of such datasets leads to theoretical and
computational challenges. This project is devoted to the development of
classification algorithms for high-dimensional datasets consisting of
distributions, and will focus both on their theoretical analysis and
computational efficiency. To this end, the principal investigator will use the
framework of optimal transport, which provides a natural way of comparing
distributions. Students will be involved and trained in interdisciplinary
aspects of this project.

This project applies knowledge from computational optimal transport, such as
linear embeddings and regularized optimization, and machine learning algorithms,
to study classification tasks for datasets consisting of distributions. The main
goal is to develop approximation methods with guaranteed error bounds that also
allow for algorithmic insights and efficient implementation. Open problems on
approximation power, computational feasibility, and numerical analysis will be
addressed. Specifically, the project addresses four fundamental questions that
arise in the field: (1) What are the types of distributions that can be
classified with traditional machine learning techniques through linear
embeddings, and how does the choice of a regularizer affect accuracy? (2) How
well can the Wasserstein distance and Wasserstein barycenters be approximated
through linear embeddings using Euclidean distances? (3) Under which conditions
can we guarantee separability with simple classifiers in the embedding space for
disjoint classes of distributions? (4) How can we tailor our framework to
address various applications, such as classifying structures in audio or video
segments?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.