* 2306150
* CAREER: GIVEN-Gaming Intervention of Values Engineers Need
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Kelly Cross, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2027
* USD 481,935.00

The field of engineering has realized marginal success in achieving diversity
goals regardless of investments of money, research, and time. The GIVEN project
will create a new efficient approach to training engineering faculty about
diversity in STEM. An important outcome for the GIVEN project is to increase
faculty engagement and expand diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts
beyond faculty from underserved and marginalized groups. Engineering faculty,
despite being aware of diversity issues, generally lack knowledge and have
limited resources to intervene or make change to engage with DEI efforts. The
GIVEN project is a foundation to provide engineering faculty with the needed
resources to meaningfully engage with DEI concepts and could revolutionize DEI
training and engineering faculty professional development. This project will
measure engineering faculty beliefs about DEI with an online platform or gaming
tool. The gaming tool will track the evolution of engineering faculty beliefs
about diversity and the research team will assess the impact of the gaming tool
with both surveys and individual interviews. This project will encourage
engineering faculty to engage with campus diversity efforts through reflection
of their role and provide information resources to develop personalized
strategies to contribute to local DEI efforts. The GIVEN project will create a
tool to evaluate the beliefs of engineering faculty who are charged with
educating the next generation of engineering professionals. The project aligns
with NSF Broadening participation funding program by developing an innovative
method and project to significantly impact the recruitment and retention of
engineering faculty. The project will also catalyze the transformation of the
engineering culture to prioritize diversity, equity, and inclusion.

This mixed-methods multi-case study seeks to understand engineering faculty
beliefs about DEI and develop a gaming intervention to catalyze their engagement
with DEI efforts. The study is framed by basic values theory to answer the
following research questions:

RQ1. What beliefs and values do engineering faculty hold about diversity,
equity, and inclusion? RQ2. How do faculty values and beliefs about DEI impact
their approach to integrate DEI into their professional activities? RQ3. How
does the gaming intervention impact engineering faculty values and beliefs about
DEI?

This proposal will initiate a national conversation about the role of
engineering faculty in promoting diversity and inclusion. Specifically, the
project will develop an online gaming tool that can provide asynchronous access
to a DEI training instrument tailored for engineering faculty. The synergistic
activities of research and teaching will provide a medium to introduce the DEI
concepts into the engineering culture, curriculum, and classroom. The results of
the study will increase the engineering faculty engagement with DEI efforts.
Through their gaming and communities of practice (COP) interactions participants
will develop a tailored individualized understanding of what it takes to
implement DEI concepts into their faculty activities. Finally, the results of
the study will update our understanding of strategic approaches for broadening
participation and how faculty can effectively teach diverse students in STEM.
The study will provide an exemplar for improving diversity and inclusion
initiatives that various institution types can model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.