* 2306204
* Symplectic cohomology and quantum cohomology of Fano manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Pomerleano, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 06/30/2026
* USD 123,416.00

Symplectic geometry is the study of spaces that are locally modeled on phase
spaces from classical mechanics. While symplectic manifolds have no local
invariants, they do have interesting global ones. A major part of this project
is concerned with “Gromov-Witten” invariants, which aim to probe a symplectic
manifold by studying maps from two-dimensional surfaces into the manifold that
satisfy an appropriate partial differential equation. These invariants are very
powerful, but it can be quite difficult to get good control over them because of
their non-local nature. One key goal of the project is to prove new fundamental
facts about Gromov-Witten invariants on certain symplectic manifolds that are
defined by polynomial equations. The general strategy the PI will use is to “cut
open” the manifold along a divisor. The corresponding invariants of the divisor
complement turn out to be very tractable and also provide a stepping stone
towards understanding the Gromov-Witten invariants of the original space. The PI
will continue to serve as a mentor to high school students at MIT's Research
Science Institute, and will organize a workshop on homological mirror symmetry
for graduate students. He will also continue to work on developing a Master’s
program in mathematics at the University of Massachusetts Boston.

Specifically, in the main strand of the project, the PI will prove that the
quantum connection on a Fano manifold with a smooth anti-canonical divisor has a
singularity of unramified exponential type. The strategy is to view the quantum
cohomology of the Fano manifold as a deformation of the symplectic cohomology of
the complement of the divisor. The symplectic cohomology of the complement can
in turn be studied via the wrapped Fukaya category, allowing one to bring tools
from noncommutative geometry to bear. In a different direction, the PI will
build on his previous work to relate the symplectic cohomology of an affine log
Calabi-Yau variety to certain intrinsic mirror algebras recently constructed by
algebraic geometers. The PI will then go on to study homological mirror symmetry
for intrinsic mirror pairs using a combination of symplectic and categorical
techniques also developed in previous work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.