* 2306106
* Capillary-gravity wave scattering from barriers with pinned contact lines
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Likun Zhang, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 301,719.00

Capillary-gravity waves are waves traveling along free surfaces of liquids and
are often confined in a narrow channel. The proposed research is designed with
the goal of achieving an improved understanding of the fundamental fluid physics
underlying surface wave interactions with a rigid wall. The three-phase liquid-
air-solid boundary influences the liquid behavior, which is important in
laboratory studies and also in industrial applications, for instance, the
dynamics of drops attached to a solid wall, liquid oscillations in closed
basins, liquid globes and lenses attached to thin wire loops, liquid cylinders
stabilized by helical wires, and wave propagation and flows in open narrow
channels. The understanding provided by this research will enable the
development of new designs and models that will lead to more efficient liquid
management involving minimal solid contact. The results will be applicable to
engineering areas including condensation heat transfer, liquid-gas contacting
processes, and chemical engineering applications, as well as applications in
biology and biotechnology. The approaches developed from this project will also
provide new methods for measuring and modeling fluid behavior involving three-
phase boundaries. The project will also contribute to the preparation and
diversification of the STEM workforce involving undergraduates, graduate
students, and a mid-career stage faculty member. The proposed research will use
laboratory and computational experiments to improve the understanding of the
fundamental fluid physics underlying the scattering of travelling capillary-
gravity waves from a surface-intersecting rigid barrier, where contact lines pin
the free surface of the liquid at a barrier's edge. The laboratory experiments
will use an acoustic method of airborne ultrasound reflected out the water
surface to measure the amplitude of capillary-gravity waves. The computational
experiments will concern inviscid linear waves in incompressible and
irrotational flow by finite-element simulations using commercially available
software. Specifically, the project will study (i) contact line effects in the
transition from gravity wave scattering to capillary wave scattering, (ii) the
dependence of wave scattering on the barrier's geometric parameters, and (iii)
the effect of menisci near the barrier walls where the liquid surface is curved.
Understanding how contact lines at three-phase boundaries influence the dynamics
of a free liquid surface is essential in surface-tension dominated fluid
dynamics. Prior studies involving contact line effects on capillary dynamics
focused mainly on the frequency dependence and the damping of standing-wave
modes. In contrast, the proposed research will fill the gap of knowledge in
capillary-gravity wave scattering from rigid structures with contact line
effects. Since the 1960s theoretical studies have attempted to predict the
contact line effects on capillary-gravity wave scattering, but progress has been
hindered by the limitation of ideal assumptions made in the models, and by the
lack of experimental data for the understanding of the fluid physics. The
proposed laboratory experiments will provide the first quantitative results on
the effect of contact lines on the scattering. The laboratory and computational
experiments should systematically improve the knowledge on the fluid physics of
the scattering and yield new insights on the influence of contact lines and
menisci, and on the dependence on wave and structure parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.