* 2306996
* Peanuts in Space: solving the thermodynamical conundrum in contact binary stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrej Prsa, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 597,089.00

The two stars of a contact binary system orbit so close to each other that they
share a common envelope, resulting in their distinctive "peanut" shape. Contact
binaries are ubiquitous, easily observable thanks to their 0.2-1.2-day orbital
periods and large brightness variations, and moreover appealing due to the
physics governing their observed properties. Most perplexing is the fact that
despite their generally different masses and radii, the two stars possess
essentially identical temperatures, indicating that they are in thermal
equilibrium and requiring a significant flow of mass and energy between the two
stars' common envelope. However, current contact binary models do not account
for mass/energy mixing. The principal investigator's (PI) team will correct this
situation by upgrading their modeling software PHOEBE to account for mass/energy
transfer by the introduction of a mixing parameter. They will analyze thousands
of contact binary light curves and explore mixing parameter correlations to
infer the physical processes driving this mass and energy transfer, leading to a
better understanding of these systems. This award will support a postdoc and
three undergraduate researchers each year, as well as supporting regular general
audience level articles to be distributed online through the IAU Outreach
office.

The team will explore three simple 1-parameter model extensions to PHOEBE:
radial mixing, lateral mixing, and magnetic activity. In each case mixing will
be assumed to affect only the cooler star, and that the amount of mixing is
approximated well enough by a power law. In each case the model will be
parametrized by the single mixing parameter "p", serving as a proxy to the
hydrodynamical underpinnings of mass and energy flows in the envelope. They will
evaluate the effect of “p” on the light curve, and since “p” is at least
somewhat degenerate with the remaining principal parameters, other parameters
will be considered to generate a good fit to the data and account for mixing.
Carrying out this same analysis on thousands of contact binary light curves
available in public archives, they will be able to study the correlations
between “p” and the degree of thermal and geometrical contact, and the
distributions of parameter “p” for each of the single-parameter models. Those
correlations are what will inform the team of the underlying physics, and “p”
will provide them with an essential guidance on how to properly formulate a more
advanced mixing model. This scheme is already implemented in PHOEBE for
computing stellar fluxes, making contact binary atmospheres a natural extension
to PHOEBE’s existing capabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.