* 2306544
* Conference: 2023 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (US FOE, German-American FOE, Japan-America FOE, and EU-US FOE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth makes it essential that
engineers understand research developments, techniques and approaches beyond
their own discipline. The FOE symposia serve as a catalyst to spur engineering
innovation and foster collaborative networks of researchers within the United
States and between engineers from the United States and partnering countries.
The FOE program has the potential to benefit society both by supporting
innovation and by increasing the visibility of engineering and the important
ways in which engineers serve society.

This award will provide partial support for four Frontiers of Engineering (FOE)
symposia, to be held in 2023. These symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering (NAE) in concert with international partner organizations, are
for early career researchers. The meetings to be funded by this award in 2023
are: German-American FOE (March, 2023; JÃ¼lich, Germany); Japan-America FOE
(July, 2023; Tokyo, Japan); US FOE (September, 2023; Boulder, CO); and EU-US FOE
(October, 2023; Murray Hill, NJ). The 2023 German-American FOE will focus on:
Sustainable Production/Circular Economy; The Hydrogen Economy; Neuromorphic
Computing; and Supply Chain Resiliency. Topics for the 2023 Japan-America FOE
symposium are: Computational Approaches to Address Infectious Diseases; Wearable
Robotics; Materials by Design; Circular Economy. The US FOE meeting will
address: Engineered Quantum Systems; Mining Resource Extraction/Critical
Materials; Combating Disinformation; Complex Systems in the Context of Health
Care. The EU-US meeting will cover: The Quantum Era Challenge; Future Challenges
in Additive Manufacturing; Green Hydrogen; The Computational Era of Life
Sciences. Approximately 100 outstanding young engineers for the U.S. symposium
and 30 from each country for the bilateral symposia will participate. Each 2.5
day symposium will include plenary sessions, break-out and poster sessions, and
opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships. Sessions will
consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations, and emerging
research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the symposium. FOE
symposium papers, abstracts, presentation videos, and slides will be made
available on the FOE website (www.naefrontiers.org).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.