* 2306827
* Investigating the nature and timing of development of the Eastern California shear zone (ECSZ) in southeastern California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lin Ma, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 244,152.00

The boundary between the Pacific and North American plates includes the San
Andreas fault and a wider region of deformation called the Eastern California
shear zone, which contains active and inactive segments. This project
investigates faults in the inactive Eastern California shear zone to constrain
the timescales and styles of faulting through time. This information will help
to understand the structural narrowing of the plate boundary and abandonment of
the inactive segment, which is important for constraining the evolution of
earthquake-producing faults in southern California. This project combines field
studies, detailed fault analysis, and geochronology to study rocks that were
deformed during evolution of the inactive segment. To do this, the project will
include a team of graduate, undergraduate, and community college students from a
largely Hispanic population who will each gain valuable experience in conducting
science and scientific communication. Students will also be involved with
outreach opportunities at local earth science events to interact with the
community. Relative transform motion across the Pacific-North America plate
boundary is accommodated by the San Andreas fault system, with a lesser, but
substantial, portion occurring within a broad zone of distributed deformation
known as the Eastern California shear zone (ECSZ). The ECSZ can be subdivided
into an active segment that currently takes up 20-25% of the relative plate
motion, and a paleo-ECSZ that is largely inactive today. The goal of this
project is to constrain the timescales and styles of deformation within the
paleo-ECSZ through field studies, structural analysis, and geo/thermochronology
applied to the well-characterized Bear Canyon conglomerate (BCC) that formed
coeval with evolution of the paleo-ECSZ. 40Ar/39Ar sanidine ages on tephra
layers coupled with detrital sanidine 40Ar/39Ar of the BCC will constraint
timescales of deposition. Thermochronology of basement rocks coupled with
structural and thin section analysis of fault rocks will document changing
strain fields as the paleo-ECSZ became active, and U-Pb dating of fault calcite
will constrain timescales of faulting. Documenting this somewhat cryptic earlier
history is crucial for understanding structural narrowing of the ECSZ into an
active belt and abandonment of the paleo-ECSZ. This project will fund graduate
and undergraduate students who will reflect the largely Hispanic population of
UTEP. Students will gain valuable experience with field work, structural
analysis, geo/thermochronology, modeling techniques, and scientific
communication. Outreach opportunities at local earth science events will be used
to build relationships with the community and community college.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.