* 2306340
* Do We Need Something Beyond Cold Dark Matter?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alyson Brooks, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 450,358.00

The gravitational force holding galaxies together tells us that there is more
mass inside galaxies than we can see — an unknown component we call “dark
matter.” There is roughly six times as much dark matter as normal matter in the
universe. The most recent Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization
Panel (P5) listed the identification of dark matter as one of the key drivers of
projects in this decade. So far, the only clue to the nature of dark matter has
come from astronomical observations. There is good evidence that dark matter
must be a particle, much like protons. In fact, there could be multiple “dark”
particles (like there are protons, neutrons, electrons, etc). If that is the
case, those dark particles may interact with each other, much like light
interacts with atoms. These interactions could leave an observable imprint on
galaxies. To date, a model with dark matter interactions is consistent with all
astronomical observations. In this project, scientists at Rutgers University
will undertake the largest-ever investigation into how interacting dark matter
affects galaxies. The team will use a large set of galaxy simulations to study
multiple, independent observables that could reveal whether dark matter has
interactions or not. This project will take a major step forward in
understanding the properties of dark matter. This work also establishes a
program to support and mentor first-year college students (many of whom are
likely to be from groups historically underrepresented in STEM) as they
transition to being undergraduates. The program will (1) develop a mentoring
relationship between students and members of the Rutgers Physics & Astronomy
department, (2) utilize cohort building activities to develop the students into
a peer support network for each other, (3) introduce the students to basic
research tools and get them involved in original research. These three goals
have been shown to increase the retention of underrepresented students in
science.

The research team will use a suite of high resolution, state-of-the art
simulations of galaxy formation within both a Cold Dark Matter (CDM) and self-
interacting dark matter (SIDM) paradigm. The initial conditions for every galaxy
run in CDM will be used to run the same galaxy within SIDM, for a direct
comparison of the effect of the dark matter model. The plan is to (1) examine
whether CDM or SIDM can reproduce the diverse range of rotation curves observed
in real galaxies; (2) directly compare the observed shapes of galaxies with
those predicted in CDM vs SIDM; (3) test the resulting central densities, sizes,
and stellar stripping of satellites in SIDM relative to CDM; (4) explore
supermassive black hole (SMBH) growth and merging in CDM vs SIDM. A strategic
advantage of the proposed work is that each test is independent and orthogonal.
At the end of the project, our understanding of the observational impact of SIDM
will be substantially improved, and direct tests against observational probes
will identify whether CDM or SIDM is a viable model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.