* 2306392
* I-Corps: An integrated tool for crop ecosystem monitoring, analysis, and prediction
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Xiangming Xiao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software system that uses satellite optical data, weather
information, and algorithms to support the precise monitoring, reporting, and
yield forecasting of crops and grasses. The proposed technology may help growers
to manage their crops in response to climate variation and extreme events such
as drought, heatwaves, and flooding. The proposed system may help sugarcane and
corn industries to maximize their biofuel feedstock production. Agricultural
retailers and insurance companies also may benefit from using this software tool
to reduce losses and increase sales.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an integrated software tool
for crop ecosystem monitoring, analysis, and prediction, which may be used to
assess, diagnose, and predict crop condition, yield, water use, and soil health.
As crop production is affected by many factors, crop growers and various crop-
related business often face moderate- to high-risk of low crop yield or failure.
The proposed technology combines satellite images, climate data, modeling, and
machine learning algorithms as well as in situ data to provide data and
information on crop types, crop growth conditions (e.g., greenness, leaf area
index, and biomass), carbon and water fluxes, grain yield, and soil health over
individual crop fields at high spatial resolution (0.025 acre). The proposed
software tool has been evaluated across multiple scales from individual crop
fields to county, state, and regional fields. The goal is to identify business
partners and customers who are involved in the production, processing, trade,
and consumption of crop products as well as crop ecosystem conservation and
sustainability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.