* 2306622
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing coastal resiliency in the Caribbean (PR, VI, FL)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Miguel Velez-Rubio, University of Puerto Rico at Bayamon
* Cooperative Agreement
* Xueying Han
* 04/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This NSF Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on redefining
resiliency for coastal regions, developing new technology to ensure resiliency
for future generations, and catalyzing economic development based on innovation
in the Caribbean. This project addresses the increased coastal vulnerability,
increases resiliency and sustainability, and informs policy while transforming
the region into a vibrant green economic zone focused on climate-related
intellectual property, manufacturing, and workforce development. At the heart of
the region of service, Puerto Rico serves as a "living laboratory" for
exploration and data-driven innovation; with a history of infrastructure for
manufacturing, a university system with eleven campuses, and key military bases,
the island is an ideal location. Key partnerships in the region form a robust
network of expertise, research capabilities, student exchange, and investment.
The multi-disciplinary approach to research and innovation will build a
significant ecosystem for discovery to address climate threats in the Caribbean
and catalyze a new economy to meet the need for coastal resiliency.

The project's activities will be organized in six networks focused on facets of
coastal vulnerability, including robust data collection, new designs to mitigate
coastal erosion, increased biodiversity, renewable and sustainable energy, and
policies to support resiliency. Each network will support the growth of four
pillars (i) R & D on Coastal Resiliency for a better understanding of the
variables of major hurricanes, climate change, and other factors, (ii)
Innovation to drive employment, business start-up activity and an ownership
economy, (iii) Workforce Development for a highly competitive, inclusive and
diverse engineering workforce (leveraging micro-credentials in key strategic
areas) related to resilient renewable energy, sustainable manufacturing, and
federal contracting, as well as train first responders who can provide vital
services, and (iv) Strategic Partnerships academic partners, industry groups,
government entities, incubators and an existing will play critical roles in
accelerating new technologies from the lab to the market. This project will
promote technology transfer and the creation of new technologies related to
sustainability and coastal resiliency based on the renewable energy-water nexus,
microgrids, and data-driven system integration, seed cohorts of startups based
on research outcomes and coordinate with regional and national early-stage
investors and venture philanthropists committed to economic development in the
region, ensuring maximum impact of research, supporting economic growth and
expanding inclusion in the ownership economy--- and thus setting forward the
path toward a full NSF Engine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.