* 2306442
* I-Corps: Commercial form-factor earbuds for unobtrusive and comfortable sleep monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Rikky Muller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a comfortable, easy-to-use, and discreet electroencephalography
system that would not only empower end users to track sleep and readiness, but
would also enable a whole new class of large-scale, easy-to-administer sleep
studies. A re-usable, comfortable, in-ear electroencephalography (Ear
electroencephalography) could also help improve the diagnoses of cognitive
disorders (e.g., anxiety and depression), sleep disorders, and epilepsy by
providing medical professionals with a new tool for observing their patients in
their daily lives. The downstream effects related to at-home sleep monitoring
and easier, more comfortable diagnoses include improved public health, greater
scientific understanding of the human brain, and healthcare cost savings.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a device for unobtrusive and
comfortable sleep monitoring. The technology uses dry electrodes and a wireless
recording system for electroencephalography and wellness monitoring through
commercial form-factor earbuds. Current clinical electroencephalography (EEG)
systems used to perform sleep studies rely on technicians to help patients apply
and remove the EEG electrodes. EEG electrodes are wet electrodes that rely on
skin cleaning and abrasion as well as cumbersome electronics. The required skin
preparation often results in skin lesions and hair loss. These system
requirements limit patient comfort, user movement, and the ability to measure
uncontaminated neural activity. While some commercial systems have introduced
smaller electronics and dry electrodes, their headset form-factors cannot be
comfortably used in sleep, and they are still too bulky for comfortable day-to-
day use in both public and private environments. This project will develop a
user-generic, in-ear electroencephalography recording platform that fits into
commercial earbuds, significantly reducing system weight and size to
dramatically improve comfort and usability allowing for daily wear. The proposed
platform also uses novel dry electrode designs, low-power wireless recording
electronics, and a widely adopted form factor to enable a new era of
comfortable, daily use, and at-home sleep monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.