* 2306943
* I-Corps: Mitigating Multidrug Resistant Bacterial Infections with Biocompatible and Environmentally Benign Nanoantibiotics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Hongjun Liang, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of antibiotics to mitigate multidrug resistant bacterial infections.
Antibiotic resistance is a global public health crisis, and “one of our most
serious health threats” according to the CDC. The world has witnessed a surge of
superbugs that elude one or more antibiotics at an alarming rate. This situation
is exacerbated by the lack of new antibiotics in the pipeline and increasing
accumulation of artificial antibiotic wastes in natural habitats that further
accelerates resistome development. Membrane-active antimicrobials (MAAs) have
been widely anticipated to be promising candidates for new antibiotics. However,
toxicity is one of the biggest barriers to the translation of MAAs to the
market, of which the indiscriminate hydrophobic interaction that disrupts both
bacterial and mammalian membranes is a major contributing factor. The proposed
technology uses hydrophilic nanoantibiotics that kill bacteria, including
multidrug resistant (MDR) bacterial strains, highly efficiently without damaging
mammalian cells. In addition, they have been shown to undergo rapid degradation
and deactivation by enzymes that exist in natural habitats when released as
wastes. This technology potentially may be used to solve the crisis of
antibiotic resistance.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of biocompatible and
environmentally benign nanoantibiotics. The proposed technology has demonstrated
that assembly of hydrophilic and antimicrobial inactive linear-chain polymers
into nanostructured polymer molecular brushes (PMBs) turns “ON” their
antimicrobial activities collectively, while disassembly of the nanostructured
PMBs turns the acquired activities “OFF”. In addition, nanoantibiotics have been
shown to kill bacteria by selectively disrupting the bacterial membranes while
remaining benign to mammalian cells. Because this mode of damage acts on
bacterial membranes instead of targeting biosynthetic pathways as conventional
antibiotics do, it is extremely difficult for bacteria to produce resistant
strains. Nanoantibiotics low toxicity to mammalian cells further suggests that
they have a great potential for clinical use. In addition, the environmentally
degradable nanoantibiotics help solve the long-standing problem of continuous
accumulations of antibiotic wastes in natural habitats, which alters the
structure and function of the microbial community in sensitive ecosystems,
threatens food and water security, and accelerates the development of the
resistome. The development of environmentally degradable nanoantibiotics may
represent a milestone in the search for new antibiotics and may have
commercialization potential to fight drug-resistant bacterial infections.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.