* 2306195
* Heavy Metal Recognition and Separation from Aqueous Media with Surface-Embedded Hosts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Wenwan Zhong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2026
* USD 457,729.00

The goal of this project is to develop a separation system that can effectively
extract heavy metals, specifically actinides and lanthanides, from water to
address environmental contamination. Removing heavy metals from environmental
water sources is a pressing research challenge due to their persistent risk to
ecosystems and potential harm to human health. Such a heavy metal separation
process requires molecules that can selectively bind actinides. However,
designing these molecules is difficult, as the coordination profiles of heavy
elements are largely similar. Additionally, liquid-liquid extraction systems are
less desirable than solid-phase extractions. The investigators will apply a
simpler and more efficient flow-based method that can be easily reused. The
research approach involves developing an innovative metal extraction system
utilizing flexible cavitand molecules. These molecules are capable of shape-
based molecular recognition and high-affinity metal binding, enabling the
capture and removal of heavy metals from environmental water. This project also
provides graduate and undergraduate students with interdisciplinary research
training in areas that bridge organic, environmental, and analytical chemistry
with materials engineering.

This project aims to develop flexible, small molecule cavity-containing
molecules known as cavitands that are embedded at surfaces. The cavitand
receptors enable the selective molecular recognition and separation of heavy
metal ions directly from the aqueous phase without organic solvents. The
flexibility and tunability of the cavitand receptors will provide a unique
platform that will allow strong selectivity for binding metals. The selectivity
can be tuned by adding external small molecule guests to the cavitand molecule;
these guests can be used to trigger the release of the metals from the cavitand.
The research approach combines the teamâ€™s expertise in surface-based molecular
recognition and column separation to (1) incorporate the cavitands in coated
capillaries for selective metal ion binding and extractions, (2) study the
kinetic and thermodynamic factors behind this selective recognition, and (3)
perform actinide and heavy metal separations and triggered release at interfaces
with aqueous flow. These studies will be extended to larger-scale applications,
whereby packed columns will be exploited for selective metal separation and
triggered release.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.