* 2306143
* Physical-Space Estimates on Black Hole Perturbations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Elena Giorgi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 223,924.00

The field of Mathematical General Relativity concerns the mathematical
description of space and time, focusing on the analysis of solutions to the
Einstein equation, such as black holes. One important problem in the field is
the mathematical proof of the stability of black holes, which is essential
towards understanding them as realistic physical objects. If stable, black holes
which are perturbed with gravitational (or other kinds of) radiation could
present a temporary change but would eventually return to their initial status.
The result of this work will be shared to the mathematical and physical
community through peer-reviewed publications and seminars and will be
disseminated to the general community through media articles, public lectures
and outreach events in schools. Graduate students and postdocs will be involved
in this research.

Physical-space estimates for hyperbolic partial differential equations have been
successfully applied to the recent proof of non-linear stability of the slowly
rotating Kerr family and to the analysis of the interaction of gravitational and
electromagnetic radiations in the charged Kerr-Newman black hole. The
investigators plan to develop a robust approach, based on the definition of a
combined energy-momentum tensor for a system of coupled wave equations, that has
the potential to be applied to other matter fields. They also plan to extend the
applicability of these methods to rapidly spinning black hole solutions by
making use of a refined analysis of how energy methods and integrated local
energy decay estimates interact in the presence of rotation. Radiations
perturbing black holes are described by partial differential equations, whose
properties can be studied through various techniques. Although some techniques
involving decomposition in simpler forms, such as modes, have proved to be very
successful, they have limitations in applications to non-linear problems and to
the interaction of different kinds of radiation. This research aims to extend
the known methods involving physical-space estimates for the study of stability
of black hole solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.