* 2306982
* Visualizing Photon Induced Dynamics in Polyatomic Molecules using Femtosecond Pump-Probe Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nora Berrah, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 182,323.00

The PI and her team will investigate the interaction of polyatomic molecules
with light. Molecules are the primordial constituents of matter that surrounds
us, from the air we breathe to the water we drink or the pharmaceutical drugs we
take to cure diseases. Light plays a crucial role in humanity’s livelihood - for
example, the rhodopsin molecules found in our eyes undergo an ultrafast
transformation when exposed to light allowing us to see. This kind of
transformation, which we call isomerization, impacts also technological
applications such as molecular motors and re-writable optical memories. Other
examples of the effect of light on cyclic molecules are the photo-synthesis of
vitamin D3 in the skin or optoelectronic applications in optical switching and
nanomechanical motors. These light-induced transformations of molecules hold a
central role in physics, chemistry, and biology due to their importance in a
wide variety of systems from the building blocks of proteins and antibiotics to
industrial applications. Of crucial interest is how such molecules transform or
break, after the absorption of light. This project, led by the PI and her team,
is to investigate in detail these ultrafast photon-activated fundamental quantum
mechanical mechanisms. This interdisciplinary research program integrates
education at the undergraduate and graduate levels, strives to produce a diverse
workforce and provides a comprehensive training in quantum science, programming,
and ultrafast laser technology. This training benefits students and postdocs who
are the next generation workforce in the STEM fields in academia and also in
various industries. The PI’s research has, and will continue to train students
and postdocs for several career tracks. Previous NSF funded students and
postdocs trained with quantum mechanic, technical and computational skills in
the PI’s research lab are now contributing to several areas of science and
technology, in academia, national laboratories, defense, and industries such as
financials, developing new laser technology and quantum optics. This research
program has additional societal impact through its outreach and national
mentoring activities of underrepresented groups.

This NSF research program will investigate time-resolved ultrafast light-induced
dynamics in polyatomic molecules in order to advance knowledge and understanding
of non-adiabatic molecular dynamics due to their important role in fundamental
physical and chemical processes. The PI and her team will contribute to the
understanding of the conversion of photon energy from light into chemical energy
via the physical and chemical mechanisms they will study. In particular, the
PI’s team will examine the coupled electronic and nuclear dynamics during photo-
induced chemical reactions with temporal resolution. Specifically, the team’s
goal is to investigate, at the femtosecond timescale, how electronic
rearrangement in molecules, subsequent to photon absorption, induces and effects
nuclear motion and transformation in molecules. The team will examine in detail
internal molecular energy conversion, atomic rearrangement in molecules,
transformation of molecules through isomerization, molecular bond elongation,
roaming molecular fragments that detach from the parent molecules but stay
nearby and form new molecules, cyclic molecules opening, bond breaking, bond
making and molecular fragmentation. The experiments will be conducted with
Ultraviolet or Infrared laser pump-probe techniques. The resulting charged
fragments will be detected using the coincidence technique of Cold-Target Recoil
Ion Momentum Spectroscopy (COLTRIMS). The underlying photo-induced molecular
dynamics will be revealed by ion-momentum imaging. This quasi-background free
differential experimental imaging technique will provide new, detailed
information on the aforementioned competing physical and chemical processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.