* 2306545
* SCH:Artificial Intelligence for Contrast-Enhanced Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Shuo Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,125,000.00

The instances of liver tumors and its associated cost has been increasing
steadily in the last few years. Diagnosing liver tumors currently requires
injecting patients with a chemical contrast agent while doing magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). These chemical contrast agents are time consuming to administer,
expensive, and have morbid side effects for many individuals. This Smart and
Connected Health (SCH) award brings together a multidisciplinary team,
comprising researchers from computer science, biomedical engineering, and
clinical radiology to develop an Artificial Intelligence generated virtual
contrast MRI thereby reducing the time, cost, and morbidity due to the chemical
contrast agent. This project will provide a diverse group of students and
clinical fellows with interdisciplinary training in machine learning, image
processing, and medical imaging. Additionally, this project will engage students
from middle/high school students (K-12 outreach) to doctoral students and
postdoctoral fellows.

This project proposes novelties in contextual adversarial learning, uncertainty,
and reliability-based analysis to enable fundamental understanding and computer
modelling of contrast enhanced imaging. The project proposes to (1) investigate
“contrasomics”, a brand new category of contextual features; (2) develop novel
cross-domain contextual models to detect, classify, and quantify lesions, and to
synthesize virtual contrast images that have equivalent diagnostic value with
real contrast enhanced imaging; (3) develop novel uncertainty and reliability
analysis to gain the trust of end users; (4) validate the models with liver
cancer/tumour classification using MRI. This project brings together computer
science, biomedical engineering, and clinical radiology researchers and proposes
an integrated multi-disciplinary education and outreach program to achieve the
broadest possible dissemination of the knowledge gained from this work. The
project also proposes potential future transfer to practice (industry and
clinic) and wide dissemination of advances to broad communities beyond the image
processing, machine learning, and medical data analytics domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.