* 2306566
* Targeted Infusion Project: Innovating Writing-To-Learning Pedagogy To Promote And Assess Deep Conceptual Understanding And Mindful Learning Across Authentic STEM Education Settings
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jie Ke, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,982.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project explores the implementation of the Writing-to-Learn (WTL)
pedagogy coupled with cognitive and metacognitive skills development for
students enrolled in STEM courses at Jackson State University.

The primary goal of the project is to use AI-empowered automatic assessment of
studentsâ€™ writing and metacognitive prompts to both assess student learning
gains and help improve student learning and persistence in STEM domains. The
proposal incorporates a virtual network of teaching and educational research
professionals to engage in professional development and exchange knowledge on
innovative instructional practices. Outcomes from the project will lay the
foundation for institutionalizing the effective pedagogies that facilitate
students' learning and skill development within HBCU communities and promote
collaboration among STEM instructors and learning scientists, particularly newly
minted HBCU academicians.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.