* 2306109
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing cyber security technologies in the Central Savannah River Area (GA, SC)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Gagan Agrawal, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on the Central
Savannah River Area (CSRA) and in selected areas outside the Greater Atlanta
area. The technical themes of the effort are the related areas of cybersecurity,
cyber-physical systems, edge computing, and the Internet of Things (IoT). The
confirmed partners include Augusta University, University of Georgia, Clark
Atlanta University (CAU), Augusta Technical College, Army Cyber Command
(ARCYBER), Savannah River National Laboratory, Georgia Bureau of Investigation
(GBI), Trideum Corporation, Bigbear.AI, and the International Economic
Development Council (IEDC). The region of service is well positioned for a
future NSF Engine in this technical area because of aligned interests of major
government entities (most prominently, the recent relocation and consolidation
of Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER)), academic partners that support vital programs
in cybersecurity and related areas, and a growing number of private companies.
At the same time, because of this area's relatively low socio-economic status at
the current time, this Development Award can have a transformative impact on the
area.

Cybercrime costs and the value of security solutions/services are increasing
rapidly, so cybersecurity is critical for the Nation. Moreover, as computing has
become ubiquitous in various devices around us, there is an ever-growing attack
surface to defend, implying opportunities for significant economic activity. The
components of this Development Award include: 1) Use-Inspired Research - the
academic partners have built relationships with government and private agencies,
including aligning research with a problem set presented by ARCYBER. The
relationships will be expanded to include other government and private partners
through several events and interactions and by supporting paid internships for
Augusta University students at local small businesses. 2) Workforce Development
- the focus will be on expanding enrollments in existing programs sharing
materials across different academic partners, and entrepreneurship training. 3)
Transition to Practice: Strengths of partners (IEDC, CAU, and GCC) will be used
to help transition research to practice and foster new businesses, especially
for minorities and veterans. An economic scan conducted by IEDC will also help
guide future actions. The proposed integration among the partners, together with
growing workforce development and synergistic activities to support businesses,
will prepare the team for a full NSF Engine in two years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.