* 2306411
* Forward and Inverse Problems for Topological Insulators and Kinetic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Guillaume Bal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 375,000.00

Topological insulators are novel materials with the potential to transform
communications capabilities using electronic (spintronics) and photonic
structures. The main reason is the transport properties observed at the
interface separating such insulators: transmission is protected topologically
and hence immune to defects and impurities. The main objective of this proposal
is to further the quantitative understanding of such materials and to
characterize their properties from scattering measurements. As a second
objective, the principal investigator will continue to develop the theoretical
understanding of several transport models that find direct applications in novel
medical imaging modalities such as Photo-acoustic tomography or multi-energy
computerized tomography. This project also provides research training
opportunities for graduate students. Mathematically, new tools will be developed
in the derivation and analysis of partial differential models to quantify such
insulators, in particular Floquet topological insulators and insulators
generated by gated twisted bilayer graphene sheets. This will involve the
development of integral formulations to accurately simulate transport properties
of these materials. An inverse scattering method will also be devised to
characterize the coefficients in the differential models from far field
scattering measurements. Another important thrust of the project is to propose a
semiclassical analysis of wave-packet propagation along conducting interfaces
separating such insulators. On the medical imaging side, the main objective of
this proposal is to analyze inverse transport models such as the Fokker Planck
and the integral geometric settings that appear in multi-energy computerized
tomography.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.