* 2306528
* The Inviscid Limit and Boundary Layer Theory for Stationary Navier-Stokes Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Sameer Iyer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 59,451.00

It is well known that viscous incompressible flows moving past solid bodies
develop boundary layers, i.e., very thin regions near the body's boundary where
the flow rapidly adjusts to the surrounding free stream flow. Boundary layers
are ubiquitous: they develop around bodies moving in air or water, such as
airplanes, ships, and cars, and near the ground as wind blows over buildings and
land. This project aims to establish rigorous mathematical results regarding the
stability of boundary layers, building upon recent mathematical advances made by
the principal investigator and collaborators in recent years. These mathematical
results will inform a diverse range of scientific applications, e.g., by
providing simpler reduced models which capture the qualitative behavior of
boundary layer flows that can then be used to generate accurate fluid dynamics
simulations.

This project is devoted to the rigorous mathematical analysis of boundary layers
and the inviscid limit for two dimensional, stationary, incompressible Navier-
Stokes flows. Three regimes are identified for study which correspond to three
different qualitative behaviors of the flow. The first regime will study the
stability of globally laminar, self-similar boundary layers. These boundary
layers have been confirmed to remarkable accuracy in experiments. The second
regime is that of reversed flows. These flows are observed after boundary layer
separation. Mathematically, this regime will require the introduction of new
techniques from mixed-type problems, free boundary problems, and many other PDE
disciplines. The third regime consists of projects studying boundary layer
separation, which is a singularity phenomenon observed in nature. Here, large
tangential gradients require higher-order boundary layer models to be studied.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.