* 2306273
* High Mobility Binary and Ternary Germanate Films and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Bharat Jalan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2027
* USD 426,233.00

Nontechnical description: An ultra-wide bandgap (UWBG) semiconductor is a
material that has a wide bandgap, typically greater than 4.0 eV. One of the key
benefits of UWBG semiconductors is their ability to handle high power densities
without suffering from breakdown or other forms of degradation. Another benefit
of these semiconductors is their ability to operate at higher voltages and
frequencies than traditional semiconductors. This makes them ideal for use in
high-power electronics, such as power converters, inverters, rectifiers and high
frequency devices. They are also highly resistant to radiation and high
temperatures, which makes them well-suited for use in aerospace and defense
applications. This project focuses on the synthesis and characterization of such
a material - a group-IV oxide-based wide bandgap semiconductor. This project
will further contribute to the professional development experience for students
from local high schools, minority organizations and community colleges through
education, training and hands-on workshops.

Technical description: Crystal structure and chemical bonding can have profound
impact on the structural and electrical properties of a semiconductor. Through a
systematic approach, this project is investigating the synthesis of group-IV
oxide-based wide bandgap semiconductors with high purity, controlled structure
and well-characterized intrinsic defect concentrations as an essential component
to realize a next-generation platform for high-mobility, high-power devices. In
particular, the project is investigating these structures in detailed structural
and electronic transport studies to exploit strain engineering of these
materials, and to understand, and control defects (specifically dislocations and
point defects), local structure, and electronic mobility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.