* 2306989
* Cosmic Flexion
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Goldberg, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 359,436.00

One of the great predictions of Einstein's Theory of Relativity is that light
can be bent by massive, astrophysical objects like stars and galaxies. This
phenomenon, known as gravitational lensing, can cause relatively nearby objects
to appear stretched and distorted, as if seen through the edges of a magnifying
glass. By interpreting those distortions, it is possible to figure out the
location of matter creating the lensing. Scientists at Drexel University aim to
measure the mass distribution of dark matter in the universe by looking at the
shapes of approximately 100 million galaxies. Since galaxies that are near one
another also experience similar distortions, the true location and distribution
of dark matter can be inferred. Scientifically, this work has a broad impact as
it deals with the most fundamental questions of how matter evolves on small
scales. As part of this project, the team will also develop a Cosmology Summer
School aimed at Philadelphia high school students.

This work involves the first measurement of Cosmic Flexion from large-scale
structure, well into the poorly constrained, nonlinear regime, using the Dark
Energy Survey (DES). This approach is modeled on cosmic shear measurements in
which the lensing signals of pairs of galaxies are correlated. Gravitational
flexion (the ``arciness'' of an image) is equal to the gradient of the dark
matter density field and is particularly sensitive to small scale perturbations.
Cosmic shear measures structure on scales from 2 arcminutes up to several
degrees. By comparison, cosmic flexion analysis of large-scale structure can
produce constraints on the nonlinear power spectrum from 2 to 20 arcseconds,
corresponding to the tens of kilosparsecs scale. The team will also measure
flexion-shear correlation functions, which will produce signals ranging from
several arcseconds to 10 arcminutes, bridging the gap between the two regimes of
cosmic shear and flexion. Finally, the same dataset and reduction can and will
be applied to estimate individual galaxy-galaxy lensing signals and produce
constraints on galaxy mass functions.The research team will utilize their
expertise to develop tools which can be used by the broader community, in
addition to providing direct estimates of small-scale cosmic structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.