* 2306877
* Catalyst Project: Research Experiences to Accelerate Chemistry
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Tuan Phan, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Texas Southern
University seeks to implement a project-based learning model in the Chemistry II
laboratory course to provide Freshmen students classroom-based research
experiences, as well as provide support students in a mentored summer research
program. As a result of their participation, it is anticipated that students
would acquire 21st century competencies needed for careers in STEM.

The project at Texas Southern University seeks to positively impact student
attitudes towards STEM education and increase student persistence in STEM
disciplines. The objectives are to 1) to reform the General Chemistry laboratory
course using project-based learning methods for first year undergraduate
students; and 2) to immerse undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
annually in an intensive 6-week summer enhanced learning and research program.
Students will be directed through the analytical process by using the scaffold
methodology, in which they formulate a question, consider sampling, prepare
samples for analysis, analyze the sample, report data, evaluate results, draw
conclusions, and determine the needs for future research. The project outcomes,
guided by an external evaluation, are expected to contribute to understanding
not only the success of the program, but add to the knowledge base of the
preparation of underrepresented groups using project-based learning methods,
retention of students in STEM disciplines, and student pursuit of advanced
degrees and careers in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.