* 2306429
* On the Long Time Behavior of Nonlinear Dispersive Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xueying Yu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 114,216.00

Waves are ubiquitous in nature and described by so-called dispersive equations,
from the light transmission in fiber optics to the charge transport between base
pairs in the DNA molecule to the particle interaction inside atoms. These models
are pervasive in physical and biological phenomena, but their long-time behavior
is far from well-understood. Here long-time behavior is a general term used to
encompass the notions of global well-posedness, scattering effects, unique
continuation of the solutions, and wave turbulence. Understanding the
evolutionary behavior of dispersive equations has a broad range of applications
in fields, such as, numerical simulations, optics, condensed matter, fluid
mechanics, and biology. The aim of this project is to understand the long-time
dynamics of dispersive systems while bringing new insights that will establish
novel approaches and models in applications. The project includes research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

This project contains three components. The first component concerns the unique
continuation principle, which is believed to play an important part from a
numerical point of view. In numerical simulations, a computer often preforms
computations on finite approximations of the domain or the data or both, which
may result in non-uniqueness or instability issues. A well-developed unique
continuation theory will provide better stability and reliability of the
computational results. The second considers dispersive models on waveguides, an
important model for data transmission. The investigator will also introduce a
model with waveguide behaviors that for the first time will connect a
probabilistic well-known Ornstein-Uhlenbeck operator to dispersive equations and
has the potential to build a strong bridge between dispersive partial
differential equations and probability. The last component investigates the
energy transfer phenomenon, which relates to the wave turbulence theory. Wave
turbulence theory has the feature of universally predicting the evolution of the
wave action spectral density of interacting wave systems, which will help with
forecasting surface gravity waves in the oceans, among others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.