* 2306331
* SCH: Shallow and Deep Personalization for Hearing Aids
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Octav Chipara, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,199,085.00

Approximately 44.1 million adults in the US suffered from hearing loss,
according to recent statistics. Untreated hearing impairment affects
communication and can contribute to social isolation, depression, dementia, and
reduced quality of life. The primary intervention for sensorineural hearing loss
and related psychosocial consequences is hearing aid (HA) amplification.
Unfortunately, only 15–30% of those who could benefit from HAs use them. A
prerequisite for the successful adoption of HAs is effective signal processing
algorithms coupled with personalization methods to configure their many
parameters to improve speech understanding, sound quality, and users' subjective
preferences. Therefore, this proposal focuses on developing new signal
processing algorithms and configuration methods that empower people with hearing
loss to meet their individualized hearing needs.

This project aims to develop two approaches for personalizing HAs with different
trade-offs in the degree of personalization, the amount of user effort required
to find a satisfactory configuration, and their effectiveness in handling
hearing losses of varying severity. It will develop shallow personalization
techniques for configuring the parameters of existing HA signal-processing
pipelines. These approaches provide more personalization options than state-of-
the-art over-the-counter HAs by using different sub-band processing gains,
compression parameters, and noise-reduction settings depending on the auditory
context. These techniques are most suitable for patients with mild-to-moderate
sensorineural hearing loss. We will also develop deep personalization techniques
for training and personalizing HAs that use deep neural networks to amplify
sounds. A unique aspect of this approach is using electroencephalogram signals
combined with user feedback to drive the personalization process. These
algorithms will benefit patients with more severe hearing loss or those in
challenging auditory environments. The intellectual merit of this proposal is
the new advancements in machine learning that are necessary to enable patients
to configure and effectively use their HAs. The proposed research is anticipated
to empower patients to become more involved in hearing care, improve HA
satisfaction, and enrich their social interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.