* 2306230
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Formation of the Foundations for Engineering Intuition in Structural Engineering with Mixed Reality
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Devin Harris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

The design of large-scale structural systems such as buildings and bridges
require practicing civil (structural) engineers to understand the linkage
between the physical built environment and abstract descriptions, idealized
depictions, and mathematical models used to explain their behavior. This
formalized understanding is often developed through experience and forms the
basis of engineering intuition. Students, or engineer trainees, lack this
engineering intuition and are known to have difficulty making these connections
and constructing mental models of the abstract concepts and complex systems in
the absence of first-hand observations, which are challenging to replicate in
the classroom. This project will utilize mixed reality technology, specifically
a mobile augmented reality application that is deployable on mobile devices, to
accelerate the educational experiences of students in a core structural design
course. In the classroom, the technology integration will allow for
collaborative (peer-peer and student-instructor) real-time engagement with
models of real-world structural systems aimed at providing the essential linkage
between physical representations and their theoretical abstractions. The
research will evaluate the impacts of technology integration on instructional
methods, student engagement, learning outcomes, and formation of engineering
intuition. The study will be led by an experienced PI with expertise in
structural engineering and technology development but new to the field of
engineering education research, with mentorship provided by an experienced
engineering education researcher with complementary expertise in cyber-learning,
mixed-reality learning environments, and relationships between spatial and
mechanical abilities in student learning. The collaboration will serve as a
pilot study on the integration of mixed reality as an accelerator of the
development of engineering intuition, a key characteristic in the formation of
holistic engineers prepared to communicate effectively in a technology-driven
world.

The research objective of this proposed project will measure the effectiveness
of mixed reality as a tool for the development of engineering intuition in
structural design and mechanics by providing students with a mechanism for
engagement with real-world representations of the complex systems they intend to
design. To meet this objective this study aims to: 1) assess the effectiveness
of a mixed reality pedagogical tool on students’ performance on abstract
structural engineering design-related problems; and 2) assess the effectiveness
of the pedagogical tool on students’ engagement in structural engineering
topics. The expected result of the integration of MR as a supplemental tool is
that students will complete the course not only with the “how” of design
process, but also with increased knowledge and spatial awareness of the “why”
and “in which context”, an essential component to the advancement of holistic
structural engineers. The research will build from the situated perspective on
learning through an empirical examination of the effectiveness of a guided
active exploration process to improve students’ abilities to visualize and
analyze abstract descriptions of the problem context for structural engineering
and design. In evaluating this approach, the study will answer the following
research questions: 1) does mixed reality improve students’ abilities to
visualize and analyze abstract descriptions of the problem context for
structural engineering and design?; 2) to what extent does mixed reality help
students formulate their understanding of complex structural behavior and
interactions within structural systems?; and 3) how do the students use and
engage with mixed reality content in their exploration of structural engineering
concepts?. The outcomes of this study will serve as the foundation for exploring
mixed reality in other mechanics-oriented contexts and for broader technology
dissemination to the engineering community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.