* 2306045
* Targeted Infusion Project: Curricular Innovation of Microbiology and Genetics Laboratories - New Strategies for Biology Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elaine Vanterpool, Oakwood College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 396,492.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Oakwood College seeks to create a transferable model for
growing STEM enrollment in lower division coursework and to, more effectively,
retain and guide traditionally underrepresented students into STEM degree
programs and careers. Specifically, two undergraduate Biology laboratory courses
will undergo curricular enhancements and implement pedagogical interventions to
integrate innovative microbial host-interaction and molecular genetics research.

The proposed project hypothesizes that innovative research into the laboratory
curricula will improve the quality of undergraduate STEM education at Oakwood
College by: (1) improving studentsâ€™ critical-thinking and scientific reasoning
skills; (2) increasing retention and 4-year completion rates of biology majors;
and (3) bolstering the competitiveness of undergraduate students for graduate
school. The overall approach will be implemented in four phases: (1) research
summer bridge, (2) research experiences in General Microbiology laboratory, (3)
research experiences in Genetics laboratory, and (4), peer research leadership
development (summer and academic year) and research dissemination. This project
has the potential to positively impact the retention and recruitment of
underrepresented students in STEM fields at two major transition points. First,
it may improve the research experience for undergraduates demonstrating the
relevance and applicability of biological sciences. Secondly, it will provide
hands-on, problem-based learning experiences that may lead to increased
competitiveness for undergraduate student researchers for STEM careers and
graduate studies. It is anticipated that the project will demonstrate the
efficacy of the two targeted lab courses for improving student learning related
to biological sciences and provide an evidence base demonstrating whether this
approach is feasible and effective in undergraduate education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.