* 2306215
* AGS-PRF: The Physiological and Volatile Emission Stress Response of Leaves during and after Repeated Whole-Plant Ozone Exposure
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Mary Riches, Riches, Mary Jean
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2025
* USD 100,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship project is focused on an investigation of
the impact of atmospheric ozone on biogenic volatile organic compound emissions,
leaf wax morphology, and plant physiology. By increasing the understanding of
the underlying mechanisms behind ozone exposure and damage to plants,
improvements can be made in the ability to predict impacts from ozone air
pollution on crops.

This research focuses on two overlapping areas of uncertainty: how atmospheric
ozone (O3) pollution impacts both plant productivity and plant emissions of
biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC). The objectives of this research are
to: (1) quantify the impacts of O3 exposure on plant physiology, (2) identify
how O3 exposure changes the temperature and the carbon dioxide (CO2) dependence
of BVOC emissions and plant physiology, (3) quantify the impacts of O3 exposure
on BVOC emissions, and (4) determine the ability of plants to recover from O3
stress.

The broader impacts of this research include a library exhibit and workshops
targeted toward educating students in grades 4-6. An educational pamphlet on
ozone pollution will be created and made available to teachers and the public
through web pages and the library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.