* 2306830
* Collaborative Research: BPE Track 2: Disability DCL - Capturing Narratives that Characterize Neurodivergent Strengths and Weaknesses
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Hamid Karimi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 06/30/2026
* USD 373,508.00

Neurodivergent (e.g., ADHD, autistic, bipolar) students bring desired
characteristics such as attention to detail, creativity, and unique spatial
skills to engineering, yet they are more likely to drop out of college due to
different barriers and challenges. Empowering neurodivergent participation in
engineering by understanding both the strengths and challenges faced will
significantly benefit the generation of creative and innovative solutions needed
to solve complex global and societal problems. This National Science
Foundation’s Broadening Participation in Engineering collaborative project at
Utah State University and Minnesota State University will approach
neurodiversity in engineering by engaging with the neurodivergent community on
social media (e.g., Instagram, TikTok) to understand their strengths and
challenges. Social media is a vast information source where communities share
their lived experiences and build community, and more specifically, the
neurodivergent presence online expanded after the COVID-19 quarantine.
Neurodivergent people share their lived experiences and interact with one
another to generate shared meaning resulting in new emancipatory language that
describe their experiences and emancipate themselves from deficit-based framing
and stereotypes. Such language embraces both strengths and challenges faced by
neurodivergent people which can be leveraged in engineering education to support
neurodivergent students. By engaging with neurodivergent communities, trust can
be built between researchers and neurodivergent people to work together to
develop better learning accommodations and resources. Further, this language can
be informative to higher education, for example, to write policy and develop
learning accommodations that represent and potentially increase participation
and degree completion of neurodivergent students. In engineering, neurodivergent
students will share their stories in engineering to share their lived
experiences such as successes and offer coping mechanisms to manage challenges.
These stories will be shared publicly to encourage other neurodivergent students
in their studies and inform peers and faculty about neurodivergence in
engineering.

This mixed-methods, collaborative project will identify emancipatory language
that describe the strengths and challenges of neurodivergent students in
engineering (neurodivergent refers to people who think, function, and behave
significantly different from societal “norms,” e.g., ADHD, autism,
schizophrenia). This project will first implement social media analytics to
engage with and identify emancipatory language in the public neurodivergent
community. Social media platforms (e.g., TikTok, Instagram, Twitter) will be
scraped for neurodivergent related content and analyzed using natural language
processing techniques (latent Dirichlet allocation and sentiment analysis). This
method will reveal common language associated with neurodivergent strengths and
challenges. Findings will then be used to develop a strengths and challenges
interview protocol for the next phase. The next phase will consist of two
narrative inquiries. The first inquiry will be longitudinal where 24
neurodivergent engineering students at Utah State University will be interviewed
over a semester to develop semester long narratives. The second inquiry will
leverage social media to recruit neurodivergent engineering students across the
nation to develop a variety of narratives. Expected outcomes will include
building trust between neurodivergent and research communities, developing a
lexicon of words to describe and conceptualize neurodivergence in engineering,
demonstrating social media analytics and natural language processing methods in
engineering education research, and developing a resource and narrative
depository for neurodivergent engineering students and engineering faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.