* 2306243
* Non-Perturbative Interfacial Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Samuel Walsh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 260,000.00

Interfacial waves are waves that propagate along a boundary separating two
substances or regions. They are found throughout nature, ranging from internal
waves in the ocean to spreading contagions in biology and defect patterns in
material science. Much is now known about waves that are perturbative in some
sense. For instance, if the interface is not greatly disturbed, its motion can
be well predicted using simpler linear or weakly nonlinear models. However, many
important phenomena fall far outside this category. As one example, following
the 2022 volcanic eruption in Tonga, tsunami-like waves were observed moving
much faster than linear theory predicts in shallow water and even seemed to
amplify in deep water. This project aims to deepen the mathematical
understanding of these and similar non-perturbative waves for which the
underlying systems exhibit intrinsically nonlinear dynamics, surface
singularities, or resonance phenomena. Progress in this direction will be
benefit the larger mathematics and science communities, and society more broadly
as they will bring predictive capabilities improvements and ultimately help
mitigate future disasters. The project will provide research training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

Internal bores are fronts that propagate along pycnoclines in stratified bodies
of water. They play a geophysically significant role in mixing, energy
transport, and oceanic circulation. Using global bifurcation theory and free
boundary elliptic regularity theory methods, this project seeks to prove the
existence of overhanging internal gravity waves and verify a conjecture of von
Karman regarding the existence and form of exact gravity currents. Another
objective concerns the time evolution of interfacial hydrodynamic waves. As part
of this project, the investigator will use techniques from infinite-dimensional
Hamiltonian systems to characterize the spectral stability of multimodal
internal capillary-gravity solitary waves, and prove that solitary waves with
strong surface tension are orbitally unstable with respect to transverse
perturbations. Understanding meteotsunamis --- atmospherically generated
tsunamis --- created by the Tonga eruption is another central objective. One
prominent explanation for their formation is based on three-wave resonance in a
two-phase lightly compressible Euler system. This project will give the first
rigorous treatment to this theory by constructing steady axisymmetric three-
dimensional solutions as models for the initial atmospheric shockwaves and exact
three-dimensional doubly-periodic steady solutions for exhibiting the resonant
triad. The final aim of the project concerns localized vortical structures
carried by waves. A hollow vortex is a bounded region of constant pressure
encircled by a vortex sheet and suspended inside a perfect fluid; their
existence and stability in the plane have been studied since the 19th century.
The investigator will construct exact water waves with a submerged hollow vortex
and ascertain their orbital stability, giving insight into wave-vortex
interaction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.