* 2306180
* I-Corps: Artificial intelligence-based software package for end-to-end structural health monitoring of infrastructure systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Togay Ozbakkaloglu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that uses the internet-of-things and/or fiber optic-
based monitoring systems to solve problems faced by structural health monitoring
companies related to data processing, interpretation, and storage. During its
service life, civil infrastructure should satisfy the requirement of safety and
sustainability for the designated operation. However, due to natural disasters
and extreme events (such as strong winds and earthquakes), structures degrade in
performance over time, or they get damaged severely and even collapse. For
example, America's Infrastructure received an overall grade of C- according to
the American Society of Civil Engineers Report Card 2021, indicating that the
nation's infrastructure is in mediocre condition, has deficiencies, and needs
attention. Structural health monitoring systems have gained rapid popularity in
providing real-time information for the safety assessment of structures.
However, structural health monitoring companies worldwide are facing challenges
in data processing, interpretation, and storage, which limits their ability to
obtain sufficiently comprehensive information about the health of infrastructure
asset that is being monitored.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of smart and effective data
processing, interpretation, and storage in the structural health monitoring
systems using conventional artificial intelligence and computational
intelligence. Conventional artificial intelligence in this technology will
describe the problem and build logical reasoning using explicit rules.
Computational intelligence, which comprises an interconnected network of simple
units, will be used to acquire information about the output from specific input
data. The novelty of this innovation includes the development of a hybrid system
by incorporating new techniques from both conventional artificial intelligence
and computational intelligence to automatically accomplish the process of data
acquisition and data analysis. A provision of cloud services in the core
technology is used to store data before and after analysis and evaluation for
further processing. Finally, this technology will interpret analyzed data to
detect and locate damages and make decisions on the deterioration level of an
infrastructure asset. This will allow the system to determine the required
actions before danger occurs. This technology will provide an effective way for
data processing, interpretation, and storage in monitoring systems in real-time
by dividing the processes into three main components, namely checking for
plausibility, short-term data analysis, and long-term data analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.