* 2306931
* Was the deep Atlantic dominated by southern source waters during the LGM?  A conservative view based on the oxygen isotopic ratio of benthic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 451,999.00

The cause of glacial-interglacial atmospheric CO2 cycles remains one of the most
important unresolved questions in the field of paleoclimatology. It has long
been known that Earth’s ice sheets expand when atmospheric CO2 is low and shrink
when CO2 rises. The underlying climate mechanisms that regulate CO2 levels
however, remain unclear. One possibility is that changes in ocean circulation
influence air-sea gas exchange. It has been hypothesized that expansion of deep
waters from the Southern Ocean limited the release of carbon during the last ice
age (~20,000 years ago). Reconstructing ocean circulation in the past is
therefore essential to understanding what regulates atmospheric CO2 over long
time periods. In this study, we will use a new method to reconstruct the ocean
circulation using oxygen isotope analyses of microscopic fossils from marine
sediment cores. Students from all levels, high school to undergraduate to
graduate, will participate in this research.

Earth’s climate during the LGM (Last Glacial Maximum ~20,000 years ago) was
characterized by lower atmospheric CO2 levels, cooler surface temperatures, and
lower global sea level. The Atlantic Ocean circulation was also likely marked by
shoaling of deep waters that emanate from the North Atlantic and incursion of
abyssal waters from the Southern Ocean. Our understanding of the circulation is
based mainly on carbon isotope analyses of microfossils that suggest southern
source waters replaced northern source waters in the North Atlantic. The image
of southern source waters dominating the deep Atlantic has become a defining
feature of the LGM, as familiar as well-known changes in pCO2, surface
temperature, and sea level. More recently, however, results from neodymium
isotopes imply the deep North Atlantic was influenced primarily by northern
source waters, challenging the canonical view of the LGM circulation. The goal
of the proposed work is to determine which of these two scenarios is most likely
correct using oxygen isotopes as a circulation tracer. The oxygen isotopic
composition of microfossils is conservative because it varies mainly as a
function of temperature. Once the oxygen isotope ratio is set at the sea
surface, it changes only through ocean circulation and mixing. The carbon
isotope composition of microfossils, on the other hand, is non-conservative
because it is also influenced by biological processes that compromise its
utility as a circulation tracer. The proposed work will benefit the paleoclimate
community by creating the first section for the LGM Atlantic based on a
conservative water mass tracer. The oxygen isotope results will also facilitate
validation of other circulation proxies and lead to improved model simulations
of the ocean circulation and its role in the carbon cycle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.