* 2306334
* Implementation Project: Transforming STEM Education at the University of the District of Columbia by Establishing a General Science Degree
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Xueqing Song, University of the District of Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 924,494.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This project at the
University of the District of Columbia (UDC), a public, urban, land-grant HBCU,
focuses on developing a General Science Baccalaureate (GSB) degree with
supporting activities aimed at retaining students. This degree seeks to allow
flexibility in preparing undergraduate students for the job market and graduate
school in many specialized science, technology, and engineering and mathematics
(STEM) fields, including STEM teacher preparation. The GSB degree seeks to
provide students an opportunity to explore and take advantage of the diverse
course offerings across UDC’s College of Arts and Sciences, College of
Agriculture, Urban Sustainability, and Environmental Sciences, and School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences.

The project's overall goal is to increase the number of students from
historically marginalized groups pursuing science careers. The objectives are to
(1) create and implement a General Science Baccalaureate degree, (2) develop and
execute a dedicated recruitment and enrollment program for the GSB degree, (3)
offer a comprehensive enrichment program and wrap-around activities, including
student research, aimed at retention of STEM majors, and (4) conduct an
education research study on the impacts of the project. The correlational mixed-
method research study is designed to show if a GSB degree program that
implements supplemental learning experiences and provides research opportunities
will change a student's persistence and perceptions and identity as a STEM major
and investigate the effects. The project is guided by an internal steering
committee and an external advisory board, as well as by the process of formative
evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.