* 2306769
* Hypoelliptic and Non-Markovian stochastic dynamical systems in machine learning and mathematical finance: from theory to application
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Qi Feng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 165,248.00

This project investigates stochastic analysis and numerical algorithms for
stochastic dynamical systems, together with their applications in machine
learning and finance. The first part focuses on the foundations of machine
learning/data science, which guarantees the theoretical convergence of numerical
algorithms (e.g., stochastic gradient descent, Markov Chain Monte Carlo) in non-
convex optimization and multi-modal distribution sampling. This project will
develop algorithms to solve such problems in big data and engineering, which
include uncertainty quantification in AI safety problems, control robotics
motions, and image processing. The second part focuses on the stochastic models
in mathematical finance and algorithm designs in option/asset pricing. The
applications in this part target efficient algorithms for path-dependent option
pricing with rough volatilities, which are expected to significantly impact some
computation-oriented financial instruments, such as model-based algorithm
trading involving rough volatility and high-frequency data. This project will
provide support and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.

The stochastic systems in this project possess degenerate, mean-field, or non-
Markovian properties. In the first part, the PI will study the "hypocoercivity"
(i.e., convergence to equilibrium) for highly degenerate and mean-field
stochastic dynamical systems and their applications to algorithms design in
machine learning. One of the proposed topics will focus on the (non)-asymptotic
analysis of the general degenerate/mean-field system and its exponential
convergence rate to the equilibrium (e.g., Vlasov-Fokker-Planck equations;
Langevin dynamics on higher order nilpotent Lie groups). As applications of the
convergence of such dynamics, the PI will design algorithms focusing on non-
convex optimizations and distribution samplings in machine learning. In the
second part, the PI will study non-Markovian stochastic dynamical systems
capturing path-dependent and mean-field features of the financial market. The
topics include path-dependent PDEs, stochastic Volterra integral equations,
conditional mean-field SDEs, and the Volterra signatures. The PI focuses on
addressing the fundamental issues, including the density for the rough
volatility model and conditional mean-field SDEs and the structure of Volterra
signatures. Furthermore, the PI focuses on designing efficient numerical
algorithms using the Volterra signature and deep neural networks. These
algorithms target solving path-dependent PDEs, path-dependent option pricing,
and optimal stopping/switching problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.