* 2306329
* Harnessing buoyancy-driven instabilities for enhanced membrane desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nils Tilton, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 408,664.00

Industrial activities in the United States generate large volumes of complex
wastewaters that are challenging to treat, because they have a high
concentration of dissolved salts. These wastewaters are often discharged to
local surface waters, sewers, wells, and land surfaces, where they contaminate
resources and ecosystems. This project uses a combination of computer
simulations and laboratory experiments to develop an advanced water treatment
process called membrane distillation, which can desalinate and recycle complex
wastewaters. Specifically, we show that gravity can be harnessed to improve
mixing within membrane distillation, and enable the use of renewable solar
energy to reduce energy consumption. Integrated educational activities include
summer internships for high-school students, undergraduate research activities,
the development of free textbooks, and the organization of student research
symposia.

Membrane distillation is a thermal desalination process in which water
evaporates and travels through a porous membrane that removes salts. The
proposed work solves two long-standing technical challenges of membrane
distillation. The first is cooling of the water near the membrane, which slows
evaporation and the recovery of freshwater. The second is the accumulation of
dissolved salts near the membrane, where they precipitate and clog the membrane.
We address these issues by orienting the membrane so that gravity causes cool,
salt-rich, water to sink away from the membrane, generating buoyant mixing
within the wastewater. We also show that this mixing can be strengthened by
actively heating the wastewater through a surface opposite the membrane. To that
end, the proposed work uses computational fluid dynamics and bench-scale
experiments to (1) elucidate the physics of the buoyant mixing; (2) explore
optimal methods of actively heating the wastewater using electricity or
renewable solar energy; and (3) validate the process against real-world
municipal and industrial wastewaters of growing concern. We expect the work to
broadly impact society by mitigating water scarcity and improving the
environmental sustainability of desalination processes with critical
applications to the energy-water-climate nexus.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.