* 2306792
* Collaborative Research: SCH: AI-driven RFID Sensing for Smart Health Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Harrison Bai, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 07/31/2027
* USD 299,612.00

Many existing health monitoring systems are expensive, uncomfortable to wear, or
can only be administered in a hospital environment. With advances in the
Internet of Things (IoT) and Machine learning (ML)/artificial intelligence (AI),
it is highly desirable to develop AI-driven radio frequency sensing techniques
to make smart health monitoring cheaper, more comfortable to use, and more
accessible to the broad population, while supporting excellent monitoring
performance. The main challenges to achieving such goals are the noisy RF data
and strong interference coming from the dynamic environment. A multi-
disciplinary team of six investigators with complementary expertise will work
closely together to significantly improve the state-of-the-art of radio
frequency sensing based smart healthcare provisioning and make a significant
step forward to fully harvest the potential of the IoT and ML/AI. The team of
investigators will also jointly develop a new graduate-level course on Deep
Learning Empowered RF Health Sensing and enhance their undergraduate and
graduate level courses. The project will also engage students by providing
hands-on experience with cutting-edge technologies that are at the very frontier
of wireless sensing, deep learning, and smart health. Outcomes from this project
will be disseminated through technical publications, conference keynotes,
distinguished lectures and tutorials, a project website, and open-source
repositories. The investigators are committed to broadening participation from
underrepresented groups, through their institutional outreach programs and the
NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Research Experiences for
Teachers programs.

This project develops Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) based sensing
systems for smart health monitoring. Specifically, several fundamental problems
will be investigated, and novel ML/AI techniques will be developed for RFID
sensing based smart health applications. This project leverages passive RFID
tags as wearable sensors for monitoring human health conditions to help diagnose
diseases such as Parkinson’s and interstitial lung disease. ML/AI-driven
methods, such as tensor decomposition, transfer learning (via domain adaptation
and meta-learning), deep Gaussian Processes, and federated learning will be
incorporated to develop effective solutions to these challenging problems. The
research agenda consists of four well integrated thrusts: (i) to investigate the
challenges and fundamental performance limits of the sensors; (ii) to develop
RFID-based respiration rate, pulmonary function test, and heartbeat signal
monitoring schemes; (iii) to develop RFID-based pose monitoring, activity
recognition, and PD detection systems; and (iv) to develop robust and fair
federated learning models for handling health data. The project’s algorithms
will be implemented and validated with extensive experiments in emulated and
real clinical environments, with a focus on two important smart health
applications, Parkinson’s disease detection and breathing-based interstitial
lung disease detection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.