* 2306068
* LSAMP BD: Prairie View A&amp;M University BTD Cohort XIV (2023-2025) Program, Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Dorie Gilbert, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,075,000.00

With support from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
this Bridge to Doctorate (BD) Activity will offer 12 talented students from
multiple LSAMP alliances the opportunity to pursue a doctoral degree in
Electrical Engineering (or in a STEM-related field) at Prairie View A&M
University (PVAMU), a historically black college and university (HBCU). The
TAMUS LSAMP BD program aims to increase the pool of PhDs from groups
historically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines and create a cohesive community of graduate
students across STEM disciplines within PVAMU. Through collaborations between
the Marvin D. and June Samuel Brailsford College of Arts and Sciences (BCAS) and
the Roy G. Perry College of Engineering (RGPCOE) at PVAMU, twelve first-time
graduate students in three RGPCOE departments and one BCAS department will be
nurtured for two years as a cohort community. The Fellows will benefit from a
program of academic and personal development activities and social support, to
sustain their commitment and success in their degree programs and advancement
toward doctoral programs by August 2025. The TAMUS LSAMP BD program will
increase the pool of STEM PhDs from LSAMP populations. Currently, the PVAMU PhD
programs lack diversity. Eventually, this project may help diversify the larger
STEM graduate student populations at PVAMU and beyond. .

The goal of the TAMUS LSAMP BD is to foster academic success by developing
Fellows’ readiness, motivation, and fortitude to complete STEM doctoral degrees
and by preparing them for potential academic, research, industry, or government
STEM careers upon completion of doctoral programs. To accomplish this goal, the
TAMUS LSAMP BD program’s objectives include (1) building relationships with
other LSAMP undergraduate STEM programs across the U.S. for recruitment, (2)
translating best practices and lessons learned from previous TAMUS LSAMP BTD
cohorts to foster the success of BD PVAMU, (3) preparing Fellows to gain
admission into and meet the challenges of completing doctoral programs of study
at PVAMU and other universities, (4) developing partnerships with other higher
education institutions to place PVAMU BD Fellows in STEM doctoral programs with
multi-year funding, (5) equipping Fellows with leadership and transferable
skills for future STEM careers, and (6) disseminating and advancing the
discovery of successful strategies to increase URM graduate student retention
and progression to doctoral degrees. The project will implement a rigorous
training program of activities informed by evidence-based theory and best
practices in higher education. The result will be an infrastructure for
increased retention and graduation rates of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM, contributions to best-practice strategies for graduate
student success at HBCUs, and the development of opportunities that lead to
educational and career enhancements of graduate students who are
underrepresented in STEM. As the recruitment pool of LSAMP baccalaureate
recipients includes a high proportion of individuals from LSAMP populations, the
project anticipates that LSAMP Bridge to Doctorate Fellows will be students from
these groups. Therefore, the project will contribute significantly to broadening
participation in academe and science research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.