* 2306135
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing climate technologies in Eastern North Carolina (NC)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Kenneth Halanych, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Xueying Han
* 04/30/2025
* USD 995,337.00

This NSF Engines Development Award will develop use-inspired solutions that
promote coastal community resilience. Challenges facing low-lying coastal
regions include climate change stressors, population growth, and a growing
socioeconomic divide. These stressors intersect with race, gender, and
socioeconomic status disproportionately. Economies must become more sustainable
and resilient to climate and population change and do so rapidly. Fast-paced
economic change is especially important where resources are limited, and
stressors can intensify. This project aims to use living ecosystems and their
processes to create and enhance products and services. The region of service is
eastern North Carolina, with its base in Wilmington. The focal sectors slated
for rapid development are coastal infrastructure, aquaculture, and renewable
energy targeting five aspects: 1) Engineering with Nature, 2) Environmental
Sensing & Signaling, 3) Ecosystem-Inspired Materials, 4) Ecosystem Genetic
Engineering, and 5) Ecosystem Service Measuring & Modeling. The project is led
by a diverse and responsive team of researchers from universities and community
colleges in partnership with Chambers of Commerce, non-profit entities, and for-
profit businesses that seek to develop a pipeline for translating use-inspired
innovations into marketable products while developing a robust regional
workforce.

To develop the future NSF Engine, this project will forge a network of diverse
partners able to hasten translation into practice, including offices of
technology transfer, innovation, and entrepreneurship (e.g., NC Biotechnology
Center, the Small Business and Technology Development Center, Community College
Small Business Centers, Prospera, NC Department of Commerce Center for Workforce
Solutions, NC IDEA, and the NC Black Entrepreneurship Council). Additionally,
the team will deploy stakeholder surveys to identify gaps in the entrepreneurial
landscape that must be bridged to make economic growth a reality. Community
College partners will build pathways to workforce development and business
creation. By completing this development award, this project will have
established: 1) a regional transdisciplinary use-inspired research network, 2)
strategies that promote novel R&D opportunities, 3) a cross-university network
of research translation expertise and capital, and 4) community engagement
strategies that build participation. Further, an External Advisory Board will
assist in recruiting the cross-sector leadership team of a future NSF Engine.
Through these activities, this project will create a network to promote
community climate resilience while establishing a robust and inclusive regional
economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.