* 2306667
* Enabling KARMMA as a Tool of Precision Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* EDUARDO ROZO, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 497,792.00

Gravity bends light. Consequently, adding mass in front of an image will distort
the image. Measuring these distortions allow us to determine the distribution of
mass that was added. The Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time
(LSST) will use this gravitational lensing effect to measure the distribution of
dark matter in the Universe, with the goal of better understanding what drives
the accelerated expansion of our Universe. Traditionally, this type of analysis
is done by calculating summary statistics: think of taking a map of the matter
density, and summarizing all that information by, say, the average distance
between peaks. This “compression” is done by necessity: predicting summary
statistics is “easy”, whereas predicting dark matter maps is hard. Scientists at
the University of Arizona seek to combine machine learning techniques with
recent developments to extract cosmological information from the mass maps
themselves. Doing so will ensure that the cosmological information contained in
the data will be extracted in an optimal way. As part of this project, the PI
will act as a volunteer faculty member in the newly developed TIMESTEP research
apprenticeship program at the University of Arizona, training undergraduates on
research and coding skills that will improve their ability to secure summer
research internships, be it REU programs or in industry.

The standard approach for extracting cosmological information from weak lensing
survey data relies on the shear correlation function. However, the fact that the
matter density field today is non-gaussian renders this approach sub-optimal: if
the information contained in its non-gaussian features could be extracted, the
cosmological constraints from cosmic shear experiments could be improved by a
factor of two or more. Fields-based inference has emerged as the obvious choice
for realizing this goal. The team proposes to build on the success of the KARMMA
mass mapping algorithm to develop the first practical and accurate field-based
inference framework. This work will overcome the need to run dark matter
simulations by using approximate methods for modeling non-linear growth.
Specifically, the plan is to: 1) extend the KARMMA framework to enable
tomographic mass map and cosmological sampling; and 2) train a convolutional
neural network to perturb the KARMMA lognormal maps into simulation-quality
maps. Efficient sampling of the posterior will be achieved through the use of
Hamiltonian Markov Chains. The full inference framework will then be validated
using simulated data sets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.