* 2306137
* Multi-enzyme immobilization in metal-organic materials for rapid and sustainable degradation of biomass
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Zhongyu Yang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2026
* USD 550,176.00

Non-technical summary/abstract

Contemporary life and society depend heavily on energy and materials sources.
Certain sources are non-sustainable, meaning that they cannot be replenished
quickly once consumed, while others are sustainable and can be regenerated.
Unfortunately, non-sustainable sources are running out rapidly; thus, the nation
could benefit both environmentally and economically from an improved use of
sustainable sources. Plants are promising sustainable sources, which offer
fuels, materials, and nutrients. Yet, these valuable components cannot be easily
taken out from plants, because they are trapped in plant skins. Typical plant
skins are composed of complex species, such as i) an intense network of
numerous, cross-linked large molecules, known as cellulose, ii) a bunch of small
molecules known as lipids which line up and assemble into plant cell membranes,
and iii) glycoproteins, molecules formed by sugar-like molecules connected with
proteins. These species build up a hard protection layer to plants, which cannot
be broken down easily. This project will develop special biomaterials to break
down such a protection layer. A series of enzymes, special proteins which speed
up the breaking-down of cellulose, lipids, and glycoproteins, will be placed in
the scaffolds and gaps of a solid crystal, known as Ca-MOM. These enzymes will
cooperate to degrade the protection layer of plants without generating adverse
by-products. The Ca-MOM crystal will stabilize and help re-collect the enzymes,
making them reusable. Meanwhile, the positions of the enzymes in the crystal
scaffolds will also be probed to understand the performance of the enzymes in
the developed biomaterials. These efforts will not only produce biomaterials to
efficiently and sustainably break down plant skins to allow for the extraction
of valuable energy resources and materials but also understand how enzymes
function in these biomaterials. The demonstrated strategy will also improve the
progress of science because it can be adapted to breaking down of other natural
sources which contain valuable components and require multiple enzymes to
cooperate. The research efforts will be bridged with an educational plan to
bring research opportunities to local underrepresented groups by involving them
in green chemistry research. This principle investigator will also develop an
educational program called Green Chemistry- Green Planet in order to introduce
the green chemistry concept to local elementary students through established
programs such as the North Dakota (ND) 4-H and Operation Military Kids programs
in ND.

Technical summary/abstract

Plants are sustainable sources of energy and materials, yet the valuable
components are protected by plant cell walls. The challenges to break down these
cell walls are the difficulty in degrading the intense cellulose network, the
major cause of cell wall stiffness, and complexities due to other components
such as lipids and glycoproteins, which also enhance viscosity and stiffness.
Using cellulases and accessory enzymes to degrade cellulose and other components
is the green choice of plant biomass degradation due to their specificity and
biocompatibility, yet the challenge is the need of multiple enzymes including
proteases which damage the partner enzymes. This project will overcome this
challenge by immobilizing three celluases, a lipase, and a protease on Metal-
Organic Materials (MOM) via enzyme-MOM co-crystallization. In the resultant co-
crystals, each enzyme is partially exposed to the reaction medium for substrate
contact while partially buried under MOM surfaces for enzyme protection to
reduce proteolytic damage. The developed biocatalysts will be demonstrated on
the degradation of a model plant biomass, followed by probing the structure-
property relationship of the resultant multi-enzyme/MOM biocatalysts differing
in MOM ligands using Electron Paramagnetic Resonance spectroscopy. The
hypotheses are 1) simultaneous immobilization of 5 enzymes enhances the cost
efficiency of and accelerate plant biomass degradation with reduced proteolytic
damage and 2) the biocatalytic performance of the developed biocatalysts depends
on the structural basis of enzyme exposure on MOM surfaces and MOM ligands.
These hypotheses will be tested through three objectives: 1) develop a
5-in-1/Ca-BDC biocatalyst for the rapid biodegradation of plant biomass, 2)
determine the structural basis of the 5-in-1/Ca-BDC biocatalyst, and 3)
establish the structure-property relationship of the 5-in-1/Ca-MOMs the
biocatalytic performance of the developed biocatalysts. The educational plan of
this project will provide opportunities for averagely 1 Native American student,
2 undergraduate students, and 1 local high school student per year to
participate in green chemistry research. In addition, an educational program
called Green Chemistry - Green Planet will be developed to enhance the science
knowledge of numerous K-12 students via the North Dakota (ND) 4-H system and the
Operation Military Kids program in ND.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.