* 2306984
* A Neuromechanical-Robotic Approach to Control Pathological Tremor in Upper Limbs
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kaveh Akbari Hamed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,660.00

Millions of people around the world suffer from pathological tremors, which
significantly reduce the quality of their lives. To date, there is no permanent
cure to pathological tremors. Existing treatments such as surgery and
medications can be expensive. They can also be invasive and come with side
effects. The aim of this project is to develop and implement a cost-effective
and ergonomic wearable exoskeleton to mitigate tremors and provide movement
assistance to tremor patients. The broader impacts of the project include
improvement in the quality of life of patients suffering from pathological
tremors, the inclusion of students from underrepresented groups, mentoring and
training of undergraduate and graduate students, and integration of the research
findings into classroom materials.

The development of the proposed technology will focus on novel
neuromusculoskeletal analyses, wearable exoskeletons, and human-robot
cooperative control theories, as well as their integration into rehabilitation
exoskeletons for tremor alleviation. The primary objective is to gain a
fundamental understanding of the interplay between tremor-related physical
movements, cortical signals, and neuromuscular signals. The secondary objective
is to develop a compact rehabilitation device embedded with a robust adaptive
controller to suppress tremors and assist movement in daily life. To pursue
these objectives, the research team will conduct a combination of theoretical,
computational, and experimental analyses to investigate the dynamics of tremor.
A model-based optimal control framework will be developed for tremor alleviation
and movement assistance, and a wearable exoskeleton will be designed and
manufactured for conducting experiments on tremor patients. The anticipated
impacts of this project include a fundamental understanding of pathological
tremor dynamics that furthers the development of better exoskeletons empowered
by novel real-time tremor modeling and cooperative control algorithms. The
proposed framework will suit exoskeletons designed not only for tremor
alleviation, but also for other rehabilitation goals. The generic methods
proposed for tremor modeling and cooperative control will also provide solutions
applicable to other fields of robotics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.