* 2306186
* EAGER: Community-Driven Ice Penetrating Radar Systems for Observing Complex Ice-Sheet Thermal Structure and Flow
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Dustin Schroeder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 03/31/2025
* USD 245,046.00

Understanding ice structure, depth, internal velocity, and basal conditions is
key to understanding current and future glacier and ice sheet behavior in
Greenland and Antarctica. Most radio glaciology research projects are limited to
whatever airborne ice-penetrating radar (IPR) data happens to already exist in
the area of interest. Collecting new IPR data is a long and slow process,
usually well outside the scope of individual research teams, especially in
resource-intensive Antarctic glaciology research. This proposal seeks to field-
test and validate two community-driven instruments that help address this gap in
Antarctic research: a snowmobile-towed radar as well as a UAV (uncrewed aerial
vehicle) system. Both systems are based off a common software control system and
share the same code and post-processing tools. As part of this proposal, this
code will be made available under an open-source license for other researchers
to use and adapt, along with instructions for creating compatible hardware
setups from commercially available parts, in order for them to be able to study
glaciers and ice sheets at higher capacity and lower cost.

The snowmobile-towed radar will be a multi-frequency, polarimetric chirped radar
system designed to illuminate thermal, material, and roughness properties at the
ice-bed interface. The PEREGRINE UAV system is a chirped radar with 56 MHz of
bandwidth built into a small fixed-wing uncrewed aircraft that packs away into a
single Pelican case for rapid small-scale surveys. The variables to be measured
by these systems are critical observational data for projecting future behavior
of the Antarctic ice sheet. The project spans two years and incorporates two
seasons of field testing planned for Summit Station, Greenland, due to the need
to test on a thick, cold ice sheet as well as the lower cost and risk of
supporting instrument testing in the Arctic compared to Antarctica. The period
between the field seasons will be used to initiate or continue conversations
with researchers interested in incorporating our instruments into future
fieldwork or adapting our core radar system into new instruments. This will give
us an opportunity to develop new capabilities in response to this feedback and
conduct relevant system tests during the second field season. A period after the
second field season is reserved for the development of detailed documentation
and preparation for the open release of code and systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.