* 2306216
* Quantum Noir: A conference series focused on Faculty, Researchers, and Students of Color(+) in the Quantum Sciences
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* William Wilson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 291,459.00

Non-technical description: This work will lead to creation of “Quantum Noir”, a
biennial Quantum, Nanoscience and Engineering conference targeted at researchers
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The primary goals of the
meeting are to educate participants of the scope and potential of Quantum
Science and Engineering, illuminate scientific opportunities nationwide, and to
network researchers from under-represented groups, connecting participants
“collaboratively” with leaders in the Quantum Science and Engineering Community,
focused on new technologies, national policy, and workforce training. The
conference serves as a training and recruiting event for faculty, researchers,
and students from under-represented groups into the Quantum Sciences. The
ongoing revolution in Quantum Information, Quantum, Sensing, and Quantum
Networking is a national challenge we must meet with all our resources, human
and otherwise. With this support, Quantum Noir will help bridge this critical
resource gap.

Technical description: We are witnessing the emergence of Quantum Science &
Engineering, a technology disruption as significant as the revolution in
microelectronics. The ascent of this new discipline demands we rally the
nation’s scientific community to address this opportunity. Much of the
foundation of this work is based in condensed matter science and engineering
where historically, there has been a barrier of entry for researchers of color,
particularly at small and minority serving institutions, due to limited access
to the extensive infrastructure and resources required to do world-class work.
The conference will serve as an important workforce training and development
event by enabling technology dissemination of the “state-of-the-art” from
Quantum Engineering leaders, directly to a new generation of diverse
researchers. The conference will create a collaborative nexus for researchers
and students and will allow industry and the venture community access to an
untapped source of innovators. The first meeting will be at Harvard University
hosted in part by the Harvard Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS). Quantum Noir
will leverage the community expertise to truly diversify Quantum science, but
also to build community, ensuring we are optimizing the nation’s talent and
human resources available by connecting all researchers with the available
infrastructure, resources, and training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.