* 2306190
* NSF/MCB-BSF: De novo design of minimalistic light-switchable protein binding domains
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* William DeGrado, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 740,797.00

Nature frequently uses an external signal, such as light, to switch on/off
protein function. Photoswitchable proteins in plants, fungi, and bacteria change
their conformation upon absorption of a particular wavelength of light. The
conformational change results in activation/deactivation of the downstream
pathways that control cell movement, growth, development, and other processes.
Photoswitching proved to be an attractive strategy in synthetic biology to
achieve control of various cellular processes with precise spatial and temporal
resolution. Thus, design and engineering of photoswitchable proteins present
great interest for both basic science and many applications in synthetic
biology. This project will develop and test new methodology for rational design
of minimalistic light switchable single-domain proteins that bind specifically
to a particular target protein in only one PSC state. This project will train
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students including members of
underrepresented minority groups.

This project aims to overcome the limitations of currently used approaches by
rationally designing interior binding sites for native and synthetic
photoswitchable chromophores (PSCs) into various small protein domains that are
well-behaved and are could be engineered to interact with variable targets. In
such designs, a binding site for a PSC will be carved into the core of a small
protein domain, with a cysteine or another nucleophilic amino acid placed to
enable proximity enhanced covalent PSC-protein linkage. With protein core
stabilized by ligand-protein interactions, the surface residues of the protein
domain will be evolved to bind to a particular target protein. Upon excitation
by light and isomerization of the PSC, the binding domain would exhibit local or
global unfolding and subsequent disruption of the protein-protein interaction.
Switching the chromophore back to the ground state would result in restoration
of the original conformation and the binding function, producing a stable and
recyclable light-switchable protein binder. Moreover, this project will explore
whether light switching function encoded by protein core can be coupled to the
binding function within a single protein domain, in contrast to what is observed
in the majority of native light-switchable proteins that separate light sensing
and output functions. This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the
US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.