* 2306365
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing neuroscience technologies to improve cognitive wellness (MO, IL)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Dedric Carter, Washington University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Goetzel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on a comprehensive
approach to addressing systemic regional challenges through neuro-related
disciplines. As the nation's population continues to age, with increased
incidence of cognitive impairments, and we grow our recognition of the brain's
role in broader health and wellness, the convergence of innovation from neuro-
related disciplines is critical to meet current challenges to life, learning,
health, and wellbeing. This project realizes that tech acceleration alone is
insufficient in emerging innovation ecosystems. The activation dollars afforded
by the NSF Engines Development award offer the necessary time in St. Louis to
organize and assemble stakeholders across the neuro, cognition, health,
education, and wellness disciplines to educate the youth, build a workforce,
translate the research, launch and retain innovative companies, and implement
the infrastructure for increased economic mobility through related research
translation.

Neuroscience continues as a frontier to drive curiosity and research, with major
payoffs in technology development and advances in artificial intelligence and
machine learning. Moreover, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and other debilitating
neurological diseases, as well as brain injury, stroke, and developmental brain
disorders, disproportionately impact underserved communities in places like St.
Louis, emphasizing the importance of a locally driven neurotech engine. This
project will build on an existing St. Louis biosciences innovation ecosystem and
nationally recognized research in neurology, neuroscience, psychiatry, social
work, education, and implementation sciences. The team has a number of
opportunities for early wins in technology/product usage and job creation,
including expansion of existing startups, newer technologies for research-based
services, and recruiting companies with commercial products and services that
match regional innovation needs. The project anticipates additions to the
regional workforce from these efforts. The project's work-learn models will
center the needs of the St. Louis metro's historically underserved communities
and enhance investments in career pathways for economic mobility, such as
focused apprenticeships. The team will train individuals from high-poverty
communities to advance commercialization activities with early-stage startups.
The catalytic capital to bring disparate funding opportunities together in the
broadest sense of economic development and impact are difficult to find. The NSF
Engines Development award period creates the opportunity to bring together
groups with disparate perspectives on the neuro landscape to provide valuable
stakeholder engagement that enables the team to prepare for an Engine proposal
submission and generate a significant impact in the larger St. Louis region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.