* 2306044
* LSAMP BD: Montana State University All Nations Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Craig Ogilvie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,075,000.00

With support from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
this Bridge to Doctorate Activity will offer 12 talented students from multiple
LSAMP alliances the opportunity to pursue doctoral degrees in STEM fields at
Montana State University (MSU). Montana is the ancestral and modern-day home of
many different Indigenous Peoples, yet American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN)
students comprise only 2% of STEM doctoral students at MSU. Broadly across the
nation, only 105 AI/AN students completed a research doctorate across all fields
in 2020/21. As a new Bridge to Doctorate site within the All Nations Alliance
for Minority Participation, MSU will work towards full participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM as well as support Indigenous self-
determination and well-being by providing significant financial support to AI/AN
doctoral students and implementing: 1) evidence-based recruitment and retention
practices; 2) mentorship and professional development opportunities adapted to
Indigenous cultures, values, and experiences; and 3) an innovative support
system that enables students to readily rejoin their degree programs if
temporarily called away to meet pressing family and community obligations.

In addition to empirically evaluating the efficacy of MSU’s novel Return to
Learn model, this project will support participatory and co-produced STEM
graduate research projects that prepare AI/AN students for 21st-century STEM
careers while ensuring reciprocal benefits with Tribal community partners.
Research projects will integrate Indigenous research methodologies and value
systems (Relationship, Responsibility, Reciprocity, and Redistribution) with
scientific and technological questions pertaining to national priorities ranging
from large-scale manufacturing of 2-D materials for quantum computing, to
advanced energy storage and conversion technologies, to biofilm engineering, and
infectious vector-borne diseases in collaboration with NIH’s Rocky Mountain Lab.
Planned professional development workshops will then include Navigating Academia
Professionally and Personally, Taking Charge of Your Professional Trajectory,
Indigenous Well-being, Creating and Leveraging Colleague Network Groups, and
Lessons Learned from AI/AN Alumni. This project will serve as a national model
for AI/AN students to carve their own flexible, culturally-responsive STEM
doctoral education and career paths that integrate cutting-edge research and
scholarship with Indigenous leadership and identity. Results will be
disseminated to our university partners in the Sloan Indigenous Graduate
Programs and The University Centers for Exemplary Mentoring. We will also
present findings at conferences that specialize in AI/AN education. As the
recruitment pool of LSAMP baccalaureate recipients includes a high proportion of
individuals from underrepresented minority populations, the project anticipates
that LSAMP Bridge to Doctorate Fellows will be students from these groups.
Therefore, the project will contribute significantly to broadening participation
in academe and science research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.