* 2306709
* Collaborative Research: SCH: A wireless optoelectronic implant for closed-loop control of bi-hormone secretion from genetically modified islet organoid grafts
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Yaoyao Jia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 07/31/2027
* USD 360,000.00

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic autoimmune disease that affects 1.5 million
Americans and 20â€“40 million people worldwide. While a broad understanding of T1D
has been gained over the past few decades, a cure for T1D is still not
available. Researchers at Michigan State University and the University of Texas
at Austin are collaborating to develop a novel framework for continuous,
precise, and closed-loop control of bi-hormone (insulin or glucagon) secretion,
using tiny wireless optoelectronic implants. This research is the first attempt
to use optogenetic tools, using an array of highly efficient, implantable,
Wireless (untethered and battery-free) OptoElectronic Implants (WOEIs) with a
negligible footprint and minimal invasiveness to control bi-hormone secretion
from islet organoids. This approach should pave the way for developing a new
technological therapy for T1D. The direct benefits to millions of affected
individuals worldwide include improved quality of life and reduced cost of
associated medical care.

The overarching goal of this project is to develop a closed-loop framework for
rapid, selective, and precise control of bi-hormone secretion from genetically
modified islet organoid grafts, using highly efficient, implantable WOEIs. The
WOEI will monolithically integrate a dual-color optical stimulator and an
optical glucose sensor with a wireless system-on-chip in an ultra-small and
lightweight package. A distributed array of such WOEIs can simultaneously
control many islet organoids for large volumetric coverage and better
uniformity. A wireless backpack worn by the animal will carry highly efficient
wireless electronics for safe power transfer from a wireless power cage to the
WOEIs, and wideband data communication with the WOEIs and with the end-user. An
interactive user interface hosted on a personal device (i.e., personal computer,
smartphone, etc.) will receive and analyze glucose-sensing data in real-time and
control optogenetic modulation in a closed-loop manner. This project is
multidisciplinary and will significantly impact research and technological
development in biomedical devices, stem cell biology, and wireless
microelectronics. Furthermore, this project is expected to have a broad impact
on engineering-/health-related STEM education through the integration of
research with diverse educational and outreach activities, such as project
demos/field tours, graduate and undergraduate research, teacher training, K-12
curricula, new course components, social media, and YouTube programs. These
efforts will collectively benefit the broader society by providing effective
personalized therapies for T1D management, engaging significant underserved
populations, promoting biomedical research for personalized medicine, and
training the US STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.