* 2306726
* Small Scale and Singularity Formation in Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alexander Kiselev, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

The project concerns the mathematical analysis of fluid mechanics and
mathematical biology. Fluids are all around us, and better understanding of
fluid motion is of importance in science and engineering. The project aims to
advance understanding of small-scale formation in fluid motion, a process that
appears in a wide range of applications and is related to development of
turbulence. The project will also focus on analysis of chemotaxis, directed
motion of cells or other biological agents in response to external chemical
stimuli. Here the main goal is to understand and quantify how chemotaxis helps
facilitate many biological processes from reproduction to immune system
function. Many chemotactic processes take place in fluid, and interaction
between the fundamental effects of diffusion, fluid flow and chemotaxis will
also be studied. These problems are at the forefront of modern applied analysis
and will require development of novel techniques that should be applicable in
other settings. The project will also involve the training of junior researchers
at a postdoctoral and graduate level.

The first direction of the project is concerned with small scale formation and
loss of regularity in patch solutions to the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG)
equation. The SQG equation appears in atmospheric science, where it is used to
model large scale weather phenomena like temperature fronts. The PI and
collaborators have recently discovered an intriguing structure in the evolution
equation for curvature of the patch boundary, and plan to use this insight to
obtain new results on ill-posedness and possible singularity formation in the
bulk of the fluid. The second direction addresses small scale creation in
solutions to the 2D Boussinesq system and 3D Euler equation. This direction also
seeks to develop models suitable to gain insight into possible singularity
formation in solutions of the 3D Euler and Navier-Stokes equations in the bulk,
suggested by recent numerical simulations of Tom Hou. The third direction
focuses on the coupled Keller-Segel-fluid system and explores the potential
singularity suppression by fluid advection. The project aims to establish first
rigorous results of this sort in the situation where advection is not passive
and is not in a perturbative regime. The final direction is concerned with the
development of a new class of models addressing the effect of chemotaxis on
biological reactions. The research is intended to go beyond regularity estimates
and rigorously derive scaling laws that may be of interest in applications. A
variety of techniques that will be deployed include novel comparison principles,
methods of Fourier and functional analysis, asymptotic analysis techniques, as
well as PDE regularity estimates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.