* 2306319
* Nonlinear Wave Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Hoefer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Wave interactions are ubiquitous in nature, the laboratory, and technology.
While much of the mathematics and science of wave interactions relies upon a
basic property of small amplitude waves, known as the law of linear
superposition, in which multiple wave shapes add together, in practice many
waves are of large amplitude and do not conform to this linear behavior. Some
examples of nonlinear waves include surface and internal gravity waves in the
near-shore environment, intense laser light in laboratory fiber optic
experiments, and quantum mechanical matter waves in experiments with ultracold
atomic gases. From multidimensional interacting nonlinear waves to the
interaction of nonlinear periodic waves and solitary waves, the investigator
will study the mathematics and physics of nonlinear wave interactions using
physical experiments and an approximation technique known as modulation theory.
This interdisciplinary research will provide a fundamental understanding of
nonlinear wave interactions with applications to fluid dynamics, nonlinear
optics, and quantum fluids. The project will provide research training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The investigator will
mathematically and experimentally study nonlinear wave interactions. This will
be achieved by constructing exact and numerical soliton-cnoidal (periodic
traveling wave) breather solutions, solving generalized Riemann problems for
colliding cnoidal waves, obtaining modulation equations and solutions for
multidimensional and forced nonlinear waves, and performing fluid experiments.
Methods to be employed include Whitham averaging, integrable system methods
(Darboux transformations), conservation law methods, multiscale asymptotics,
numerical computation, and experiments in viscous core-annular flows. To
describe the complex interactions of solitons and cnoidal waves, the approach
unites techniques from hyperbolic conservation laws and nonlinear dispersive
waves. The equations to be analyzed are models of geophysical and technological
significance, ranging from completely integrable, e.g., Korteweg-de Vries and
Kadomtsev-Petviashvili, to non-integrable, e.g., Ostrovsky, 2D Benjamin-Ono, and
conduit equations. The proposed viscous core-annular experiments will provide
quantitative tests of the modeling and theoretical predictions. The developed
theory will contribute to the field of nonlinear waves and to the understanding
of atmospheric and oceanic internal and surface wave propagation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.