* 2306647
* ACE Implementation Project: The DREAM STEM Project-Advancing Research, Academics, and Entrepreneurship in STEM Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Alade Tokuta, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,199,966.00

Achieving Competitive Excellence (ACE) Implementation Projects in the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
provide support for ambitious, potentially transformative activities that have
the promise of significant advances in undergraduate STEM education at HBCUs.
ACE projects create more and varied pathways to success for STEM students by
increasing intellectual and evidence-based resources that advance STEM education
and research. The DREAM STEM ACE project at North Carolina Central University
seeks to enhance STEM learning environments and student learning outcomes
through advancing research, instruction, and STEM entrepreneurship. The project
focuses on developing competitive, adaptable STEM professionals with strong
identities as scientists and skills in leading the new STEM economy. This
significant paradigm shift will help sustain studentâ€™s interest through
matriculation and build their ability to innovate and work in commercializing
STEM and STEM careers.

The DREAM STEM ACE project seeks to integrate multiple strategies such as
proactive advising, academic support services, calculus and physics bootcamps,
learning assistants and peer tutoring, and mentoring for both students and
faculty. The integration of STEM skill development and entrepreneurship is
designed to help students see themselves as innovators and contributors to the
economic landscape. Innovation through design opportunities include research,
discovery, and innovation summer institutes (RDI), course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs), and problem-based learning (PBL) integration. A
Science Innovation Scholar designation will identify those students committed to
developing entrepreneurial thinking at an advanced level. The project seeks to
grow 3+2 dual degree offerings to include Science and Engineering programs,
elevate STEM entrepreneurship in the region and nationally, and increase STEM
education research among faculty through learning circles. A STEM education
research project will investigate the differences in effect on academic outcomes
of STEM students who participate in the different mastery experiences offered by
the DREAM ACE Program. The project represents an innovative and holistic
approach to increasing retention, completion, and higher degree attainment for
HBCU STEM students. This project has potential for far-reaching impacts to
students, faculty, the institution, industry partners, and the regional economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.