* 2306975
* Theoretical Studies of Surface Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
and the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC) Programs in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico and
his research team aim to advance the fundamental understanding of dynamics for
atomic and molecular interactions with metal and semiconductor surfaces using
computational methods. Professor Guo and his research group will focus on the
computational characterization of elementary processes such as adsorption,
desorption, scattering, diffusion, and reaction to provide systematic and
comprehensive insights into surface reaction dynamics. The knowledge gained from
these fundamental studies has the potential to help establish key principles and
predictive models for interfacial phenomena thus allowing for better elucidation
of important chemical and physical processes at surfaces ranging from corrosion,
device fabrication, and heterogeneous catalysis. The students engaged in this
work will gain valuable experience in computational research, which will be
enhanced through collaborations with experimentalists.

An accurate description of energy dissipation in surface processes via both
adiabatic and nonadiabatic pathways is sought using density functional theory
(DFT), machine learning, as well as classical, semi-classical, and quantum
mechanical methods. DFT will be used for understanding the electronic structure
of interfacial systems; machine learning will be used for representing high-
dimensional potential energy surfaces and other properties, while a combination
of classical, semi-classical, and quantum mechanical methods will also be used
for simulating nuclear dynamics. Because adiabatic and nonadiabatic pathways are
altered by phonons and electron-hole pairs at surfaces, Professor Guo and his
group will investigate how energy flow and bond forming/breaking events vary at
metal and semiconductor interfaces. This includes investigations of energy
dissipation of hot adsorbates, atomic scattering from semiconductor surfaces,
vibrational excitation effects in Eley-Rideal reactions on metals, post-
transition state dynamics in decomposition/desorption reactions from metal
surfaces, and quantum effects in surface reaction rates on metals. Specific
objectives include a better understanding of non-Born-Oppenheimer effects,
nuclear quantum effects, and mode specificity in reactivity and energy disposal.
Collaboration with experimentalists groups will help guide the computational
studies so that the complex interplay of energy transfer and chemical
transformation on solid surfaces can be better understood.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.