* 2306659
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Improving Older Adults' Mobility and Gait Ability in Real-World Ambulation with a Smart Robotic Ankle-Foot Orthosis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Xiangrong Shen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2027
* USD 479,620.00

This project will develop a novel exoskeleton to improve walking in real-world
environments. When people age and their muscle functions decline, it can limit
their ability to generate enough ankle push-off power to walk normally.
Mobility-challenged older adults often walk unnaturally and inefficiently. For
example, they may compensate for reduced ankle push-off action by overusing the
hip. This behavior not only affects the long-term health of the related leg
joints, but also causes accelerated decline of physical mobility. Such mobility
decline has profound impacts on older adults’ lifestyles, as well as their long-
term physical and psychological health. As walking speed decreases, an elderly
individual may experience unexpected difficulties in his/her daily activities
(e.g., being unable to cross a busy street before the light changes). When
walking becomes more strenuous, an older adult is more likely to be physically
inactive and suffer from the multiple health problems associated with such a
sedentary lifestyle (high blood pressure, obesity, depression, etc.). Motivated
by this significant challenge, our research in this project will be dedicated to
the development of a new robotic ankle-foot orthosis (exoskeleton) system to
assist the user’s ankle movement when walking in real-world environments. With
the robotic orthosis’ assistance, older adults may walk more naturally and
efficiently with the enhanced ankle push-off, and thus enjoy significantly
improved gait ability and physical mobility in their daily lives.

The project will conduct multiple research activities towards the creation of
the proposed robotic ankle-foot orthosis (AFO) system. It will design and
fabricate a compact and lightweight Daily-Use Robotic Ankle-Foot Orthosis (DUR-
AFO) to provide the desired physical assistance with little additional load to
the user. Through its powered assistance to the ankle, the DUR-AFO is
anticipated to induce elderly individuals to augment their ankle push-off for a
more natural and efficient gait (closer to younger healthy gait) and thus
improve their gait ability. Further, the project will conduct biomechanical
research to investigate the human gait-control mechanisms under independently
controlled bilateral robot assistance in real-world locomotion (walking and
turning); we will also explore the novel approach of using real-time information
feedback (vibrotactile prompts, audio cues, etc.) to empower and motivate users
to maintain a desired level of muscle efforts while enjoying the powered
assistance by the DUR-AFO. Finally, the project will develop a novel
Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based cyber system as the basis of the human-robot
synergistic collaborative system, providing multiple important functions such as
adapting the robot control parameters for gait quality optimization, determining
the real-time feedback to the human user, and identifying the human motion
intent in the form of the desired mode of locomotion. Overall, this novel human-
robot synergistic collaboration framework not only optimizes the performance of
the robot assistance to the human movement, but also promotes the human user’s
beneficial behavioral changes (“maintaining a desired level of muscle efforts in
walking exercise”) towards the shared goal of the human-robot system (“improving
the human’s gait ability and overall mobility in daily-life activities”). This
project is jointly funded by Smart and Connected Health and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.