* 2306254
* Anomalous Diffusion: Physical Origins and Mathematical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Liping Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 85,882.00

Diffusion is the physical process of particles or molecules gradually become
uniformly distributed in an ambient medium, e.g., the dispersal of an ink drop
in water. Anomalous diffusion refers to instances when the process deviates
significantly from its usual behavior, and it manifests in two distinct ways:
subdiffusion when solute particles move much slower than expected, and
superdiffusion when solute particles cover larger distances in shorter
timescales, exhibiting more erratic behavior. Diffusion dictates important
physical properties of materials (e.g., electrical or heat conductivities) and
phenomena in complex systems (e.g., human body). By studying the physical
origins and mathematical intricacies of anomalous diffusions, the project will
enhance the fundamental understanding of diffusion processes in diverse fields,
ranging from physics and chemistry to biology and environmental science. The
scientific goal is to establish the quantitative relationship between the
microstructural and physical properties of the particle and ambient medium and
the measurable generalized diffusivity and its scaling laws. The project will
provide research training opportunities for graduate students. The investigator
will consider factors that are observed to affect diffusion processes, such as
anisotropy, heterogeneity, and deformability of particles, and the
viscoelasticity of the medium and externally applied electromagnetic fields and
aim to scale up from microscopic stochastic differential equations to
macroscopic fractional differential equations, using a systematic multiscale
analysis approach. The goal is to extend the classical Stokes-Einstein framework
and address technical challenges related to power laws, non-standard Brownian
motions, and anomalous diffusions. On a microscopic level, the project considers
the complete set of multiphysics field equations governing the behavior of
particles and the ambient medium. On a macroscopic level, the aim is to derive
effective evolution equations for the concentration or probability distribution
function of particles at different time scales. This involves coarse-graining
the microscopic equation of motion and identifying distinct diffusional
behaviors within different time regimes. Multiscale analysis methods are
employed to uncover the mathematical and physical origins of fractional
differential equations. By exploring how these equations emerge and how their
solutions impact anomalous diffusions, the project will result in a deeper
understanding of the underlying physical mechanism.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.