* 2306450
* Targeted Infusion Project: Fusing Social Science and Forensics to Enhance Preparedness for Modern Criminal Justice Careers
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Genevieve Ritchie-Ewing, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,855.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Central State University’s Department of Social and
Behavioral Sciences (SBS) seeks to develop a Forensic Studies minor, featuring
interdisciplinary studies between Chemistry, Social Sciences and Behavioral
Sciences, emphasizing cultural diversity and enhanced understanding of STEM
fields associated with forensics. Given that African Americans are
underrepresented in forensic fields, this project leverages student interest in
forensics at an HBCU to increase workforce diversity through evidence-based,
innovative techniques including training in inquiry-based scientific
experimentation.

The objectives of this project include: 1) developing a new forensics course in
each of the following fields - psychology, social work, anthropology, 2)
establishing a Forensic Studies Laboratory to bolster the technological capacity
of the institution and serve as a teaching and learning space for forensic
courses, and 3) creating a Forensic Studies minor that requires students to
complete 24 semester credit hours in multiple STEM disciplines. The proposed
minor degree program combines training in cultural diversity and understanding
with the basic scientific principles and methods that undergird forensic STEM
fields. The required and elective forensic science chemistry immerses students
in the fundamental laboratory rules and methodologies used in forensic
toxicology, serology, and DNA analyses. In addition, STEM social science courses
such as Crime Scene Analysis and Introduction to Forensic Anthropology expands
students’ STEM education by focusing on the evidence collection methods at crime
scenes, whereby students will gain hands on experience. It is anticipated that
efforts to expand and strengthen the institutional academic offerings in
forensics has the potential to contribute to increased workforce diversity in
STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.