* 2306968
* FET: Small: Entanglement Estimation for Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lu Wei, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,057.00

Quantum entanglement is the physical resource that enables quantum computing and
other quantum technologies. Although the problem of estimating the degree of
entanglement of quantum states has a relatively long history, this issue and its
consequences are far from being fully understood. In particular, a quantitative
understanding of how the amount and type of available entanglement relates to
the performance of quantum algorithms remains largely elusive despite the well-
known fact that entanglement empowers the computational speedups over classical
algorithms. This project aims to address this challenge by developing a new
framework for the analysis and design of quantum algorithms by connecting
algorithm performance to the degree of entanglement of quantum states. In the
literature, quantum circuits have been the most pervasive model to understand
the performance of quantum algorithms. The circuitry models are, however,
limited to the study of computational complexity of quantum algorithms, which do
not directly exploit nor quantify entanglement as a fundamental resource for
algorithm analysis. The framework presented in this project will complement the
existing one leading to new perspectives in quantum algorithm development.
During the course of the project a new course on quantum algorithms will be
developed, adding to a long-term goal of a Graduate Certificate Program on
quantum computing, traditional computer science courses will be updated with
either prerequisite materials or introductions on quantum information science.
To increase awareness of quantum science and its diverse career opportunities,
the research team will continue to host outreach workshops for high school STEM
educators to develop effective quantum science curricular and to improve
confidence in teaching the subject to high school students.

This project studies the theory of entanglement estimation, which is based on
the concept of generic random states. Generic states are quantum states
generated at random according to certain distributions. The use of generic
random states has become increasingly important in modern quantum science.
Ensembles of random states underlie our understanding of complexity of quantum
circuits as well as the development of entanglement estimation theory. Random
states also find applications in benchmarking quantum devices and testing
quantum advantage. The focus of Thrust 1 is on entropy-based estimation and
metric-based estimation. For entropy-based estimation, the exact statistical
performance of the generalized entropy that reduces to the standard entropies
including Renyi entropy, von Neumann entropy, and quantum purity will be
obtained. For metric-based estimation, the non-asymptotic behavior of key
entanglement metrics of fidelity and volumes in quantum computing will be
investigated. In Thrust 2, major generic state models will be utilized to
uncover the deep connection between entanglement estimators and algorithm
performance. The focus is on quantum circuit cutting algorithms in the context
of state tomography and quantum simulation algorithms in the context of quantum
optimization algorithms. An integral part of the project will be the evaluation
and verification of some of the project findings using IBM Quantum Simulators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.