* 2306684
* Proactive Safety Improvement via crowdsourcing Live Curve Safety Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Yichang Tsai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 491,936.00

This project will create novel methodologies for assessing, managing, and
improving the safety conditions of horizontal curves on roadway networks. In the
US, a disproportionately high number of serious vehicle crashes occur on
horizontal curves (25 percent of all fatal crashes), despite curves accounting
for only 5 percent of total highway mileage. The advisory speed of curves can
change due to pavement condition changes caused by pavement aging and distress,
and curve geometry change can be caused by resurfacing and maintenance. This can
lead to a higher risk of crashes if the curve advisory speed has not been
assessed, monitored, and adjusted in a timely manner. However, the current
network-level curve safety assessment practices are labor-intensive, time-
consuming, and costly for engineers, resulting in problematic curves often being
identified only after crashes occur. To address this issue, this project aims to
develop new methodologies that leverage low-cost mobile devices, intra-agency
crowdsourcing, advanced and scalable algorithms, and a novel confidence-driven,
decision-making method that will make cost-effective and frequent curve safety
assessments technically and economically feasible. The methodologies that will
be developed in this project will result in significant savings in terms of cost
and labor for transportation agencies and will promote transportation safety
equity, especially for agencies with limited resources. The research outcomes
will lay a solid foundation for advancing the development of future technologies
and tools, and, most importantly, they will take a big step towards development
of a safe system that saves lives by transforming the reactive safety management
practices into proactive roadway safety management practices.

The objectives of this project are to develop and validate two methodologies for
network-level curve safety assessment by taking a multidisciplinary approach.
The first methodology is a crowdsourced multi-run curve safety assessment
methodology that will address the technical challenges in the state-of-art
technologies related to different vehicle types, suspension properties and
driver behaviors when scaling up from individual curve safety assessment to
network-wide assessment with a crowdsourcing framework. This methodology will
use a novel seed-propagation model and an iterative convergence feedback model
combined with the curve-driving kinematics relationship and spatial-temporal
analysis for simultaneous estimation of vehicle suspension and curve geometric
properties. The second methodology is a trajectory and roadway geometry-
dependent confidence level methodology that will enable informed, data-driven
decision-making by quantitatively evaluating the confidence level of the
computed decision-making outcomes, such as advisory speed, based on a vehicle’s
trajectory and roadway geometry. The outcomes of this project will also be
integrated into a wide range of classroom and research activities to train the
next generation of scientists, engineers, and policymakers on innovative
technologies that will promote proactive safety management practices and
transportation safety equity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.