* 2306211
* Program Assessment Conference for Mathematics: Creating Tools for Math Departments to Self-Assess Professional Development Programs for their Graduate Student Instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Lauren Clark, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/29/2024
* USD 99,999.00

This project serves the national interest by developing tools that will allow
college mathematics departments to better prepare graduate student instructors
for their duties in the classroom. Graduate students play a critical role in
early undergraduate mathematics, serving as teaching assistants and lead
instructors for a substantive proportion of first- and second-year courses at
many institutions. Recognizing that most beginning graduate students do not have
prior experience as educators, many departments now provide Professional
Development for Teaching (PDT) for graduate student instructors in mathematics.
The specifics of PDT programs can vary across institutions, and is often
tailored to local factors including the students being served in early courses.
To sustain and improve these programs, however, departments and administrators
must be able to assess their effectiveness and engage in continuous improvement
efforts. The Program Assessment Conference for Mathematics will foster a
partnership among those who implement, those who oversee, and those who evaluate
the professional development of mathematics graduate students. This project will
work toward the creation of a flexible assessment tool. Sustainable programs are
ones who understand and can share their stories of impact and improvement, and
the project-created protocol will empower mathematics departments to self-assess
their professional development programs for graduate students. A high-quality
tool will not only improve undergraduate education, but will also propagate
improvement to other campuses because many graduate students are future faculty.

In order to develop and refine the protocol, the workshop will take part in two
phases. Drawing from a participants' expertise, the design phase of the
workshop, which will be in-person, will elicit significant insights that lead to
the creation of the protocol. Then, the (primarily virtual) testing and
improvement phase will pilot the PAC-Math protocol in six higher education
settings, improve the protocol based on feedback, and disseminate it to the
mathematics community. Approximately half of the testing and improvement phase
participants will be selected from the experts involved in the design phase. The
remaining testing and implementation participants will not have been involved in
the design of the protocol in order to build on new perspectives and ideas for
improvement. Once the protocol has been piloted and revised, it will be
disseminated widely to the mathematics community and will be potentially
scalable to other disciplines and contexts in the future. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.