* 2306717
* Conference: Neural Mechanisms of Conscious Awareness in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Biyu He, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

NSF Conference Award: PI â€“ Dr. Biyu He, New York University Title: Neural
Mechanisms of Conscious Awareness in Humans

The nature and basis of conscious awareness in humans is one of the oldest and
deepest mysteries in philosophy and science. We go to sleep every night and
enter an unconscious state and then wake up every morning and return to
consciousness. How does consciousness arise? The origin of conscious awareness
is a question that has puzzled philosophers for thousands of years. How does
brain activity give rise to consciousness? Recent insights from neuroscientists
into the nature and neural basis of consciousness have arisen thanks to the
rapid development of new behavioral paradigms, neuroimaging techniques to
measure brain activity, and both descriptive and quantitative theories. The
field of consciousness science, exploring the neural basis and correlates of
consciousness, has seen explosive growth over the past three decades and this
relatively young scientific discipline promises to have an enormous potential
impact on neuroscience, medicine, society, and technology.

The Workshop on the Neurobiology of Consciousness is jointly funded with the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and be held on the main NIH campus in June,
2023. Talks will be live-streamed as a Webinar for a broad audience of
interested scientists and the public. The Workshop will facilitate in-depth
discussion between scientific experts working in divergent fields whose
integration is essential to understanding the neurobiology of consciousness. Key
goals of the Workshop are to synthesize the current state of knowledge about
consciousness, discuss and design experiments to critically test existing
theories of consciousness, define the most exciting new approaches to advance
the field, and develop a roadmap for future discoveries in the science of
consciousness. A special issue of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience will be
devoted to publication of conference presentations. In addition to established
scientific investigators, the Workshop will also include postdoctoral trainees
and early investigators to participate in this high-profile workshop. Trainee
fellowships to cover travel expenses will be preferentially given to women and
under-represented minorities in order to enhance diversity in the field of
consciousness research. The Workshop will also include an educational program
that will provide a pre-Workshop introduction to the field of consciousness
research to undergraduates from minority serving institutions to further broaden
inclusion and diversity and encourage the next generation of consciousness
researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.