* 2306188
* Collaborative Research: Tools 4 Cells:  Developing Next Generation Methods for Studying Cytoskeletal Factors in the Cell Nucleus
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alexander Ruthenburg, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2026
* USD 669,456.00

In recent years it has become clear that the positioning of genes in the cell
nucleus is important for turning them on and off. However, little is known about
how gene positioning is regulated. The goal of this project is to understand how
actin, a protein that plays a central role in organizing the cytoplasm, is also
involved in the organization of the genome and the control of gene expression.
This requires novel tools for the precise perturbation of actin only in the cell
nucleus to avoid any confounding effects due to disruptions of its cytoplasmic
fraction. These tools include a light-activatable stabilizer of nuclear actin
filaments and a system to selectively degrade nuclear actin. Together, these
tools will enable fine control over nuclear actin without impacting its
functions in other parts of the cell. The Broader Impacts of this project
include its intrinsic merit as all nucleated cells likely contain actin and the
developed tools will be disseminated to other researchers in the field and are
expected to broadly impact our understanding of basic mechanisms that control
genome positioning and gene usage. Further, UIC is a minority serving
institution and the University of Chicago participates in numerous efforts to
recruit students from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines. This project
will maintain this tradition and contribute to strengthening the STEM workforce
by heavily involving students from these groups in science.

Actin-based cytoskeletal factors, essential for defining cell shape, are also
present in the nucleus, where they have been linked to transcription and
chromatin organization. Uncovering the mechanisms behind these effects is
complicated by the challenges of specifically targeting the nuclear pool of
cytoskeletal factors for dynamic perturbation. Existing techniques introduce
artifacts and are not manipulable on rapid timescales. In this project, new and
sharper tools will be developed. These include an adaptation of LILAC, a
photoactivated probe, to track and/or stabilize actin filaments in the nucleus,
without perturbations to cytoplasmic actin. Vice versa, to enable precise
temporal control of nuclear actin degradation, an auxin inducible degron (AID)
tag will be fused to endogenous beta-actin and combined with a strongly nuclear-
localized TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Together, these loss- (degron depletion) and
gain-of-function (LILAC) nuclear actin inducible manipulations in clonal cell
lines will enable the discovery of direct effects of actin dynamics on nuclear
processes. These tools will be broadly characterized and used to investigate the
role of actin in nuclear organization. High-resolution chromatin conformation
capture (Micro-C) will be used to reveal the impact of nuclear actin dynamics on
fine-scale chromatin reorganization. Calibrated ChIP-seq and PRO-seq will
generate complementary insights into associated changes in chromatin state and
functional impacts on nascent transcription. Direct effects of tuning nuclear
actin dynamics on Pol II clustering at the nanometer scale will be investigated
using quantitative superresolution microscopy in live and fixed cells.

The project is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.