* 2306439
* Collaborative Research: Random Matrices and Algorithms in High Dimension
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xiucai Ding, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2026
* USD 31,067.00

Numerical algorithms that can process huge amounts of data are increasingly
important, notably for those algorithms used every day within artificial
intelligence (AI) software. Examples include voice assistants, facial
recognition for cellphones, and machine-learning-based financial fraud
detection. But many algorithms are applied only heuristically and remain poorly
understood, meaning that theoretical guarantees are missing. In fact, recent AI
applications indicate that the direct application of these algorithms, without
proper validation, may generate artificial, misleading information. The broad
aim of this proposal is to deepen our understanding of classes of statistically-
relevant random matrix models that are used to model, analyze and interpret
large data sets and to analyze new and classical algorithms as they act on these
models. It is expected that this will produce new insights and statistical
tools, paired with theoretical guarantees. This award will also train junior
researchers and help continue to build the community of researchers working in
this field.

The proposed problems fit into three main projects. The first concerns the
analysis of random matrix models that extend the classical setting of sample
covariance matrices. Then by connecting random matrix models and orthogonal
polynomials via Riemann--Hilbert problems, the PIs will obtain new estimates and
new conclusions about orthogonal polynomials for natural measures generated by
these random matrices. Armed with the theoretical results, the second project
concerns the direct application of the estimates from the first project, and
further refinement of previous analyses, to understand the average-case behavior
of numerical algorithms. The focus here is on algorithms from numerical linear
algebra. In the third project, the investigators will use the new random matrix
estimates, the new results in the theory of orthogonal polynomials and its
associated Riemann--Hilbert theory, for both classical and new random matrix
ensembles, to generate new algorithms, ultimately leading to new viable
statistical estimators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.