* 2306486
* CAREER: Protocols for Low-Power Wide-Area Networks in White Spaces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Abusayeed Saifullah, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 383,567.00

This project will integrate research and education in the design and
implementation of a Low-Power Wide-Area Network (LPWAN) in the TV White Spaces.
LPWANs enable low-power devices to transmit over long distances for various
Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. Today, LPWANs have a number of major
limitations making their adoption challenging. First, they rely on wired
infrastructure for integrating multiple networks to cover very large areas
(e.g., smart city). Lack of proper infrastructure hinders their applicability to
rural/remote wide-area applications such as agricultural (e.g., smart farming)
and industrial IoT (e.g., oil-field monitoring). Second, rapid growth of LPWANs
in the limited spectrum raises the challenge of coexistence. Third, current
(non-cellular) LPWANs are not designed to effectively support mobile nodes,
e.g., tractors and drones in smart farming. Finally, LPWANs are not yet designed
to support real-time communication hindering their adoption for many
applications (e.g., process control). This project will address these challenges
by developing theoretical foundations and systems for SNOW (Sensor Network Over
White Spaces), an LPWAN that exploits unused TV spectrum, called white spaces.
The results are extendable to many other LPWANs. Due to abundant white spaces,
this project will enable connectivity for many rural applications. It will
integrate education through course development, student research, and outreach
to minority/underrepresented and K-12 students.

This project will design and implement an LPWAN architecture and complete
protocol stack based on SNOW to support scalable integration, coexistence,
mobility, and real-time communication as follows. (1) It proposes a scalable
seamless integration of multiple SNOWs by minimizing latency in the integrated
network. Considering tradeoffs between quality and execution time, the solution
approach includes both global optimization and fast heuristics. (2) It proposes
a novel approach based on Reinforcement Learning to handle coexistence with many
independent networks. This is done by developing an efficient Q-learning
framework that is practical at low-power nodes. This will be the first
Q-learning approach for LPWAN and for handling coexistence in a low-power
network. (3) It proposes lightweight cross-layer approaches to enable mobility
of SNOW nodes by handling Doppler effect as well as the effects of geospatial
variation of white spaces. (4) It proposes a real-time communication framework
for SNOW which will be the first result on real-time scheduling for LPWAN. (5)
It will implement the proposed protocols on TI CC1310 and also on universal
software radio peripheral devices. The protocols will be evaluated through
experiments in two different radio environments -- an urban test-bed and an
agricultural field piloting smart farming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.