* 2306236
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhanced Broadband Research and Education at PVAMU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Suxia Cui, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The goal of this project is to enhance the undergraduate curriculum and
provide adequate knowledge, hands-on training, and certifications in 5G
broadband communications systems at Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU).

The project proposes to develop STEM talents in broadband communication systems
at the undergraduate level by (i) developing a testbed on 5G communication
systems for research and training, (ii) enhancing or developing broadband
courses in the electrical and computer engineering department, (iii) developing
an undergraduate certificate program in Broadband Access Technologies, and (iv)
engaging community college students in broadband technologies via
seminar/workshop during the summer. The proposed developments will be based on
evidence-based teaching components relevant to current and future broadband
needs, such as improving student mastery of skills in the 5G broadband domain.
The research aspect of the project will focus on wideband communications,
blockchain-based transactions, serverless computing, and security for cloud
computing. This program will equip and motivate students historically
underrepresented in STEM with the knowledge to complete baccalaureate degrees
with an emphasis on the broadband field and build a career in broadband
communications. The program will also engage community college students to
motivate them to achieve four years degrees at PVAMU in STEM fields, especially
in electrical and computer engineering with a concentration in broadband
communications. Thus, the proposed activities will have a broader impact on the
workforce and research development, contributing to nationwide broadband growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.