* 2306219
* Research Initiation: Enhancement of transfer of design thinking in undergraduate Bioengineering students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Avshalom Kaplan, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,844.00

A major goal of engineering education is to train engineering students to
approach complex projects with design thinking strategies. These include
systematically analyzing the problem at hand as well as the needs of the clients
and of the community, generating a variety of creative possible solutions,
applying a rational process to select the best option for the circumstances,
designing a prototype of the solution, and testing the prototype and improving
it until it is optimal. Unfortunately, despite being taught these design
thinking strategies in undergraduate courses, many engineering students do not
transfer them to their capstone projects and to their engineering careers.
Instead, they fall back on simple strategies such as getting fixed on single
solutions and using unsystematic trial-and-error methods. The project builds on
a theory that explains why people fail to transfer problem-solving strategies
across contexts. We plan to redesign a bioengineering course in a way that will
increase the likelihood that the students will transfer the design thinking
strategies from the course to their capstone project and into their careers. The
outcome of the project will be a framework that other engineering educators can
use to redesign their courses so that their students are also more likely to
transfer design thinking strategies beyond the current course into their
engineering professional roles. This project will increase the community of
researchers who are studying engineering students’ development by training a
bioengineering professor and an engineering doctoral student in engineering
educational research.

Whereas a central goal in engineering education is developing students’ design
thinking for creative real-world problem solving, decades of research have
demonstrated that students commonly fail to transfer design thinking strategies
they learned in undergraduate courses to their capstone projects and to their
engineering jobs. The research question guiding this project is: how can
engineering instructors enhance transfer of design thinking strategies among
bioengineering undergraduate students? This project proposes to build on
contemporary theories of role identity, motivation, learning, and transfer to
develop a theoretical framework and theory-informed pedagogical principles to
teach design thinking strategies in a manner that supports their transfer across
contexts and tasks. The project will involve a collaboration between a
bioengineering professor, an engineering doctoral student, and an educational
psychology professor who will adapt the Dynamic Systems Model of Role Identity
(DSMRI) to a conceptual framework of engineering students’ transfer of design
thinking strategies across context-based role-identities, and the formulation of
pedagogical design principles to promote such transfer in engineering
undergraduate courses. The theoretical framework and pedagogical design
principles will then guide a two-year design-based research that will involve
the design of transfer-promoting activities focused on design thinking
strategies into a biodesign undergraduate course. In year 1, the project will
focus on implementing activities and investigating students’ engagement in these
activities and their degree and type of transfer of the design thinking
strategies into their capstone project. In year 2, efforts will focus on using
the findings to reformulate the conceptual framework and pedagogical principles,
redesigning the activities, implementing them, and investigating students’
engagement and transfer. Deliverables from this project will include the
conceptual framework of design thinking strategies transfer, and the pedagogical
principles of designing for transfer of these design thinking strategies. The
researchers will disseminate these products in engineering education research
conference presentations, peer-reviewed journals, and educator workshops. The
findings will also provide the basis for future NSF engineering education
proposals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.