* 2306035
* Physics of Wind Musical Instruments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nicholas Giordano, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2026
* USD 126,495.00

Sound generation in wind instruments such as the recorder, flute, trumpet, and
clarinet involves the motion of a compressible fluid (air). This motion can be
extremely complicated, and can lead to vortex formation and various nonlinear
phenomena found in strongly driven fluids. Dr. Giordano will use advanced
computational methods to study the fluid dynamics of air inside and around a
variety of wind instruments. This fluid motion is directly responsible for sound
generation, so the results of this study will lead to a better understanding of
the musical tones produced by wind instruments. An integral component of this
project will be the comparison of the computational results with experiments
performed with real instruments, to test and validate the computational
findings. The students who engage in this work will acquire computational skills
that can be applied to a variety of other problems in science and engineering.
Indeed, modeling the sound produced by a wind instrument involves the same
equations and the same computational issues that are encountered in studies of
the sound produced by a jet turbine, the motion of a flapping wing, human
phonation, and other important aerodynamics problems, so students involved in
this project will be well versed in the advanced computational modeling and
experimental methods needed to tackle a wide range of problems in science and
engineering.

A first principles description of the fluid dynamics of a wind instrument
requires the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations, a set of nonlinear partial
differential equations. The complexity of the Navier-Stokes equations is such
that their application to realistic musical instruments demands a computational
solution, which is now feasible with available high performance parallel
computers. This project will obtain solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations for
a variety of wind instruments using state-of-the-art computational resources and
custom designed algorithms for multicore computer architectures. These
computational studies will be complemented with experimental measurements
designed to test specific qualitative and quantitative predictions of the
modeling results, leading to new insights into these instruments. The PI will
also develop instructional modules on acoustics and musical instruments for K-12
teachers and students who participate in outreach programs at Auburn University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.