* 2306178
* Research Initiation: Addressing the Readiness Gap through Examining Engineering Students' Perceptions of their Future Professional Selves
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Harlynn Ramsey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Research documents a “readiness gap” that new engineering graduates are not
fully prepared for the workforce, particularly in terms of professional, non-
technical skills (such as communication and teamwork). Engineering educators
have adapted curriculum and updated teaching methods to promote these skills,
but the gap persists. This study will examine the readiness gap not from the
employers’ perspective of the missing desired skills, but from the students’
perspective about their expectations for the workforce. By the time engineering
students graduate, they will have been in school for most of their lives: the
transition to the workforce is no ordinary transition — it is a step into the
unknown. This project will attempt to: 1) understand students’ expectations
about life after graduation; and 2) determine to what extent a brief
intervention (showing students short videos of recent alumni discussing their
personal transitions from school to work) can affect students’ expectations
about work and their perspectives about their future selves. Students will be
surveyed before and after watching the videos to see if watching the videos
affected their sense of their future selves or their expectations for their
future work in engineering. The PI leading this study is new to the field of
engineering formation research and will be mentored by an established
engineering education researcher, which addresses the program goals of
initiating new engineering education researchers into the field.

Multiple studies have documented a misalignment between new engineering
graduates’ preparedness and employer expectations. This study will study the
identified “readiness gap” of new engineering graduates entering the workforce
by examining students’ expectations toward their professional future. How might
identifying, understanding, and potentially addressing their beliefs and
misconceptions about engineering contribute to correcting the misalignment? The
study will address two Research Questions: 1) How do undergraduate engineering
students imagine their professional futures? and 2) How does a brief invention
of having students watch a series of short videos by recent alumni affect their
perceptions about their professional future? The intervention consists of a
series of short, thematically curated video clips of early career engineers
answering questions from current students about life and work after graduation.
A mixed methods approach will be employed, using pre- and post-surveys and semi-
structured interviews of students who watch the videos. Each year of the
project, pre- and post-surveys will be conducted with 150 students; from that
pool of 150 respondents, 30 students will participate in follow-up semi-
structured interviews. We will oversample participants in two ways: first,
students from populations historically underrepresented in engineering; second,
those who had the strongest positive and negative reactions to a question asking
the about the value of intervention. The pre- and post-surveys will include a
validated scale, the Future Self Continuity Questionnaire, and the data will
help locate students’ sense of their future selves as engineering professionals
on a range of fixed to fluid identities, determine whether their perceptions of
their future professional selves change after the intervention, and inform
analysis of the qualitative data. Study outcomes include establishing a starting
point for understanding engineering students’ career expectations and advancing
efforts to promote professional readiness through vivid and positive examples of
early career engineers; the use of a video intervention will be transferable and
adaptable to other types and sizes of institutions. In particular, the study
will investigate the perspectives and potential changes in perspective of
students from historically underrepresented populations and first-generation
university students. Additionally, this project develops the capacity of the PI
in engineering education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.