* 2306625
* Implementation project: Interdisciplinary Research Infusion into STEM Education (I-RISE) Undergraduate Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Shakhawat Bhuiyan, Jarvis Christian College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,065,163.00

Implementation Projects provide support to the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the quality of
their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and research. This project at Jarvis Christian
University (JCU) seeks to train a diverse group of students by making innovative
connections between education, interdisciplinary STEM research, and social
learning strategies. The goal of this project is to increase the number of
underrepresented minority students pursuing STEM degrees to be competitive for
graduate and professional schools. The project will impact the academic success,
retention, and graduation rate of students enrolled in STEM degrees and make
sustainable change to STEM programs at the institution.

The project seeks to address several causal factors of STEM student achievement
gaps through implementation and extension of evidence-based teaching in the STEM
areas. The infusion of Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs)
into lower-level STEM courses will expose students early to hands-on research
approaches with the potential to advance their understanding of their chosen
field and promote critical thinking skills. The project will gain insight into
the effects of interventions on social learning strategies, including growth
mindset, sense of belonging, and self-efficacy. In addition, the development of
the new Engineering program will provide a strong general foundation in the
field of engineering and equip students to excel in higher-level courses and
engineering specializations. Moreover, student participation in faculty mentored
research during the academic year and summer will contribute to the advancement
of faculty research and increase JCU STEM students’ ability to compete
successfully for graduate research fellowships. Finally, this opportunity will
promote new and expanded collaborations for degree and research opportunities
with other institutions through the establishment of the Interdisciplinary
Research and Education Center (IREC). The project, which may serve as a model
for broad STEM intervention, will be assessed to determine the impact of faculty
mentoring, internships, research experiences, and social learning strategies on
the outcomes of retention and graduation rates of STEM majors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.