* 2306259
* Research Initiation: Studying the Implementation and Efficacy of an African-Centered Pedagogy and Curriculum for the STEM Education of African American Learners
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Duane Harvey, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project will explore the impact on African American youth when the African
American experience is the basis of the teaching methods and curriculum.
Conscious Ingenuity (CI) is one of few programs that utilizes an African-
centered approach to teach science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) concepts to African American students in kindergarten to eighth grade to
encourage and support their interest, pursuit of, access to, and involvement in
STEM fields. Currently, many STEM programs exist throughout the United States to
increase interest and participation in STEM through exposure to the field.
However, these programs utilize a traditional approach to teaching STEM concepts
which fails to create an inclusive learning environment. While conventional STEM
teaching aims to develop and strengthen interdisciplinary skill sets such as
critical thinking, problem-solving and exploratory learning, European history
and culture are at its core. African American culture and contributions are
completely ignored, these exclusions weaken the African American STEM
educational experience. This research study will help the research team identify
specific instructional strategies and materials from an African-centered
perspective that supports and encourages the interest, engagement and
comprehension of African American STEM learners. We anticipate the results will
demonstrate that when African American STEM learners are instructed with a
pedagogy and curriculum that centers their experience, provided adequate
resources and nurtured in a communal environment, they are capable learners.

Little work to date has investigated the efficacy of using an African-centered
pedagogy and curriculum to encourage and support the interest, engagement and
comprehension of African American STEM learners. To address this gap, the
objective of our research is to examine the implementation and efficacy of an
African-centered pedagogy and curriculum on the STEM education of African
American youth by analyzing the instructional strategies and materials of the
Conscious Ingenuity program, and evaluating student learning of STEM concepts
and formation of engineering identity. We are guided by the following research
questions: “In what ways does an African-centered pedagogy and curriculum
influence the construction of engineering knowledge?” and “How does an African-
centered pedagogy impact student learning of engineering concepts and
engineering identity formation for urban African American youth?”. To address
these questions, we will conduct a two-phase mixed-methods case study. The first
phase of the research study will begin by studying the instructors of the CI by
examining their instructional strategies and materials. The second phase of the
research study shifts the focus of the investigation to measuring the
effectiveness of the teaching strategies and materials instructors use by
assessing the participants' understanding of particular topics and engineering
identity formation. The findings of the proposed research will contribute to
efforts to redress racial inequities in STEM education. These racial inequities
include but are not limited to culturally unresponsive traditional STEM teaching
methods, limited access to technology, inadequate technological literacy,
eurocentric intellectual perspectives, unhealthy student-teacher relationships,
and the absence of teacher-family-community relationships. The adoption of the
proposed pedagogical approach will cultivate an inclusive environment for all
students to learn effectively, where such inclusion diminishes the conventional
one size fits all approach to teaching STEM. This inclusive learning environment
will increase social consciousness, a phenomenon necessary for cultivating
harmonious diverse communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.