* 2306183
* Climate warming and the collapse of trade-offs mediating species coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Adam Siepielski, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2027
* USD 751,090.00

This project will investigate how trade-offs between competition and avoiding
predators may be affected by climate warming. No single species can
simultaneously be best at everything it has to do to survive. Indeed, performing
well at one facet of life often means doing poorer at another. One such trade-
off is that species that are better at avoiding predators are often poorer
competitors. Likewise, species that are strong competitors are often bad at
avoiding predators. This trade-off helps maintain biodiversity in communities
since it prevents any one species from dominating. However, competition and
predation are sensitive to temperature and not all species may respond
identically to warming. Consequently, the trade-off between competition and
predator avoidance may change in a warming climate. Altering this trade-off may
result in a loss of biodiversity and critical ecosystem services. This project
will train future K-12 science educators in scientific inquiry. Additionally,
the project will involve undergraduate students in research and will teach
graduate students about modern research techniques. Together, the education and
scientific training will provide opportunities for citizens to think critically
about why biodiversity is being altered on our changing planet.

Many studies have shown that climate warming can change the number and type of
species that live together in ecological communities. Yet, the mechanisms that
lead to these changes in species coexistence are unclear. This research will use
experiments on freshwater damselflies to develop a mechanistic understanding of
how climate warming affects trade-offs between competition and predation. The
project will use laboratory experiments to determine how competition and
predation are affected by increased temperature. The experiments will be
followed by a quantitative genetic study that will assess the genetic basis of
the traits involved in the trade-off between competition and predation. Last,
the project will use field experiments to test how warming affects species
coexistence in large mesocosms. Trade-offs are a central principle in both
community ecology and evolutionary biology. As such, the results will have
implications for understanding how and why communities are structured and may
change in the future. Further, the project will address how species have evolved
to persist in communities. Collectively, the studies establish a comprehensive
research program that builds a mechanistic foundation to connect the behavioral,
physiological, and evolutionary processes that determine how climate warming
will impact the ability of species to coexist.

This project is jointly funded by Population and Community Ecology, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Evolutionary
Processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.