* 2306118
* Synthesis of Peptide-based Zwitterionic Cross-linkers and Evaluation in Bioadaptable Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kristopher Waynant, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2026
* USD 645,273.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Polymers, which are composed of repeating units called
monomers, are everywhere. Polymers that contain large amounts of water, like
contact lenses, are called hydrogels. One use of hydrogels involves placing
these materials into the body to help overcome a biological deficiency (injury,
disease, impairment, etc.). The body’s response to these “biomaterials” is
dependent upon the material properties - incompatible materials are rejected by
the body. Similarly, the physical characteristics should match those of the
original tissue. There is a need for more control over the biomaterials given
this broad range of applications. The goal of this project is to create a new
class of hydrogels that provide improved control of the material properties.
This will be done through the creation of new charged, but neutral, amino acid-
based molecules that hold the hydrogel together (cross-linkers). These species
will react with other charged monomers creating three-dimensional hydrogel
networks. Important hydrogel properties that will be investigated include the
binding of biological species, the delivery of biological signals, the material
physical properties, and the breakdown of the biomaterial over time. The
material properties will be linked to the composition of the amino acid-based
molecules. The result will be a library of new hydrogels with controlled
properties for broad use. A series of experiments will also be created for
professional development workshops with local high school teachers to bring this
science to the classroom.

Technical Abstract: There is a need for novel bioadaptable materials to address
clinical challenges associated with biomedical therapies and other biological
applications that use polymer-based materials. To be defined as bioadaptable,
the material must meet four criteria: resistance to nonspecific protein
adsorption, the ability to deliver specific biological signaling molecules
(proteins, peptides, etc.), tunable mechanical properties, and tunable
degradation behavior. Polyampholyte biomaterials show promise for being defined
as bioadaptable because of their demonstrated nonfouling behavior, ability to
deliver bioactive proteins, multiple approaches for controlling their mechanical
properties, and tunable degradation behavior. However, a significant limitation
to the advancement of these polymers is the lack of zwitterionic cross-linker
molecules and a subsequent understanding of the cross-linker structure and
physical property relationships that will guide their end use. The overall goal
is to design and synthesize a library of peptide-based zwitterionic cross-
linkers which will be incorporated into polyampholyte hydrogels to develop
structure-property relationships between the cross-linker species and the
resulting polymer hydrogels. This will lead to a fundamental understanding of
design criteria for the cross-linker which in turn will facilitate development
of bioadaptable biomaterial hydrogels. It is hypothesized that molecular-level
control over the length, chemistry, charge spacing, charge density, and pendant
side chain presentation will lead to the demonstration of bioadaptable
polyampholyte hydrogels. This hypothesis will be tested by synthesizing peptide-
based cross-linkers with controlled structure and incorporating these cross-
linkers into polyampholyte hydrogels. Hydrogel performance metrics will be
evaluated, resulting in a fundamental correlation of the structure-property
relationships of polyampholyte hydrogel performance metrics to structural design
features in the library of peptide-based zwitterionic cross-linkers. The award
will provide course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) for
students at the University of Idaho. The team will also provide teacher
workshops to broaden knowledge in the topic of hydrogels.

This project is jointed funded by the Biomaterials (BMAT) program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.