* 2306184
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: Research Workforce Development for Deep Learning Systems in Advanced GPU Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Tong Shu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 11/30/2024
* USD 201,262.00

With the recent advancements in artificial intelligence, deep learning systems
and applications have become a driving force in multiple transdisciplinary
domains. While this evolution has been largely supported by the rapid
improvements in advanced GPU cyberinfrastructure, comprehensive training
materials are generally absent that combine application-driven deep learning
techniques with the implementation of such techniques using the GPU
cyberinfrastructure. To fill in this gap, this project develops an online
workshop that comprises of a set of interdisciplinary cutting-edge training
sessions offered by six faculty members from five disciplines. With a focus on
the latest innovations in GPU-based deep learning systems and applications, this
workshop fosters a community of the next-generation cyberinfrastructure users
and contributors, who can use, develop, and improve advanced GPU
cyberinfrastructure for their deep learning research. Such training efforts
enhance the knowledge of the deep learning and GPU cyberinfrastructure
workforce, and subsequently contribute to the solutions of important scientific
and societal problems, including hydrographic mapping in geography, space
environment nowcasting in aerospace, and autonomous driving and traffic
monitoring in transportation. The workshop will also attract trainees from
underrepresented groups, including minority students and researchers from rural
areas.

The interdisciplinary workshop developed in this project aims at enabling
participants, including undergraduate seniors, graduate students, and
researchers, to improve their multidisciplinary skill-sets, extend their
academic research portfolios, develop their remote collaboration capacities, and
significantly strengthen their career competitiveness. To achieve this goal, the
intensive workshop includes 1) a set of hands-on lecture modules that provide
trainees with comprehensive knowledge and skills on the full stack of deep
learning systems in advanced GPU cyberinfrastructure, 2) a series of talks on
the cutting-edge research in advanced GPU cyberinfrastructure and deep learning
systems and application given by renowned scientists invited from academic and
industrial research institutes, and 3) a remote open-ended interdisciplinary
collaborative project of applying techniques introduced in lectures into
practice. In addition, a prototype of an interactive online training system is
developed to provide computing resources for the trainees and to track their
learning progress, for more effective and efficient training activities. The
project is expected to develop a future research workforce in deep learning
systems and applications and to broaden the adoption of advanced GPU
cyberinfrastructure in research and education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.