* 2306962
* Nonlocal Variational Problems from Physical and Biological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ihsan Topaloglu, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 202,121.00

Nonlocal models are used to describe a wide array of physical phenomena in
material science, quantum mechanics, mathematical physics, and biology. The
pertinence of these models is that they introduce scales used to investigate
microstructures in macroscopic domains, as in the case of the nonlocal
variational models characterizing the collective behavior in biological systems.
This project involves the mathematical analysis of nonlocal attractive-repulsive
interaction energies that are directly connected to aggregations models for
biological and robotic swarming, granular media, and self-assembly of
nanoparticles. The emphasis is on understanding the competing effects of
interactions on the physical systems considered. This will yield insight into
the general phenomenology of nonlocality and ultimately provide predictions of
collective behavior in these systems and guide the design of improved devices.
Training of undergraduate and graduate students will be integrated in the
research project, which will lead to the discovery of new results through
student research projects. The project has three main mathematical aims: (1)
Develop new tools to study symmetry of optimizers of a model describing the
distribution of oppositely charged phases; (2) study the effect of
regularization via an interfacial free energy in swarming models described by
attractive-repulsive nonlocal energies; and, finally, (3) introduce an extension
of Gamowâ€™s liquid drop model to investigate the effect of neutrons in
determining the shape of the nucleus of an atom and the threshold of nuclear
fission. To pursue these goals, techniques varying from nonlinear to geometric
analysis, optimization and partial differential equations will be implemented.
These techniques will be combined with computer-based experimentation. The
common aim of all three directions is understanding structures of optimizers in
a variety of physical systems of practical interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.