* 2306950
* Mapping AGN Accretion Through Echo Mapping and Radiation MHD Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jenny Greene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 328,865.00

Understanding material flowing onto objects is a universal challenge in
astrophysics, from the formation of stars and planets to the most extreme
explosions like Gamma Ray Bursts. The PIs of this research program use
observations of the material flowing onto supermassive black holes (accretion
disks) to refine models of accretion. Specifically, we observe changes in the
amount of light from accretion disks over time at different wavelengths. Over
long timescales, they can effectively watch material moving inward in the
accretion disk through this variability, which in turn tells us basic things
about the disk, like how thick it is, and how dense. They will then build new
models of accretion disks that will help us understand exactly how the signals
propagate through the accretion disk. With the upcoming Vera Rubin Telescope
Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) poised to observe thousands of accretion
disks around black holes, now is the time to get these models and our
measurement tools ready. The PIs at Princeton will also be in a strong position
to train the next generation of scientists to utilize LSST. In addition to the
students and postdocs that the PIs collaborate with, they have built a summer
research program for formerly incarcerated students, and short summer projects
associated with this project will position these students for STEM careers and
future involvement in LSST.

Accretion onto supermassive black holes in active galactic nuclei (AGN) is one
of the most energetic phenomena in the Universe, and AGN feedback likely plays a
central role in galaxy evolution. Yet, despite years of study, we still have
basic open questions about the mechanisms of accretion. While we cannot directly
spatially resolve accretion disks, echo mapping -- tracing variability signals
with wavelength -- can tell us about the temperature profile, size scale, and
even aspect ratio of the disk. This last property can be probed by tracing
variability signals that originate at large distance in the accretion disk and
then move inwards with the flow on a viscous time, the so-called "negative" lags
that move from red to blue wavelengths. The PIs of this award have detected such
a negative lag in one well-studied AGN, and this project is focused on finding
more such negative lags through: (a) archival searches; (b) 3D radiation
magnetohydrodynamic simulations that will give us insight into the response
function, or the delay distribution of the signal as it moves inward; (c) the
creation of mock light curves, informed by (b), to optimize lag recovery and the
cadence of next-generation surveys like the Vera Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey
of Space and Time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.