* 2306454
* RAPID: Understanding Hurricane Ian's Storm Surge Inundation and Sediment Transport in Order to Advance the Field of Paleotempestology
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Joanne Muller, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,180.00

Hurricane Ian made landfall in Southwest Florida on September 28, 2022,
generating extensive flooding. The change to the coastline was substantial and
was accompanied by loss of human life and extreme infrastructure damage.
Hurricane Ian is considered a rare, high loss event also known as a “tail-risk
event.” Tail-risk hurricanes are a serious threat for coastal communities, such
as the South Florida coastline, where the past few decades have seen rapid
population growth. Estimating future hurricane risk relies upon knowledge of
past events, but most hurricane records only extend back ~170 years. Scientists
can use the geologic record to find evidence of past hurricanes over thousands
of years. These records help to uncover long-term patterns in hurricane activity
and explore the causes of hurricanes like Hurricane Ian. Hurricane Ian provides
an excellent opportunity to study the geologic evidence of a tail-risk hurricane
to estimate how often these events have occurred. This project will analyze
sediment samples and measure elevation in areas impacted by the storm. These
analyses will provide a key for what evidence is left behind in the geologic
record from tail-risk hurricanes. Further work will apply these characteristics
back in time in the geologic record to determine storm frequency. The results of
this study will be used to support improvement of models, hurricane risk
assessment, planning, and development. This work will better inform insurance
and re-insurance industries, coastal managers, federal disaster agencies, and
local communities about rare tail-risk hurricanes. The data produced during this
study will be widely disseminated to the public.

Several paleotempestology reconstructions have already been developed for the
Southwest Florida coastline and have extended our knowledge of hurricane
activity in the area back more than 1000 years. However, well documented modern
analogs are needed to help interpret these long-term records. The landfall of
Hurricane Ian along the Southwest Florida coast provides an opportunity to
investigate the character of overwash deposits associated with a strong category
4 hurricane (150 mph winds). Studies of modern storms, such as the deposits left
behind by tail-risk hurricanes like Ian, are essential for being able to
accurately interpret the sediment record. This research aims to examine post
Hurricane Ian sedimentological and geomorphologic change at six previously
studied back-barrier field sites from as far south as the Fakahatchee, Ten
Thousand Islands, to as far north as Bokeelia, Pine Island. Sediment cores will
be taken to determine the character and nature of Hurricane Ian storm surge
driven overwash deposits. The cores will be examined for grain size, event-bed
deposition, and clast composition. The character and nature of the overwash
deposits will be compared to nearby high-water marks and Hurricane Ian SLOSH
model output runs. In addition, an in-depth study of the barrier island
geomorphologic change will be carried out utilizing pre- and post-hurricane
landfall LiDAR data. This project will advance the field of paleotempestology
through a better understanding of tail-risk hurricane deposition, which will
ultimately lead to better reconstructions of such events down-core. Therefore,
this research will increase understanding of tail-risk hurricane return periods.
This research will also help to determine the response of vulnerable barrier
islands to tail-risk storm events. The generated hurricane data sets will be
later used in computer models. This information will aid in the better
understanding of the long-term climate drivers that control the formation,
intensity, and track of hurricanes, which is critically important for hurricane
risk assessment and coastal management decision-making. In addition, the
geomorphologic study will inform coastal managers on the importance of barrier
islands in blocking and/or reducing storm surge/overwash.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.