* 2306898
* Collaborative Research: MRA: On thin ice- implications of shorter winters for the future of freshwater phytoplankton phenology and function
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* David Richardson, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2028
* USD 254,299.00

Lakes around the world face rapidly warming temperatures coupled with shorter
winters. These have an impact on surface ice formation and coverage in winter
and can impact growth of lake algae and their interactions with other aquatic
organisms. Increased algal blooms threaten water quality, drinking water supply,
and recreation, as well as energy flow through food webs. In this project,
researchers will mimic climate-induced changing lake futures by studying U.S.
lakes from north to south, and ranging from ice covered to ice free in winter
months. Their research will examine algal growth and interactions on a year-
round scale using field observations, experiments and high-frequency
environmental sensors, and will employ predictive modeling to assess how changes
in climate will affect lake ecosystem structure and function. Broader Impacts
will be achieved through the vehicles of community science, training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers, and public engagement. Workforce
development initiatives will provide training for water treatment plant
operators at drinking water reservoirs and high school students. By engaging
youth and community scientists, these partners/participants will be trained to
actively serve as stewards of water quality in their respective communities,
empowering them to be knowledgeable and engaged in research related to climate
impacts on lake ecosystems.

To study the transition from ice covered to ice free winters, the overall
objective of this project is to assess how changing ice cover impacts algae.
There is an explicit need to understand how changing winter conditions influence
algae, including seasonal succession, competitive outcomes, and the strength of
the ecological response to prior ecosystem conditions (ecological memory).
Studies on non-summer algal assemblages are rare. Connecting under-ice and ice-
free periods is essential for understanding the impact of changing winter ice
patterns on lake ecosystem dynamics. This objective will be accomplished via
three specific aims:

1. Elucidate how varying winter conditions across a wide range of lakes affect
algal communities (including blooms and cyanotoxins) during the winter relative
to summer. 2. Determine how the ecological memory of preceding conditions
affects current algal community structure and function. 3. Differentiate how ice
cover, underwater light, and algae will respond as climate change scenarios
shift from ice covered lakes towards a future with no surface ice formation.

The working hypothesis is that the gradual loss of winter ice and snow cover
will dramatically shape lake physical characteristics, which sets the template
for algal species interactions and competitive outcomes. As a lakeâ€™s thermal
regime shifts, there will be major changes to algal community interactions and
competition, which will alter succession and bloom patterns. This work addresses
foundational ecological questions related to community diversity and assembly,
placed in the context of rapidly changing winter conditions. Research lakes
include those within the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). This
project will contribute to the education and training of the future scientific
and technical workforce needed to pursue basic research on regional to
continental scale biology, and will engage a diverse community of learners,
educators and managers in regional to continental scale research and the use of
NEON.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.