* 2306092
* An engineered platform to establish the role of interferon signaling in dormancy and chemoresistance
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alptekin Aksan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2026
* USD 511,636.00

Despite improvements to the standard of care, the overall cure rate for ovarian
cancer patients has stagnated at around 40%, making it the most lethal
gynecologic malignancy. While most patients initially show some responsiveness
to chemotherapy, 20-30% of ovarian cancer patients experience recurrence within
6 months of the completion of treatment. Currently, there is no method to
predict a patient’s response to chemotherapy prior to initiating treatment.
There is a rare subpopulation of cancer cells that can transition into a
temporary dormant state in response to harsh external cues, allowing them to
evade chemotherapy. These cells can then reawaken after treatment has concluded
and develop into metastatic disease. The main goals of this project are to
utilize a novel silica-based material to investigate the signaling mechanisms
directing cells to enter dormancy, and then use this knowledge to develop a
clinical tool to identify patients at increased risk for chemoresistance. The
results from this project could be used to inform the development of more
effective therapeutics to target dormant cancer cells. Beyond scientific
exploration, this project also aims to improve diversity, equity, and inclusion
in engineering by promoting engagement with underrepresented K-12 students in
the Twin Cities area. This outreach will include educational presentations and
hands-on experiences on various engineering topics, including cancer
bioengineering. A new, hands-on cell encapsulation activity will also be
developed and integrated into an existing Introduction to Tissue Engineering
outreach module offered multiple times each summer through the UMN College of
Science and Engineering.

The main goal of this project is to leverage a novel platform to determine the
role of interferon signaling on the induction of, sustenance of, and awakening
from cellular dormancy. Dormancy-capable cancer cells can exist in a temporary,
non-proliferative state, allowing them to evade many common chemotherapeutics.
Interferons are potent signaling molecules with known antiviral and
immunomodulatory functions. Recently, elevated interferon signaling in cancer
cells has been hypothesized to contribute to increased chemoresistance.
Dormancy-capable cancer cells also show evidence of significant interferon
signaling activation. The first objective of this project is to utilize a novel
encapsulation platform to identify the precise interferon-stimulated signaling
axes promoting dormancy. Genetic knockdowns will be used to evaluate the
contribution to dormancy induction and chemoresistance of specific interferon-
stimulated transcriptional regulators. The second objective of this project is
to develop a prognostic tool that could be used to predict a patient’s response
to chemotherapy. Previous work has shown that immobilization in silica gel
selects for a chemoresistant subpopulation of cancer cells. A retrospective
study of ovarian cancer patients will be performed to assess the prognostic
potential of silica gel immobilization as a method for identifying patients at
risk of chemoresistance. In parallel, results from the mechanistic investigation
will be leveraged, in conjunction with machine learning techniques, to generate
an interferon-related prognostic gene signature from single cell sequencing data
of patient tumors. These results will advance the understanding of cancer cell
dormancy and develop new strategies for stratifying ovarian cancer patients to
inform treatment decisions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.