* 2306258
* Stability, Uniqueness, and Existence for Solutions of Hyperbolic Conservation Laws and Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Geng Chen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 234,974.00

The compressible Euler system, first introduced in the sixteenth century, is
amongst the oldest partial differential equation models, and it is extensively
used in physics and engineering, for instance, to model gas dynamics. However,
fundamental theoretical issues, relevant to its applications, remain unresolved.
This project will bring insights in two of these still open issues: the
existence and stability of solutions that develop strong shock waves, that is
small regions where large changes in physical properties occur, over long-time
spans. The investigator will also consider a wave model to study the time-
evolution of the structure of defects that form in liquid crystals, which are
materials used for example in display devices, where understanding and
controlling the structure of defects has technological ramifications. This
project will also offer research-related training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.

In this project, the investigator will address a long-standing and fundamental
question for compressible Euler equations and for a wave model for nematic
liquid crystals: How do solutions behave beyond the formation of a singularity,
such as shock waves? Both analytical and numerical techniques will be used to
enhance the current understanding. The first goal of the project is to study the
stability of solutions of the compressible Euler equations, which develop shock
waves, and the existence of solutions with large total variation. A second goal
is to study the singularity formation, global existence, and stability for
solutions of Poiseuille flow of a nematic liquid crystal in a tube, via the
wave-type Ericksen-Leslie model. To overcome the challenge caused by the
singularity formation, the analytical techniques used will include a new
transformation of coordinates and an optimal transport metric.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.