* 2306603
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Smart and Safe Prescribed Burning for Rangeland and Wildland Urban Interface Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Xiaolin Hu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Prescribed fires have long been used by ranchers and farmers in the Great Plains
as a land management tool. They help farming and grazing by replenishing the
soil, increasing forage production, and protecting prairies from invasive
overgrowth. They are also used by rural and Wildland Urban Interface (WUI)
communities to remove built-up fuels for reducing risks of wildfires. Despite
the many benefits of prescribed fires, there are safety and environmental
concerns for prescribed burn events. On the safety aspect, an escaped fire or a
fire reignited from smoldering fuels can become uncontrolled and result in
severe property damages and injuries to people. On the environmental aspect,
smoke from prescribed fires causes air pollution for local communities and
communities downwind. To manage and minimize these concerns, optimal planning
and execution of prescribed fires are crucial. The objective of this project is
to develop a community sensing, planning, and learning infrastructure to support
smart and safe prescribed burning for communities that use prescribed fires for
rangeland and wildfire risk management. The developed infrastructure will be
integrated into a cloud-based platform to support landowners to optimally plan
and operate prescribed burns, collect and share data about burning, and train
fire operators to learn the most effective ways of burning. The project will
also promote technology awareness for building smart communities in rural areas,
by increasing partnerships among academia, rural communities, and local
governments.

The integrated research of this project includes: 1) technical research on
multi-scale sensing and data fusion, data-driven burn condition modeling,
grassland fuel mapping & hotspot detection, and fire behavior modeling and
simulation; 2) social science research that addresses the knowledge gap on how
communities engage with and coordinate burn practices through the use of
technology; and 3) community engagement that develops tools, data repositories,
and activities to support communities’ smart and safe prescribed burning. The
multiscale sensing and data fusion integrate data from heterogeneous sources
including satellite remote sensing, unmanned aircraft systems, and crowdsourced
reports. We will work with two communities in Kansas to evaluate and demonstrate
the developed research: 1) The Gyp Hills community represents a rangeland
community where an average prescribed fire covers over hundreds of acres for
grasslands primarily used for grazing; 2) the Eastern Kansas community
represents a suburban WUI community where prescribed fires are employed at a
smaller scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.