* 2307377
* Long time influence of small perturbations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Freidlin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 199,961.00

This research project contains a new approach to an important class of problems
concerning the long-term influence of deterministic or random perturbations of
various systems and to the analysis of metastability of such systems.
Intuitively, metastable behavior includes sudden transitions, separated by long
time intervals, between near-equilibrium states of a system. This behavior is
exhibited inside a variety of fields, e.g., in molecular dynamics, genetic
mutations, certain economic models, etc. The long-term influence of small
perturbations is an essential part of the perturbation theory - one of the main
methods in applied mathematics. For various time scales, the main states of the
perturbed system are investigated and described, along with the transitions
between these states. These results enable introducing a measure of stability of
the states with respect to the perturbations and considering certain optimal
control problems. The project involves several graduate students working along
with the principal investigator on related research topics. The project approach
is based on considering the limiting (in an appropriate time scale) motion on
the simplex of invariant probability measures of the unperturbed system. In the
case of random perturbations, the hierarchy of cycles and metastable
distributions will be calculated using large-deviation-type results. These
calculations will be based on a non-linear spectral problem for the
corresponding partial differential equations. If the unperturbed system has a
first integral, the construction is, in a sense, a generalization of the
averaging principle; on the other hand, the limiting slow evolution for this
specific case will be considered on a space that is more sophisticated than in
the classical case. The results will lead to a description of a number of new
effects, such as stochasticity in the long-time behavior of purely deterministic
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.