* 2307894
* Constraining Titan's Seasonal Tropospheric Haze Distribution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Corlies, Spectral Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Keane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 488,993.00

Titan, the largest moon of Saturn, is unlike any other moon in the solar system.
A thick hazy atmosphere enshrouds the moon and affects the composition of
Titan's lakes and erosion of the surface. The project will model the seasonal
abundance and distribution of this unique haze in order to understand the
physical processes that drive the circulation of the atmosphere. This project
will engage the broader community through the development of user-friendly GUIs
that will introduce current graduate and undergraduate students to the complex
physical processes behind radiative transfer codes. This work will stimulate a
unique partnership between academia and industry that will enhance the
scientific return of atmospheric models essential to the planetary community.

Understanding the global distribution and properties of Titan’s hazes is
paramount for revealing the critical roles hazes play in global circulation,
radiative balance and atmospheric chemistry. To date, it has been difficult to
constrain the circulation and distribution of aerosols due to the inability of
current radiation transfer codes to accurately model the complex absorption and
scattering effects in the atmosphere. This program will explore the seasonal and
dynamical connections between Titan’s upper and lower atmospheres. The project
will expand two principal radiative transfer codes to incorporate newly
available methane line lists. The team will also improve the numerical treatment
of atmospheric radiative-transfer equations to accurately model scattering,
absorption, and emission in vertically inhomogeneous, non-isothermal, plane-
parallel layers. The team will validate the models using a combination of ground
and space-based observations of the Huygens landing site and will produce the
first maps of the distribution of haze in Titan’s troposphere. The development
of accurate radiative transfer codes is of vital importance to not only the
Titan community but also for the (exo)planetary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.