* 2307137
* Advancing Interstellar Aromatic and Carbon-Based Chemistry: An Integrated Experimental, Theoretical, and Astronomical Approach
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael McCarthy, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2026
* USD 507,210.00

Carbon is an extraordinarily versatile chemical element due to its ability to
form long chains and rings (i.e., catenation). This attribute is responsible for
the incredible variety of organic compounds in nature as well as biology itself.
While large carbon-based molecules such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) and fullerenes are ubiquitous in space, an unexpectedly rich reservoir of
smaller catenated carbon structures was recently discovered in nearby cold
molecular clouds. The team will conduct a combined laboratory and theoretical
effort (in coordination with sensitive radio observations) to obtain new spectra
to identify new organic (ringed or otherwise) molecules, determine the chemical
pathways by which five- and six-Carbon rings â€“ building blocks of organic
chemistry - form and eventually evolve into PAHs and more complicated
structures. Laboratory work will take advantage of equipment upgrades as well as
improved analysis/diagnostic tools and algorithms, many of which with
applications outside of astronomy. This work will provide research experience
for undergraduate and graduate students as well advancing the careers of two
postdocs.

Through a closely coordinated program of laboratory measurements, theoretical
calculations, and astronomical observations, the research team will strive for a
much deeper understanding of complex carbon chemistry, including the specific
pathways that form small aromatic rings and the subsequent reactions that lead
to much larger and complicated carbon catenates. The proposed research will have
wide ranging implications, from the sources of the ubiquitous infrared and
optical features seen along many different lines of sight, to the formation of
stars and planets. The proposed laboratory studies will result in rapid,
unbiased, and robust diagnostic tools to analyze complex mixtures de novo and
provide critical tests of fundamental reactions and their product species. Both
will have applicability in a wide range of scientific disciplines beyond their
immediate astrochemical applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.