* 2307151
* Collaborative Research: RUI--Applying Measurements, Models, and Machine Learning to Improve Parameterization of Aerosol Water Uptake and Cloud Condensation Nuclei
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Pengfei Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 358,461.00

Atmospheric aerosols are ubiquitous particles in the atmosphere that are made up
of dust, soot, pollution, or even natural emissions from trees. Aerosols are
crucially important for weather and climate because they scatter sunlight and
act as the base for developing cloud droplets. This award will provide funding
for a team of researchers from Appalachian State University and Georgia Tech to
study the growth of particles with increasing humidity, and the range of
particle sizes that serve as the base for cloud droplets. Aerosol impacts on
climate have been highlighted in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) reports as a key uncertainty for climate projections. The project has
significant educational and training benefits, with plans for 8-12 undergraduate
and Master’s level students to be involved in the project. Appalachian State is
a primarily undergraduate university and will benefit from collaboration with a
research-intensive institution.

The overarching scientific objective of this award is to train, evaluate, and
apply measurement-trained models for calculating aerosol liquid water content
(ALWC) and cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) spectra at an aerosol network site at
Appalachian State University, in Boone, North Carolina. ALWC cannot be directly
measured, but it can be estimated from more commonly-measured aerosol optical
properties. Intensive field campaigns during the winter and summer of 2024 would
provide the necessary data to develop, train, and evaluate machine learning
models that would be used to calculate ALWC and CCN spectra. Those models would
then be retrospectively applied to the historical database of measurements at
Appalachian St. to examine how and why aerosol hygroscopicity, ALWC and CCN
spectra are changing. More specifically, the researchers will test the following
hypotheses:

1. Machine learning models such as Random Forest, when trained using regionally-
representative particle number size distributions and aerosol optical
properties, are capable of predicting ALWC and CCN spectra at the Appalachian
St. site; 2. Changing aerosol composition in the Southeastern US is leading to
less hygroscopic aerosols measured at Appalachian St. over recent years. Less
hygroscopic particles in turn are leading to lower ALWC. 3. Changing aerosol
composition, hygroscopicity, and fine-mode particle size over the last decade
are reducing the CCN concentrations at the Appalachian St. site at different
supersaturation values.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.