* 2307375
* The Time Variability and Duty Cycle of Active Galactic Nuclei During Quenching
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Katheryn French, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 338,029.00

Galaxies like the Milky Way are steadily forming stars, yet such galaxies will
eventually end star formation and "quench". The physical drivers of how star
formation ends in galaxies are not well understood, but the supermassive black
holes that are found in the centers of massive galaxies may play a key role. The
project will use tracers of time-variable emission from the areas illuminated by
central supermassive black holes in galaxies to study the impact on galaxies
which have recently ended star formation. The project will provide crucial
context for understanding the galaxies discovered at larger distances with
current and near-future facilities such as JWST, 20-40 meter ground-based
telescopes, and the next-generation Very Large Array (ngVLA). The project
includes time spent developing and implementing programs for the University of
Illinois Astronomy summer camp. This camp is aimed at girls in grades 10-12,
though students of any gender can apply. We will design and implement activities
for students to explore the changing sky with time-series data to explore goal-
setting methods.

The evolution of galaxies from star-forming to quiescent is fundamental to the
build-up of the observed galaxy population. There is growing evidence that many
galaxies, especially at high redshift, experience this transition during a
period of rapid change. Feedback from Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) can provide
enough energy to end star formation, yet the role of AGN activity and the
mechanisms by which it can end star formation remain uncertain. We propose to
use post-starburst galaxies identified at low redshift as laboratories for
studying how and when AGN feedback might act. These galaxies have experienced
recent bursts of star formation that have ended suddenly within the last billion
years, analogous to the dramatic quenching seen in high redshift massive
quiescent galaxies. AGN activity is difficult to measure during the post-
starburst phase due to the uncertain nature of many commonly-used AGN tracers as
well as the inherent variability of AGN. The PIs will study the presence of AGN
activity during the post-starburst phase using tracers sensitive to a range of
timescales. They will use archival and targeted optical and radio observations
to study optical variability on timescales of weeks-years, radio variability on
timescales of years-decades, and extreme changes in state over periods of
10,000-100,000 years using extended ionized regions. Their results will provide
crucial context for future observations of higher redshift evolving galaxies,
for which the community will soon obtain deep rest-frame optical spectroscopy
with JWST and 20-40m ground-based telescopes, and cold molecular gas
measurements with the ngVLA. Utilizing time-domain observations in multiple
wavelengths will allow the field of galaxy evolution to maximize the scientific
return on the investment in time domain astrophysics recommended in the
Astro2020 decadal survey report.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.