* 2307297
* Stochastic Dynamics on Energy Landscapes with Applications in Physics and Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Katherine Newhall, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 299,996.00

A large number of systems in physics and biology evolve randomly in time, and
special mathematical tools are used to understand the function of these
fluctuations. Models of small scale materials like nano magnets or designed
meta-materials have fluctuations with spatial dependence that affect their
performance. These systems require the development of tools to account for the
interaction of multiple sources of noise and spatially-correlated noise to
predict both likely structure and transport, as well as unlikely events that
could either help or be catastrophic to the system. The mathematical advancement
of this project includes utilizing these tools to find underlying mathematical
mechanisms that can be used along with experimental observations, thus
increasing our understanding of the physical world. This project contains a
natural interdisciplinary blend of physics, biology and mathematics to train the
current generation of applied mathematics students as the research field of
applied mathematics grows in diversity. The investigators will continue working
to increase participation in mathematics. Students have the opportunity to
participate in local camps for high school girls in STEM, build mentoring
networks at all levels, create inclusive and emotionally positive spaces, and
use outstanding visualizations to promote mathematics.

The applications in this project provide an arena for advancing the
mathematical tools for analyzing large and infinite dimensional stochastic
systems. These tools center around bringing a system into the energy landscape
framework of Langevin systems and further utilizing this framework to explain
the systemâ€™s behavior. Specifically, this project answers open problems
regarding stochastic coarse-graining and large deviations. Rather than standard
averaging to remove the noise, investigators provide methods to retain both a
deterministic term and a fluctuating term to account for the interaction of
multiple sources of noise, as well as derive effective equations for a global
variable (energy). From the coarse-grained equations, the project offers methods
to asymptotically approximate transition times between metastable states and
show equivalence between different techniques on different limits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.