* 2307979
* Collaborative Research: Optimized frequency-domain analysis for astronomical time series
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Charlotte Haley, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2026
* USD 66,422.00

Earth-like planet searches are underway which can measure the motion of small
planets around distant stars. However, investments in these instruments will not
meet their full potential without advances in computer software. Through a three
year award, a team led by the Universities of Delaware and Chicago will adapt a
time domain data analysis tool previously used for health science and solar
science for astronomy. Developing new analysis methods will save telescope time
that costs tens of thousands of dollars per night by reducing the number of
observations needed and increasing telescope efficiency. Students will be
involved in the planet searches. The Team's goals are to involve physics and
astronomy majors with all levels of academic preparation in planet searches and
to create a supportive environment in which students can seek help from a
faculty, scholars, and each other.

While the Lomb-Scargle periodogram is foundational to astronomy, it has a
significant short-coming: its variance does not decrease as more data are
acquired. Statisticians have a 60-year history of developing variance-
suppressing power spectrum estimators, but most are not used in astronomy
because they are formulated for time series with uniform observing cadence and
without seasonal or daily gaps. The team will mitigate the false-positive and
bias problems of the Lomb-Scargle periodogram by adapting the multitaper power
spectrum estimator for ground-based astronomical time series. They will present
multitaper Magnitude-Squared Coherence (MSC) as a diagnostic of oscillations
that manifest jointly in two or more observables. MSC between activity
indicators and radial velocity is a powerful tool for identifying stellar
rotation and harmonics, which have been responsible for many false positive
planet detections. They will introduce a non-multitaper version of complex
demodulation for ground-based time series. Complex demodulation, a local Fourier
decomposition that reconstructs the long-period component of two coupled
oscillations, can distinguish activity-modulated stellar signals from non-
modulated planetary signals and recover full-phase rotation signals from
observations of pulsating stars. This award funds development of the Oscillation
Recognition and CAtegorization Software (ORCAS) package, which will contain
python and Julia implementations of our frequency-domain methods. ORCAS will be
sustainably hosted on bitbucket and registered with the Astrophysical Source
Code Library. The methods developed can be applied to planet hunting,
seismology, paleoclimatology, genetics, laser Doppler velocimetry, and the Rubin
Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.