* 2307097
* Separation Rates for Dissipative Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zachary Bradshaw, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 95,544.00

Fluid models are used to make predictions about critical real-world systems
arising in diverse fields including but not limited to meteorology, climate
science, mechanical engineering, and geophysics. Simulations based on fluid
models can, for example, be used to make predictions about the strength of a
tornado or the stresses on an aircraft wing passing through turbulent air. The
possibility that a mathematical model does not capture the full range of
possible real-world scenarios is concerning if the predictions do not account
for extreme events. Mathematically, this may occur if the model is unstable.
This can be evident through a butterfly effect, in which a seemingly negligible
change in a parameter leads to a wildly different outcome. Even more concerning
is the specter of non-uniqueness, in which the same set of parameters may
generate different dynamics. Consequently, a simulation could accurately
describe one real-world scenario but not account for another possibly
catastrophic one. In this project, the investigator will develop a broad
understanding of the possible severity of these unstable dynamics. Students will
be involved in this project. The project will include outreach efforts to
promote mathematics in secondary schools and community colleges. The
investigator will address the issue of how rapidly solutions to partial
differential equations can and possibly must separate, primarily in the context
of the Navier-Stokes equations, a system which models viscous incompressible
fluid flow. Recent results suggest non-uniqueness for this system in physical
classes of solutions. To assess the severity of non-uniqueness, estimates will
be developed for the difference of two solutions having the same initial data.
If the difference grows slowly, then one solution can be approximated from the
other. If it grows rapidly, then the solutions quickly become uncorrelated,
which is concerning when making predictions. New approaches for these estimates
will be developed, e.g., through higher-order local time-regularity results. The
investigator will additionally explore connections to an experimentally
supported view of predictability, in which small scale instabilities do not
instantly ruin macroscopic forecasts. Similar questions about non-uniqueness and
separation arise in other partial differential equations models, which can come
from the world of fluids, as with the surface quasi-geostrophic equation, but
are not limited to it, as with the semi-linear heat or complex Ginzburg-Landau
equations. The results for the Navier-Stokes equations will be adapted to these
models, providing valuable information about the evolution of non-uniqueness in
these equations and shedding light on how robust they are across partial
differential equations with significantly varying structures.

This project is jointly funded by the DMS Applied Mathematics Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.