* 2307944
* DISES: Integrating Socio-Economic and Environmental Interventions to Improve Well-Being in Vulnerable Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* SAMBA MBAYE, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,597,264.00

Schistosomiasis, the second most socioeconomically burdensome neglected tropical
disease globally, is caused by snail-transmitted flatworms that penetrate human
skin. It originates in the aquatic ecology of rural communities, defies control
efforts, reinforces poverty, and damages children’s health and education
advancement because even when provided drugs to clear the infections, humans
quickly get re-infected when they return to snail-infested waterbodies. A newly
identified solution synergistically leverages feedback in socio-environmental
systems through targeted aquatic vegetation harvest at community water access
points where most infections occur. The next challenge is how to scale and
sustain that solution. If successful, the low-cost, information-based design
this project tests can provide a model for community-based solutions to similar
poverty-disease traps worldwide. The project advances STEM education for
students, creates a multi-institution seminar course and develops a public
seminar series to improve the public’s understanding of science and the
scientific method.

This project implements a randomized controlled trial and field experiments with
human subjects, coupled with longitudinal collection of household survey,
ecological and human health data. The objective is to evaluate whether education
on the public health and/or private economic benefits of vegetation removal can
effectively scale and sustain ecologically non-disruptive aquatic vegetation
harvest and thereby suppress schistosomiasis infection and boost agricultural
productivity and well-being in rural communities. The project also monitors
whether these interventions inadvertently induce unintended ecological or social
spillover effects and whether the benefits of vegetation removal are distributed
towards the relatively poor or better-off households.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.