* 2307710
* WoU-MMA: Multiple Approaches to Multi-Messenger Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ryan Foley, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 888,328.00

GW170817 was the name given by astronomers to the merger of two neutron stars
witnessed through its gravitational wave siren, an associated gamma-ray burst,
and its glow at all wavelengths of light, marking the beginning of a golden age
in time-domain multi-messenger astronomy. Through this discovery, our knowledge
of gravity, nuclear physics, the origin of the heaviest elements, and cosmology
were all dramatically expanded. A research team at the University of California
at Santa Cruz (UCSC), which was instrumental in the discovery of GW170817, will
lead an international program to research electromagnetic (EM) counterparts to
gravitational wave (GW) events. The overriding questions addressed by this
proposal are: What are the EM counterparts to GW events? What are the
demographics of the mergers of compact astrophysical objects like neutron stars
and black holes? What environments produce an enhanced rate of neutron-star
mergers? What elements are generated and expelled by these events? How can
astronomers best use all GW and EM data with advanced theoretical models to
improve the answers to these questions and more? This project will support two
UCSC graduate students, one in observational work from telescopes, and the other
in theoretical modeling and numerical simulations. The program will also work to
increase participation of members of historically marginalized groups in
astrophysics, cross-fertilize the training of scientists and students in the
visual arts and digital media, and engage dozens of high school students
directly in our research.

The main scientific goals are to (1) discover and characterize new
electromagnetic (EM) counterparts to gravitational wave (GW) events, (2) produce
new theoretical models that follow the merger process from hydrodynamics of the
initial event to EM emission, (3) study the demographics of compact-object
mergers, and (4) combine data and theory to understand the physics of r-process
nucleosynthesis. By the end of this project, the investigators expect to
increase the number of EM counterparts of GW events from one to potentially more
than ten. They will characterize individual events and the larger population of
compact-object mergers. They will improve theoretical models, iteratively
improving models and data and use the data, models, and advanced statistical
techniques to measure the local cosmic expansion rate. This award advances the
goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.