* 2307599
* Metallicity Distributions of the Faintest Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Ji, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 459,219.00

Ultra-faint dwarf galaxies (UFDs) appear to be the oldest, the most dark matter
dominated, and the most metal-poor galaxies known. They appear to have formed
all of their stars during the universeâ€™s first 1-2 billion years of existence.
As such, their stellar populations retain important information concerning
processes at work during this early epoch, including the formation of the first
generation of stars (Population III) and reionization. While high redshift UFDs
are too faint to be studied by even the JWST, nearby examples should in
principle be capable of yielding enough information to reconstruct their
formation history and constrain galaxy formation. The principal investigator
(PI) and his team will use deep spectroscopy and photometry obtained with the
Magellan telescope to derive metallicities of 50-200 Main-Sequence turn-off
(MSTO) stars for each of four nearby UFDs, more than doubling the number with
measured chemical abundances. Analysis of the resulting metallicity distribution
functions (MDFs) promises to yield precise star formation histories for these
objects and thus provide important constraints on the formation of the first
galaxies. An exciting secondary goal of this work is the possibility of
detecting individual Population III stars among the observed MSTO stars and
constraining their mass function. This award will support the training of a
graduate student as well as research experiences for underrepresented
undergraduate students. The PI will also implement a series of talks during the
summer for undergraduate researchers.

The researchers will obtain deep spectroscopy capable of enabling metallicity
measurements for 50- 200 MSTO stars in each of the targeted UFD galaxies. This
will result in the largest metallicity sample to date for chemical evolution
modeling of these systems. The team will break age-metallicity degeneracies in
isochrone-based star formation histories, which will enable sub-gigayear age
precision for individual MSTOs. Ages and metallicities will be determined by
simultaneously fitting stellar photometry and line equivalent widths. These will
lead to the best-measured formation histories of UFDs, which will make the data
invaluable as tests of chemical evolution or hydrodynamic galaxy formation
simulations. These formation histories will advance understanding of the edge of
galaxy formation by showing how quickly star formation is halted in the faintest
dwarf galaxies. Given the very low UFD stellar masses and large number of
metallicity measurements, there is also a substantial chance to discover a
surviving Population III star, which would be the first of its kind.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.