* 2307440
* Collaborative Research: Spatially Resolving the Mechanisms of Star Formation Quenching Using Molecular Gas Observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Tony Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2026
* USD 433,221.00

When we look deep into space with modern telescopes, the finite speed of light
enables us to see galaxies as they appeared in the distant past. What we have
learned from such observations is that most galaxies experience rapid star
formation in their youth and declining star formation as they age. Still, there
are wide variations in how quickly star formation stops, and we do not fully
understand why the rate of star formation in galaxies changes. Have aging
galaxies just run out of fuel, or has the fuel become unusable for some reason?
One way to advance our knowledge is to make connections between the star
formation rate and the cold hydrogen gas which is the fuel for star formation.
The project investigators will take advantage of recently completed surveys of
nearby galaxies, as well as state-of-the-art computer models, to pursue this
goal. Through research experiences and mentoring, the project will expand
pathways to scientific careers for students from minority backgrounds. The
research experiences are designed for soldiers transitioning from the military
to STEM fields.

The team plans a wide variety of observations, including spatially resolved
measurements of CO emission, which trace the molecular gas content, and optical
integral field unit (IFU) spectroscopic surveys, which trace the young and old
stellar populations. The investigators have merged their measurements into the
Extragalactic Database for Galaxy Evolution (EDGE) and are now poised to extend
these studies to galaxies with much lower gas content and star formation
activity. They will conduct and analyze high-resolution simulations that match
evolutionary scenarios to observational predictions, allowing factors such as
galaxy structure and environment to be considered quantitatively. Among the key
questions to be addressed are whether the cessation of star formation is driven
largely by exhaustion of the available gas supply or by changes to the
properties of the gas reservoir.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.