* 2307466
* Collaborative Research: Theory, computation and applications of parameterized Wasserstein gradient and Hamiltonian flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xiaojing Ye, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2026
* USD 142,289.00

In recent years, nonlinear reduced-order models have demonstrated significant
impact on scientific computing, particularly on deep neural networks (DNNs).
Scientific computing problems that were once considered intractable, such as
solving high dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs), became possible
using DNNs which are scalable as the dimension increases. However, achieving
robust and reliable results using DNNs requires a deeper understanding of their
mathematical theory and computation than the current literature provides. This
project aims to develop novel formulations and rigorous error estimates for
using DNNs to solve an important class of PDEs, called the Wasserstein geometric
flows, in the space of DNN parameters. This research is expected to progress the
mathematical underpinnings of these DNN-based approaches and enable effective
computational algorithms for solving these PDEs in practice. The project also
naturally provides research topics to train the next generation of
mathematicians and engineers in this interdisciplinary field.

Geometric flows in the space of probability distributions equipped with the
optimal transport metric, the so-called Wasserstein manifold, are ubiquitous in
science and engineering. Wasserstein gradient and Hamiltonian flows are two of
the most prevalent types of such flows. This project develops a novel framework
to analyze and compute the Wasserstein gradient and Hamiltonian flows in the
space of DNN parameters. The main objectives include (i) establishing
parameterized Wasserstein sub-manifolds, via a push-forward map and pullback
Wasserstein metric and their mathematical foundations; (ii) developing
computationally efficient formulations for the parameterized Wasserstein
geometric flows and conducting convergence analysis and error estimates in
Wasserstein space; and (iii) connecting the new formulations to several
classical PDEs including the Schr√∂dinger and Fokker-Planck equations. The
parameterized Wasserstein gradient and Hamiltonian flows are nontraditional,
finite dimensional approximations of their counterparts on the Wasserstein
manifold. They present new formulations that have approximation guarantees, are
versatile, and are amenable to practical computational algorithms. These results
can also be extended to other topics in applied mathematics involving density
evolutions, such as generative models, mean-field control, and mean-field games.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.