* 2307180
* A New Generation of Absorption Spectroscopy Experiments Probing the Epoch of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Joseph Hennawi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2026
* USD 543,942.00

In the early universe, much of the gas between galaxies was neutral hydrogen.
The early generations of stars, galaxies, and black holes emitted radiation that
ionized this gas. The period of time when this occurred is known as the epoch of
reionization. The history of reionization sheds light on the nature and
evolution of the early universe. This project will use observations of the most
distant quasars to study the ionization state of the hydrogen gas between us and
the quasars. The project will also study the enrichment of the gas by heavier
elements produced in the first stars. The project will also support one graduate
student, partially support a post-doc, and provide summer stipends for two
undergraduates from Hispanic Serving Institutions in years 1 and 2. The project
will also provide indirect support for the maintenance and distribution of the
PypeIt software package for spectroscopic data reduction.

The project will use spectroscopic data from the Keck telescope for 200 quasar
sightlines to study the intergalactic medium (IGM). The quasars are all at
redshifts greater than 6. The spectroscopic analysis will allow for the
identification of the local ionization status of the IGM as well as identifying
evidence of enrichment of the IGM with metals from the first supernovae. By
identifying the local ionization status around the quasars, the project will
also provide a history of the radiative history of the quasar -- thus allowing
for a better understanding of how these supermassive black holes grew to such
large masses within 800 Myr after the Big Bang. The project will conduct end-to-
end analyses encompassing observations, theoretical modeling, state-of-the-art
simulations, and Bayesian inference to provide a solid methodological footing
for study of the epoch of reionization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.