* 2307288
* Conference: Doctoral Consortium at Student Research Workshop at the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Lu Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2024
* USD 18,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
scientific organization in the fields of computational linguistics, natural
language processing, and human language technologies. The proceedings of the
ACL's annual meeting provide the foundation of the field; it is the most cited
and most respected publication in computational linguistics. Thus, it is also
the most important gathering of researchers in computational linguistics and
natural language processing, and represents one of the most important
opportunities for young researchers to understand the field, build professional
connections, and gain exposure. ACL has a long history of supporting these
formative activities by holding a student research workshop. The workshops have
proven popular: attracting dozens of submissions from highly qualified
applicants.

The student research workshop will be a part of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), to be held in conjunction with
the main conference July 9th - July 14th, 2023 in Toronto, Canada. The workshop
will subsidize travel and conference registration for students who are selected
to participate. The workshop will solicit submissions in two categories: 1)
thesis proposals, for advanced students who have decided on a thesis topic and
wish to get feedback on their proposal and broader ideas for their continuing
work; 2) research papers, which can describe completed work, or work in progress
with preliminary results. Each accepted paper will be assigned a mentor who will
meet with the student during the ACL conference and provide individual feedback.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.