* 2307295
* All-sky Precise Stellar Ages for Galactic and Stellar Archaeology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Schlaufman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2026
* USD 633,401.00

The ages of stars are hard to discern. Stellar ages are very important because
the compositions of stars change with time. Many questions related to the origin
of our own Milky Way Galaxy will be answered with better stellar ages and
compositions. The research team has developed a procedure to discern ages for a
type of stars called ``subgiants''. The research team will calculate precise
ages and compositions for hundreds of thousands of subgiants. They will then use
these results to the study the formation and evolution of our own Milky Way
Galaxy. Students from Johns Hopkins University and the National Society of Black
Physicists will be part of this effort. The research team will also work to put
on planetarium shows at Boys & Girls Clubs of Metropolitan Baltimore.

Stellar ages are difficult to precisely infer. Even the most careful analyses of
stars with Kepler asteroseismology only provide model-dependent ages precise to
no better than 10%. These imprecise ages are holding back the fields of Galactic
and stellar archaeology. The problem is even more acute for metal-poor stars, of
which there are few of sufficient apparent magnitude in the parts of the sky
where 10% precision age inferences are in principle possible. The investigator
will produce the first and largest all-sky catalog of stellar ages with 1%
accuracy. This catalog will also include photospheric stellar parameters (i.e.,
effective temperature, surface gravity, and metallicity), fundamental stellar
parameters (i.e., mass and age), and Galactic orbits. It will yield
homogeneously inferred age--metallicity--orbit distributions for the thin disk,
thick disk, and halo of the Milky Way. The relative ages of the thin disk, thick
disk, and halo will reveal the physical processes responsible for their
formation. In addition, it will enable the isolation of the oldest stars in the
Milky Way at all metallicities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.