* 2307358
* Cosmic Collisions, Relativistic Blasts, and their Remnants in the Era of Multi-Messenger Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alessandra Corsi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 431,250.00

GW170817 is the name given by astronomers to the merger of two neutron stars
witnessed through its gravitational wave siren, an associated gamma-ray burst,
and its glow at all wavelengths of light. This discovery marked the beginning of
a golden age in time-domain multi-messenger astronomy. A research team at Texas
Tech University will use radio observations to study the physics of multi-
messenger transients. While this group helps shape the path forward for multi-
messenger astronomy, it will also undertake educational and outreach initiatives
aimed at building the next generation of scientists. These will include training
students in computing and data analysis through the Radio Astronomy Data Imaging
and Analysis Lab (RADIAL), a partnership between the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory and fourteen minority-serving institutions of higher education and
sponsoring the yearly public Bucy Distinguished Lecture to further encourage
participation of the general public and local minorities in STEM.

This project has three main goals: (i) Conducting radio follow-up observations
of neutron star - neutron star and neutron star - black hole systems discovered
by ground-based gravitational wave detectors to constrain the physics of their
ejecta and the nature of their remnants; (ii) Shedding light on the the
similarities and differences between two types of stellar explosions: gamma-ray
bursts and stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae; (iii) Exploring future
multi-messenger observing scenarios with the next generation Very Large Array
radio telescope and ground-based gravitational-wave detectors. Mergers of
neutron stars in binary systems observed through multiple messengers offer a
unique opportunity to answer key open questions in a variety of fields,
including gravitational and nuclear physics, relativistic astrophysics, and
cosmology. Studying how neutron stars and black holes form and evolve, when
isolated or paired in binaries, can shed light on the yet-to-be-understood
diverse paths that bring massive stars toward their violent deaths, enriching
the universe with its heaviest elements. Characterizing the properties of
powerful blasts and ejecta from binary neutron star mergers and massive star
collapses can give us invaluable information on particle acceleration
mechanisms, magnetic field amplification, and the nature of the central engines
powering the most relativistic cosmic jets. Unveiling the remnants of binary
neutron star coalescences can constrain the equation of state of nuclear matter,
providing a fundamental physics test. This award advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.