* 2307007
* CAREER: Computational design of nanophotonic reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2022,09/30/2026
* Jonathan Foley, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 483,976.00

Dr. Jonathan Foley of William Paterson University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theoretical and computational methods to simulate and
design hybrid nanoscale-molecular materials capable of harnessing solar energy
and low-intensity light to drive chemical reactions. Nanoscale materials can
simultaneously ensnare light and molecules to dramatically enhance their
interactions, allowing single photons to kick-off energetically demanding
chemical reactions with high efficiency, which is the province of an emerging
field called polaritonic chemistry. Foley and his research group develop multi-
scale theoretical and computational methods to elucidate key mechanistic
features of the complex interplay between light, nanoscale materials, and
molecules, and that enable the computational design of materials for energy
conversion and storage applications. This program of research is integrated with
an educational program --The Future Pioneer Project--that is fostering a diverse
and collaborative innovation ecosystem within the undergraduate and graduate
student population at Dr. Foley’s institution.

Dr. Foley is developing methods to facilitate the computational design of
nanophotonic reagents – nanomaterials that can tailor the interaction between
light and molecules to affect chemical reactivity in desired ways. These
theoretical and computational methods marry ab initio quantum chemistry with a
non-Hermitian formulation of cavity quantum electrodynamics and are coupled to
efficient classical electrodynamics solvers and computational optimization
methods to facilitate the design of optical nanomaterials for polaritonic
chemistry. Open-source software products providing unique capabilities for the
integrated simulation and optimization of nanoscale-molecular systems are being
produced. Foley is pursuing educational objectives to build capacities in 1st-
year STEM students for meaningful scholarly engagement throughout their
education, and to foster a diverse and collaborative innovation ecosystem within
Dr. Foley’s institution. To this end, a research seminar course, INNOVATION
1000, is being developed and delivered to first-year undergraduate students, and
an annual event called "The Future Pioneer Fest" is being launched to facilitate
exchanges between future scientists, artists, educators, entrepreneurs,
creators, and communicators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.