* 2307048
* Cascadia Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Chitra Solomonson, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,902.00

Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) are a well-documented
high-impact practice that has the potential to increase the retention and
transfer of underrepresented students in STEM. CUREs have been defined in many
ways, but are in essence, used to teach students research skills within the
context of regular coursework. Many STEM faculty members within Washington
State’s 34 community and technical colleges are developing and implementing
CUREs that are matched to the disciplinary fields and curriculum of associated
courses. All 34 of these colleges are also adopting the Guided Pathways model to
increase students’ retention and successful transfer to four-year universities
or direct entry into the workforce. Despite these measures, none of the colleges
have institutional plans to implement and sustain CUREs on a broad scale. The
goal of the Cascadia CURE Conference (C3) is to convene teams of STEM
administrators and faculty from ten Washington State community colleges to
create long-term plans to institutionalize the widespread practice of CUREs in a
manner tailored to their colleges’ assets, employees, students, and cultures and
also consistent with their applications of the Guided Pathways model. These
plans are expected to be aligned with their institution-wide strategic plans.
Nationally recognized experts will participate as facilitators and presenters.
This will ensure that the colleges’ long-term plans build on prior research
concerning the institutionalization of CUREs, and that each plan is achievable
using the resources available at each college.

The conference will be facilitated by leaders of the Community College
Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI), an effort that has to date worked
with 142 colleges to develop and institutionalize CUREs. CCURI’s research has
identified seven characteristics associated with colleges that have successfully
embedded CUREs within their STEM academic cultures. Prior to the conference,
each college will complete a baseline survey to assess the academic culture of
CUREs on their campus. At the conference, each team will 1) evaluate their
college’s capacity for institutionalization of CUREs, based on CCURI’s list of
characteristics and other research findings; and 2) write long-term plans for
institutionalizing CUREs at scale, using the seven characteristics identified by
CCURI. The colleges will repeat the survey after a year to evaluate their
progress, as well as note lessons learned that may be useful for other colleges
seeking to expand the use of CUREs. This study will help to clarify the
applicability of CCURI’s research as a planning and decision-making tool.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.