* 2307322
* OSIB: Co-evolutionary dynamics of pathogen virulence and host resistance: lessons from Fusarium oxysporum-infested cotton fields
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Libo Shan, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2027
* USD 402,834.00

As the world population grows, agriculture faces challenges in increasing the
yield and quality of crops. One of the biggest obstacles is crop diseases, which
can cause significant damage to important crops and limit production. Fusarium
oxysporum is a fungal pathogen that is known to cause severe damage to many
crops, including cotton. Recently, there has been an outbreak of cotton Fusarium
wilt caused by F. oxysporum f. sp. vasinfectum (Fov) in some southern U.S.
states. This project aims to better understand the evolution and pathogenicity
of F. oxysporum and to identify resistance genes that could help protect crops.
The project will also provide opportunities for training and education in plant
genomics and molecular biology for undergraduate and graduate students, as well
as outreach opportunities for underrepresented minorities and African
scientists. By using cutting-edge technologies, this project will advance our
understanding of F. oxysporum and its interactions with hosts, which could
ultimately lead to more effective disease management strategies and increased
crop production.

Over several years, the team has collected data on the pathogen characteristics
and germplasm screens of a naturally infected cotton field in Texas. Based on
this data, they have developed a hypothesis about the evolution and
pathogenicity of F. oxysporum and gained molecular insights into the fungus-host
interactions. They have also created platforms for transient and stable assays
to study the loss and gain of function in cotton. The team aims to determine the
genetic diversity, evolution, and pathogenicity of Fov and other F. oxysporum
species and understand cotton's resistance mechanisms to Fusarium wilt through
association genomics. The research will take a systems approach to understanding
the co-evolutionary dynamics of pathogen virulence and host resistance in the
complex genome of both the fungus and cotton. F. oxysporum species complex
(FOSC) is a group of isolates with different host specificities, which are
defined as formae speciales. FOSC has complex genome structures with core
chromosomes and accessory chromosomes that may be associated with virulence and
host specificity. The proposed research will explore the evolutionary dynamics
of accessory chromosomes and their role in virulence and host specificity. The
project will provide insights into Fov-cotton interactions and a broader
understanding of F. oxysporum-host interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.