* 2307840
* Exploring magnetic fields on the largest scales
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,110.00

Magnetic fields permeate the cosmos, including in clusters of galaxies where
they extend for millions of light years. Recently, magnetic fields were
discovered on even larger scales around clusters of galaxies in so-called
"megahalos". These magnetic megahalos are important both because their existence
challenges theories of the origins of magnetic fields and because they may play
a part in the growth of large-scale structure in the universe. Traditional
techniques to probe the magnetic field direction fail on these gigantic scales.
A team from University of Wisconsin, Madison, have developed a new method, the
Gradient Technique (GT), to measure the direction of magnetic fields in
megahalos. The GT reveals the magnetic field direction by employing the
properties of fluid turbulent motions that are affected by the magnetic field.
Maps of magnetic fields obtained using the Chandra X-ray telescope and the LOw
Frequency ARray (LOFAR) radio telescope will be used to (1) test theories of the
origin of the magnetic field in megahalos, and (2) the part megahalo magnetic
fields play in the acceleration of energetic particles and the development of
structures within galaxy clusters. Students, both graduate and undergraduates,
will be trained in applying the new technique to observational data, analyzing
observations and testing theoretical predictions. The team will be actively
involved in outreach involving high school students.

The team will employ extensive numerical simulations to gauge the accuracy of GT
in measuring magnetic fields. Cubes from Galaxy Cluster Merger Catalog will be
used for this purpose. The results of the numerical simulations will be used to
better understand the effect of key parameters on maps of the magnetic field
derived from the GT method. These include plasma magnetization, turbulent Alfven
number, the evolutional stage of the cluster and the resolution of the
telescope. The GT magnetic maps of the parts of clusters where polarization
measurements are possible, i.e., radio relics, will be compared with the
available polarization data. The structure of magnetic fields in halos and
relics will be compared for merging and relaxed clusters to evaluate the effect
of cluster merger. The magnetic structure of clusters with different redshifts,
dynamical states, with/without cool cores will be analyzed with the results
compared to the theoretical predictions of turbulent dynamo theory. The effects
of cosmic ray re-acceleration and propagation will be re-evaluated in view of
the obtained magnetic field structure. The predictions of the heat-buoyancy
instability in cool cores and magnetothermal instability in outskirts of the
galaxy clusters will be compared with the obtained magnetic field data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.