* 2307371
* OMAyA -  a 1mm wavelength focal-plane array receiver for the Large Millimeter Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Frederic Schloerb, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2025
* USD 690,816.00

New stars are formed in enormous regions of cold gas and dust called giant
molecular clouds. The properties of such regions can be studied using radio
spectroscopic observations. These gas clouds contain many atomic species and
simple molecules that produce spectral lines in this wavelength range.
Spectroscopic observations not only reveal the physical and chemical properties
of star-forming regions but can also measure the complex gas motions. This
project will complete the construction of a sensitive multi-pixel receiver
system called OMAyA (One Millimeter-wave Array for Astronomy), which will be
installed and commissioned on the 50-meter diameter Large Millimeter Telescope
(LMT) in Mexico. The additional advantage of a low atmospheric loss provided by
the high mountain-top location will enable sensitive scientific observations of
distant galaxies, clouds in our own galaxy and comet flybys in the solar system.
The receiver will be available to all LMT observers, and 15% of the LMT
observing time is freely accessible to any US–based astronomer.

This project will complete the construction, installation, and commissioning of
OMAyA, a powerful heterodyne focal-plane array receiver system that is designed
to operate in the 210 – 280 GHz (~1mm wavelength) atmospheric window. OMAyA will
have 8 pixels, each capable of simultaneously measuring 2 spectral lines in 2
polarizations, thus generating 32 distinct spectra with one pointing. Each pixel
of OMAyA features a novel mixer block with a high level of integration and is
equipped with the ability to detect two orthogonal polarizations, and contains
sideband-separation super-conducting mixers. The design and construction of a
significant portion of the OMAyA receiver has been completed. In this project,
the receiver will be finished and installed on the LMT. As a purely technical
advance, this project will implement a high level of integration of mixer,
amplifier, local oscillator injection components in an innovative dual-polarized
sideband separation system that will be used throughout the field of heterodyne
focal-plane arrays. As a facility instrument on the LMT available for American
and Mexican astronomers, OMAyA will enable exciting new scientific observing
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.