* 2307774
* Inverse scattering transform outside of classical conditions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexei Rybkin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 137,476.00

The investigator will study nonlinear partial differential equations that are
used in applications, to model phenomena in hydrodynamics, telecommunication,
atmospheric sciences, nonlinear optics, plasma, and astrophysics. The specific
focus is on the so-called completely integrable systems, an area of applied
mathematics also known as soliton theory. Much of what is currently known
concerns rapidly decaying or periodic initial conditions, but physics and
applications call for more general non-standard situations: the thrust of this
project is on understanding the effect of slower decay (or no decay) initial
data. The project will improve the modeling and predicting capabilities for
rogue waves, integrable turbulence, propagation of coherent structures in noisy
media, tidal waves, and meteorological phenomena (i.e., morning glory). The
project will also offer research and mentoring opportunities at both
undergraduate and graduate levels. Recruitment efforts will be mindful to
broaden research participation in mathematical science, as well as target
students intending to become high school mathematics teachers.

The project studies in the context of the Korteweg-de Vries equation the effect
that initial data with slower decay (or no decay) at spatial plus infinity have
on the solutions of completely integrable systems, that is partial differential
equations that can be solved and analyzed by means of the inverse scattering
transform (IST). Approaching the case of slower decay at plus infinity presents
severe mathematical challenges in the applications of the IST, and its study is
a major unsolved open question. Predicting long-time behavior of the solutions
is difficult, as the well-known powerful Riemann-Hilbert machinery breaks down
on such initial profiles. The main effort of this project will be devoted to
extending the Riemann-Hilbert method outside of the realm of classical
situations. The investigator plans to use the methods of Hankel operators to
tackle the arising issues and expects to discover new types of solutions, with
more complicated wave structure, in contrast to the simplicity of existing
solitons and radiation, or periodic (quasi-periodic) wave trains and their
modulations. The results will have implications for applications and be relevant
to the theory of the Schrodinger operator, the cornerstone of quantum mechanics,
and the theory of Hankel and Toeplitz operators, fundamental objects of operator
theory.

This project is jointly funded by the DMS Applied Mathematics Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.