* 2307463
* Unveiling the Cloudy Dynamics in Hydrogen-dominated Atmospheres from Giant Planets to Brown Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,362.00

A team led by the University of California-Santa Cruz will explore clouds and
their impacts upon atmospheres of giant planets and brown dwarfs. The project
will simulate the cloudy dynamics on the four Solar System giant planets as well
as brown dwarfs and giant plants orbiting distant stars. The program will aim to
understand the physics of temperature, chemical mixing, and patchiness from cold
to hot hydrogen-dominated planet atmospheres. Atmosphere models will be open
source for the science community. This work will stimulate cross-disciplinary
activity between Solar System and galactic scientists. The simulated clouds and
storms on giant planets and brown dwarfs from this research will enhance current
graduate and undergraduate classes.

Clouds provide one of the biggest challenges for interpreting observations of
planets. The solution provided here can help solve some long-standing questions.
Previously neglected convective inhibition effects could be an essential
mechanism for understanding how giant planets and brown dwarf works. This
program will explore cloud formation and cloud dynamics on giant planets and
brown dwarfs from 100 K to 2000 K in a self-consistent and systematic fashion.
The project will simulate the cloudy dynamics on four Solar System giant
planets, including CH4, H2S, NH3, [NH4]SH, and H2O clouds, and the dependence of
the atmospheric metallicity, investigating the role of clouds on temperature and
vertical mixing. The team will also simulate the cloudy dynamics on directly
imaged exoplanets and brown dwarfs and their impact upon data collected by the
James Webb Space Telescope. A better characterization of dynamics and tracer
transport will constrain the abundance of heavy cosmic elements deep within
atmospheres, which are crucial to constrain the formation and evolution of the
planets and brown dwarfs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.