* 2307158
* Revealing the Physical Drivers of Morphological Evolution with AI/Machine Learning and Rubin Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Brant Robertson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 560,085.00

The hallmark of astronomical surveys over the next decade will be their vastly
increased data volumes and complexity. Astronomical discoveries in coming years
will rely on the ability of the community to rapidly process, analyze, and
understand enormous amounts of information. In this project, scientists at the
University of California, Santa Cruz, will apply an Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) model called Morpheus to analyze and
classify astronomical objects in large-scale, public astronomical imaging
surveys. Through the application of AI/ML methods to astronomical data it is
possible to enable analyses that are otherwise computationally intractable. By
releasing Morpheus as an open framework for other scientists to apply on their
own datasets, this research will substantially augment the knowledge of galaxy
formation by making probabilistic morphology a feasible measurement for a wide
range of extragalactic imaging surveys. Goals of the project include 1)
furthering the understanding of the connection between morphology and the
physics that govern galaxy formation and 2) lowering the bar for the application
of powerful AI//ML methodologies to astronomical datasets. As part of this
project, the team will also establish a yearly free workshop for graduate
students and postdocs to develop high-quality, transferrable, and extendable
professional websites. These activities will increase the visibility of young
researchers in astronomy and astrophysics, while providing them with a durable
on-line footprint for featuring their professional activities.

The proposed research will apply the Morpheus deep learning framework for
astronomical data analysis to perform semantic segmentation, source extraction,
and morphological classification of galaxies in large scale public survey data.
The Morpheus framework leverages AI/ML technology to provide pixel-by-pixel
classifications of images, detecting objects, producing corresponding
segmentation maps, and then quantifying the model probability that each pixel
belongs a class of astronomical object. The team will incorporate Morpheus into
the Rubin Science Platform, validate it with a combination of Rubin and space-
based data, and apply it to the initial LSST data releases. The team will also
use the resulting Morpheus morphologies to investigate the correlations between
morphology and other galaxy properties. This project also supports Rubin
Observatory science verification activities at UC Santa Cruz.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.