* 2307419
* Constraining satellite-host galaxy co-evolution with next-generation semi-analytic models
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Greg Bryan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 596,139.00

We have known for over a half century that rather than evolving in isolation,
galaxies interact with their neighbors and environment, with colliding and
merging galaxies being the most obvious (and extreme) examples. But more subtle
interactions also occur, which direct the co- evolution of galaxies and their
satellites. This process remains poorly understood, and it is a challenge to
reproduce in cosmological simulations. Similarly, the connections between a
galaxyâ€™s large-scale environment and its properties are still not completely
understood. To help bridge these local and large-scale problems, the team will
leverage their success in modeling sub-halo dynamics as well as the flow of
mass, energy, and metals between galaxies and the surrounding circum-galactic
medium (CGM) to create simulations that will be used to explore the dominant
physical processes at work and make predictions for satellites in a range of
environments. This award will also provide mentoring and support for a bridge
student in graduate school in addition to underrepresented students the NYC
area.

By bridging two disparate subfields -- sub-halo dynamics and CGM/galaxy co-
evolution -- this work will advance our understanding of how satellite
populations are shaped by baryonic physics associated with their host, the
large-scale environment, and galaxy assembly. Using a series of high-resolution
simulations the team will explore parameter space with large volume mock light-
cones to provide context and scalability for larger simulations and maximize the
impact of upcoming surveys. The project will address questions regarding the
observed variations among satellite populations of MW-analogs and connections
between physical processes and known correlations between the galaxy properties
and their large-scale environments. These results will also inform other aspects
of satellite evolution, which are otherwise not possible without a more robust
understanding of their baryonic evolution and host back-reactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.