* 2307806
* Leveraging a Zooniverse Discovery to Bridge Our Understanding of Low- and High-mass Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Charles Kerton, The College of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2025
* USD 419,464.00

Most stars form in groups called clusters, which contain stars of very different
sizes and masses. Astronomers wish to understand the reasons that only some
clusters form massive stars, which have masses more than eight times that of our
Sun. The masses of stars in a cluster play an important role in how the cluster
changes over time. For example, massive stars influence their surroundings with
strong stellar winds and supernovae. Understanding the conditions that dictate
the masses of forming stars is therefore important for understanding the ways
that galaxies form and change over time. This project will address the question,
“what properties of a gas cloud influence the masses of stars that will form in
a cluster?” To do so, the project studies objects known as yellow-balls (YBs),
which were first discovered by participants in a citizen-science project. The
research team has developed an activity that provides introductory astronomy
students with a way to contribute to the project and gain meaningful research
experience. Outreach to seminaries, places of worship, planetaria, and media
outlets will educate diverse public audiences about the findings from this
project.

The investigators will use a database of over 6,000 YBs identified by users of
the Milky Way Project on the Zooniverse platform. YBs are signposts of young
star-forming regions (SFRs) that trace a broad range of mass (10 – 10,000 solar
masses) and luminosity (10–1,000,000 solar luminosities). YBs reveal many SFRs
that are missing in existing catalogs, which tend to be biased towards the most
massive and/or luminous regions. The investigators will produce a catalog of YB
properties by cross-matching YBs with catalogs of star formation; determining
distances to YBs from molecular cloud associations; determining physical
properties of YB environments from catalog associations and our derived
distances; and conducting multi-wavelength infrared (IR) photometry. Trends
between YB colors, their physical properties, and their classifications will be
identified through statistical analyses, modeling of spectral energy
distributions, and the application of machine learning techniques. This research
will elucidate the physical thresholds that delineate environments that do and
do not produce massive stars and may additionally provide a transformative
approach to classifying SFRs across the luminosity, mass, and age spectrum using
only IR fluxes.

This project is jointly funded by the Astronomy and Astrophysics Grants program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.