* 2307681
* Collaborative Research: Shock formation, shock development, and the propagation of singularities in fluid dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Vlad Vicol, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2028
* USD 283,991.00

The motion of compressible fluids, such as gases and plasmas, is characterized
by the formation and propagation of shock waves, i.e., thin adjustment fronts
created within the fluid and across which the fluid experiences large changes of
its state variables. Examples of shock waves abound in nature and technology:
sonic booms generated by commercial and military airplanes, bow shocks generated
by space vehicles upon re-entry through the atmosphere, and bow shocks created
when the solar wind hits the planets, to name a few. Although a good theoretical
understanding of the formation and subsequent propagation of shock waves exists
for one-dimensional (i.e., planar) flows, the corresponding state of affairs in
multiple space dimensions is much less satisfactory. The purpose of this project
is to develop a new geometric framework and a new mathematical description of
the wave motion that allows for a detailed description of shock formation and
the subsequent dynamics of shock waves in multiple space dimensions. This
project will also offer research opportunities and collaborative experiences for
graduate students and postdocs at the University of California, Davis, and New
York University.

This project will develop the analytical and geometric framework for resolving
one of the foremost unanswered questions in the fields of hyperbolic PDE and
mathematical fluid dynamics: the formation and unique propagation of
hydrodynamical shocks from smooth initial data, in multiple space dimensions.
The first step is called "shock formation". Here the smooth initial data is
evolved up to a cusp-like Eulerian spacetime hypersurface of first
singularities, where the gradient of the velocity, pressure, density, and energy
becomes infinite, but these fields retain Holder 1/3 regularity. The PIs
approach to determining the location and the geometry of this cusp-like
spacetime hypersurface of first singularities relies upon the construction of a
smooth spacetime geometry, together and a new set of hydrodynamic variables in
the Arbitrary Eulerian-Lagrangian (ALE) description of acoustic wave
propagation. The second step is called "shock development" wherein one uses the
analytical description of the solution on the cusp-like spacetime hypersurface
of first singularities as Cauchy data, from which the shock surface of
discontinuity instantaneously develops. In conjunction with the shock surface,
we shall establish the emergence of so-called weak characteristic
discontinuities; these are characteristic surfaces that emerge simultaneously
(with the shock) from the pre-shock, and along which, gradients of velocity,
density, and entropy exhibit one-sided Holder cusps. This framework enables the
study of even more complicated physical models such as the magnetohydrodynamic
equations (MHD) of plasma flow. Here, unlike the lone classical compressive
shock of gas dynamics, six different types of MHD shocks can be analyzed with
our approach: a fast shock, a slow shock, and four different intermediate
shocks. The latter were observed by the Voyager spacecraft in Earthâ€™s
heliosphere, but their mathematical existence, to date, remains in question.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.