* 2307785
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Do Pelagic Subsidies Modulate Coral Survivorship in a Warming Ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Connor Love, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2025
* USD 338,594.00

Coral reefs occupy less than 1% of the ocean floor yet host more than 25% of all
marine biodiversity. Reef ecosystems provide shoreline protection,
pharmaceuticals, fishing and tourism revenue, and significant protein to more
than one billion people. Currently, coral reefs are under great threat due to
rising global ocean temperatures leading to coral bleaching, habitat degradation
and loss of ecosystem function. Recent oceanographic advances show that while
global ocean temperature rises, regional scale ocean currents, upwelling and
internal waves play essential roles in coral survivorship and ecosystem
preservation as the ocean continues to warm. This project aims to uncover the
mechanisms of this observed phenomenon in a model reef upwelling system in the
southern Red Sea. This study will enable identification of reef ecosystems
around the world that will remain resilient to climate change due to shifts in
regional oceanography. This project will involve support for a U.S. based
conference with international scientists who are leading conservation efforts in
the Indo-Pacific and the Red Sea. Additionally, students at the University of
Rhode Island will contribute to the project and will be mentored in
oceanographic data science and analytical chemistry. Overall, this project aims
to uncover the complex response of coral reefs to regional oceanographic
patterns and global ocean warming with an emphasis on international
collaboration and coral reef conservation.

Growing evidence suggests that reefs that experience seasonal upwelling or
internal waves could serve as vital coral refugia in the next ~50 years. Deep
water shoaling onto reefs provides pelagic subsidies in the form of essential
nutrients, particles, and plankton that can enhance coral feeding and growth.
But there is an essential knowledge gap regarding how reefs that experience
upwelling will respond to these subsidies and how this influences coral
survivorship to rising global ocean temperatures. The proposed work aims to
connect “bottom-up” oceanographic forcing of planktonic food webs and link this
to coral trophic dynamics and the subsequent thermal stress tolerance outfalls
of the realized trophic niche of corals. Using a multi-faceted analytical
chemistry approach involving compound-specific isotope analysis of amino acids,
fatty acid analysis and recently developed “stress-test” detectors, the project
plans to test three hypotheses. The three hypotheses are aimed to answer vital
questions regarding open-ocean reef connectivity, variations in coral feeding to
upwelling and coral stress response due to shifts in mixotrophy. This work will
answer key mechanistic unknowns of upwelling on coral reefs and enable
predictive power for coral survivorship on upwelling reefs around the world.

This project is jointly funded by GEO/OCE Postdoctoral Fellowships Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.