* 2307487
* A New Approach for Fabricating Large Format Deformable Mirrors
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Philip Hinz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2025
* USD 597,604.00

Adaptive Optics(AO) is a technique that removes the blurring created by the
atmosphere when using an astronomical telescope. High speed mirrors, included as
part of the telescope, that can change shape (i.e. deformable mirrors) can
enable this technique, resulting in a much sharper image. This project would
look to develop a new approach to making such deformable mirrors. This
integration would allow for the more routine use of AO in telescopes. A key task
for this approach is the fabrication of thin curved glass “shells” that are part
of the deformable mirror optics. The investigators will develop a more
economical way of making these shells. The program will develop the approach for
making shells up to 0.9 m in diameter. This will enable existing large
telescopes to utilize such optics for use in astronomy. The project will involve
a graduate student in the development work.

This project will investigate a new approach for fabrication of the shells
needed to use in Adaptive Secondary Mirrors. Typically, initially flat polished
sheets of glass are formed into curves via heating. This approach would rely on
an accurate negative form to slump the glass onto. This project would take a
different approach by letting the glass slump freely within a support ring that
is outside the final optical diameter of the shell. Such an approach allows for
creation of shells over a variety of radii of curvature, simply by adjusting the
peak temperature. To create an approximately parabolic shape, an additional
force is required that is accomplished with a top weight with a given force just
outside the optical diameter creates close to the desired shape. This ability to
fabricate simpler and more robust large format deformable mirrors, will make
such technology available to a wide range of telescopes of various aperture
sizes. This fabrication approach can also be applied to other applications
beyond astronomy that require large curved and deformable optics such as solar
concentrated photovoltaic power systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.