* 2307195
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Resolving and scaling litter decomposition controls from leaf to landscape in North American drylands
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Heather Throop, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2028
* USD 809,213.00

Drylands (arid and semi-arid ecosystems) cover nearly half the worldâ€™s land
surface and are socioeconomically critical, globally supporting a third of the
human population and more than half the livestock. Drylands also play a dominant
role in global cycles of nutrients and carbon. Decomposition of dead plant
material such as leaves and branches is a key biological process that affects
the availability of nutrients to plants and the cycling of carbon between the
biosphere and the atmosphere. Scientific understanding of decomposition in
drylands is limited relative to wetter ecosystems, and appears to be affected by
mechanisms uniquely important to these systems, such as solar radiation and
short periods of moisture availability. In addition, drylands are characterized
by extreme variation in environmental conditions through space and time, but
knowledge is currently insufficient to characterize this variability
sufficiently to develop predictive decomposition models. This project will
reveal a quantitative understanding of dryland decomposition from small to large
spatial scales, ultimately building a model to predict decomposition across
scales. It will do so by leveraging data and resources of the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). This will substantially advance
predictive capability for cycling of nutrients and carbon over the vast drylands
of North America. This project will support several educational initiatives,
including a course module where art and science majors collaborate to develop
skills for visual communication of scientific ideas. A successful educational
outreach platform, the Interactive Model of Leaf Decomposition, will be expanded
to encompass drylands. Drylands support billions of people and represent large
unknowns in forecasts of future carbon cycling and climate. This work will
advance understanding of ecological processes in drylands, which is critical for
informed land management decisions in the face of environmental change.

A central challenge to developing an improved predictive understanding of
dryland ecosystem function is that decomposition is often measured in locations
not representative of where decaying organic material resides. Extreme spatial
heterogeneity in drylands exacerbates the scaling challenges of quantifying such
a microbial-controlled, macrosystem process. Coarse-scale averaging of
environmental controls may fail to capture critical small-scale patterns and
processes regulating decomposition. Available decomposition models typically do
not capture cross-scale drivers and environmental heterogeneity. To address this
knowledge gap, this project will develop a quantitative understanding of dryland
decomposition that scales from the microsite to the North American dryland
region, by joining field, remote sensing, and a hierarchical continuum of models
in a spatially-nested approach that leverages the power of NEON. The project
will develop a process understanding of the environmental controls over
decomposition across microsites using field and controlled environment studies
to formulate a microbial explicit model of decomposition. The project will
capture the spatial variation of decaying organic material distribution,
environmental conditions, and decomposition at dryland NEON sites. These data
will validate a microbial explicit model and inform a reduced complexity model
operating at larger spatial scales. Regional scaling of decaying organic
material pools will be based on hierarchically-nested spatial scales of
remotely-sensed imagery to characterize microsite distributions from four NEON
focal sites to the North American dryland region. This explicit hierarchically-
next hierarchical-nested model will be able to propagate the fine scale
distribution of drivers to coarse scale emergent behavior via a process level
understanding of the system. This integrated, system-orientated research that
will significantly improve understanding and prediction of litter decomposition
at spatial scales ranging from the microsite to the North American drylands
region. The project will also provide cross-disciplinary career development
opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.