* 2307341
* The unexplored direct response of leaf stomata to temperature (DRST): patterns, mechanisms and impacts
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Megan Bartlett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 693,856.00

Plants provide all the energy used by life on land, by taking CO2 from the air
and using energy from the sun to turn it into sugar. During this process, water
evaporates from leaves. In fact, most of the water that falls as rain returns to
the atmosphere after evaporating from leaves. It is essential to understand how
plants regulate water loss, both to identify which genes control that
regulation, so that breeders can improve crop water use efficiency, and also to
enable accurate predictions of how fluctuating weather and climate will affect
water loss from crops, rangelands, and forests. Plants regulate water loss by
opening and closing pores on the surfaces of leaves – for example, they open in
sunlight, and close when soil is dry. However, little is known about how changes
in temperature affect these pores. This study will determine those effects for
60 species, selected to represent most major habitats on Earth; test hypotheses
for the biological causes of any temperature responses that are discovered; and
incorporate these discoveries in a computer model to predict how temperature
responses affect plant growth and water loss. In addition to training of
undergraduate and graduate students in modern experimental plant biology, an
experiential project will be developed in which students from a nearby high
school with a large population of underprivileged students, will build outdoor
growth chambers spanning a range of different temperatures. These chambers will
allow students to observe firsthand how even small differences in temperature
can have dramatic effects on plant growth and yield. Little is known about
stomatal responses to temperature, although it is well-documented that
temperature affects stomata indirectly via the leaf-to-air vapor pressure
difference (VPDleaf). VPDleaf increases rapidly as leaves warm due to rising
saturation vapor pressure in the leaf airspaces, causing stomata to close. But
the direct response of stomata to temperature (DRST) – the response to
temperature when VPDleaf is held constant – has rarely been reported for intact
leaves, leaving the underlying mechanisms and ecological diversity largely
unknown. Lack of knowledge of the DRST may skew models of carbon and water flux,
preventing accurate prediction and understanding of plant function in a warming
world. This study will quantify the DRST and its acclimation to growth
temperature in species spanning the world's major functional types and
ecosystems, plus 10 species and cultivars from a diverse, cosmopolitan clade
(the genus Vitis); test predicted adaptive, biogeographic, and evolutionary
trends in the DRST; test major hypothetical mechanisms for the DRST and use the
results to refine a mechanistic model of stomatal conductance; and apply the
resulting knowledge to a functional-structural 3D canopy model to quantify how
the DRST affects integrated carbon and water fluxes at a range of time scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.