* 2307342
* Free Boundary Problems for Aggregation Phenomena and other Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Antoine Mellet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Self-organization, that is the emergence of a collective behavior out of the
local interactions between members of a group, is ubiquitous in applied
sciences. Some bacteria, for example, are attracted toward each other by
chemical signals and can form large cohesive clusters that act as a new super-
organism. This ability to aggregate is essential to their ability to survive and
proliferate. The mathematical description of these bacteria's behavior is
similar to that of other self-organizing phenomena, such as the flocking
behavior of birds or congested crowd motion, and analogous ideas have been used
to model tumor growth. In all cases, cohesive group formation is the result of
the competition between long-range attractive and short-range repulsive
interactions between the members. The investigator will study the relationship
between the one-to-one local interactions and the resulting collective motion
for a class of mathematical models that take in consideration these two
competing forces. These models are often complex systems of partial differential
equations, which describe the motion of individual members or of the members'
density distribution function. The goal of this research is to derive, via
asymptotic analysis and singular limits, new effective models of geometric type
describing the collective motion. And, to use these simpler models to
theoretically and numerically study the long time dynamic of a population of
bacteria, predict the behavior of a crowd, or compare the effects of different
therapies on tumor growth. The project will offer research training opportunity
for students. The investigator will primarily study models for which an
interface separating regions of high and low aggregation density can be
identified (phase separation). So, while the starting point is a system of
partial differential equations that describes the evolution of a density
function, the resulting collective motion is modeled by a free boundary
approximation describing the evolution of an interface. A rigorous mathematical
analysis will be developed using tools from the theory of partial differential
equations, the calculus of variation, optimal transportation, and geometric
measure theory. A key goal is to provide rigorous justification of the fact that
nonlocal attractive behavior has the same smoothing effect on the interface as
surface tension (at an appropriate scale). An asymptotic analysis will be
performed first on macroscopic models (e.g., diffusion-aggregation equations)
and then on mesoscopic models, such as kinetic equations. Understanding how
congestion effects can be account for in kinetic models is an important aspect
of this research. The investigator will also derive and study free boundary
approximations modeling cell motility. The rigorous analysis of these models
will establish the instability and symmetry breaking properties, which
correspond to well documented behaviors of cells (the so-called self-
polarization of cells). Finally, many of the models discussed here have a
particular structure: They are gradient flows with respect to the Wasserstein
distance - which is defined via the theory of optimal transportation. The
investigator will pursue the development of a regularity theory for optimal
transportation in a discrete setting. This is an important step toward
developing effective numerical methods in the field of optimal transportation,
with application to the models discussed above.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.