* 2307305
* Observational and Laboratory Studies of the Evolution of Circumstellar Material
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 396,000.00

Mass loss from circumstellar envelopes in the late stages of stellar evolution
is a major avenue by which the interstellar medium (ISM) becomes enriched in
gas, dust, and heavy elements. This research project will investigate the gas
phase molecular content of stellar ejecta, from asymptotic giant branch (AGB)
stars to protoplanetary nebule (PPNe) and planetary nebulae (PNe). The
investigators will extend their ongoing program of radio astronomical
observations and laboratory measurements to characterize the molecular inventory
and physical properties of these objects. Results from the project will allow
astronomers to understand the nature of stellar ejecta and their influence on
the diffuse ISM. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in
advanced techniques of radio astronomy and laboratory astrophysics.

This research program seeks to elucidate how molecular material evolves from the
AGB phase, through the intermediate PPNe phase, to the advanced PNe phase. To
accomplish this, the investigators will undertake: (1) a better assessment of
the carbon budget and isotope ratios through an extensive analysis of a highly
sensitive broadband millimeter-wave survey of the carbon-rich envelope of the
AGB star IRC+10216; (2) laboratory measurements of the rotational spectra of new
metal-bearing carbides in the radio band to aid their identification in
circumstellar envelopes; (3) an analysis of high spatial resolution images of
the oxygen-rich envelope of VY Canis Majoris in a variety of molecules to
understand the influence of the C/O ratio; and (4) evaluation of the molecular
and isotopic composition of a diverse sample of carbon-rich and oxygen-rich PPNe
and PNe by radio astronomical observations. A better understanding of the nature
of the stellar ejecta, particularly PNe, would also advance our understanding of
how they enrich the diffuse ISM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.