* 2307801
* Hierarchical Geometric Accelerated Optimization, Collision-based Constraint Satisfaction, and Sensitivity Analysis for VLSI Chip Design
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Melvin Leok, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 360,935.00

The efficient design of modern system-on-a-chip (SoC) microprocessors has the
potential to improve performance, reduce power consumption, and decrease cost.
Such complex engineering systems have a hierarchical and interconnected
structure and may have over one hundred billion components. This project will
leverage that hierarchical structure to obtain accurate and efficient numerical
methods for optimal chip layout and provide the sensitivity tools necessary to
improve semiconductor wafer fabrication. The resulting methods will decrease the
cost and time to design and manufacture high-performance, power-efficient
microprocessors. Collaborations with industry will ensure the development of
numerical methods that are responsive to the realistic, real-world challenges of
advanced semiconductor design, while also ensuring that the resulting numerical
tools will be broadly disseminated into engineering practice. In addition, such
engineering problems pose unique challenges for traditional machine learning
algorithms, as data for such problems are often prohibitively expensive, which
necessitates the construction and training of novel deep neural network
architectures that better respect the physical and geometric constraints,
thereby reducing the training data necessary and improving the generalizability
of such neural network representations of complex physical systems. The deep
interdisciplinary collaboration between computer and electrical engineering, the
semiconductor industry, and applied and computational mathematics provides
unique opportunities for cross-training graduate students.

The theoretical and computational tools to be developed in this project will be
based on intrinsic formulations of discrete Dirac mechanics on manifolds,
expressed in terms of the generalized energy, Hamilton-Dirac variational
integrators and their interconnections, together with symplectic accelerated
optimization, variational collision algorithms for the satisfaction of
inequality constraints, and geometric adjoint sensitivity analysis for ordinary
differential equations and differential-algebraic equations. Such an approach is
expected to provide a class of intrinsic, robust, and efficient geometric
accelerated optimization and adjoint design tools on manifolds that apply to
complex, hierarchical, interconnected systems, such as modern VLSI chips, and
the robust and efficient training of deep neural networks with symmetries based
on neural differential equations and group-equivariant neural networks. By
leveraging a complex engineering system's hierarchical and interconnected
structure, the investigator and collaborators will develop accurate and
efficient symplectic adjoint sensitivity analysis tools to facilitate the
simulation-driven design of complex engineering systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.