* 2307562
* Collaborative Research: Strain-limiting Cosserat Rods with Applications to Modeling Biological Fibers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Casey Rodriguez, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 230,000.00

A vast array of objects encountered throughout science, engineering, and
everyday life have two physical dimensions that are much smaller than a third.
Examples include collagen fibers, DNA, RNA, beams, pipelines, pencils, and
cellphone charger cords. This research project concerns the theory of Cosserat
rods: bodies that are parameterized by a curve with two perpendicular
directions, the two smaller physical dimensions, specified at each point. This
theory models the bodies response to applied forces using partial differential
equations, expressing balance of linear momentum, angular momentum, energy, and
entropy. The research will investigate and validate a new class of Cosserat rod
models, describing the stretch-limiting behavior of biological fibers, including
DNA and RNA. Apart from determining the models’ fundamental properties from the
mathematical physics point of view, the results of the research will contribute
to the understanding and prediction of how fibers bend, twist, and stretch
during biological processes. The project will provide research training
opportunities for graduate students.

The research project will focus on new nonlinear, thermodynamically consistent,
strain-limiting constitutive relations between the bending, twisting, and
stretching strains and the contact couples and forces in a Cosserat rod. In the
static Green elastic setting, the research will include establishing energetic
stability and bifurcation results for helical equilibrium states, and the
quantitative comparison of predictions to the associated, available,
experimental data. In the dynamic viscoelastic setting, the balance equations
are a system of parabolic partial differential equations with different field
equations, resulting from specifying different dissipation rates. The
investigators will focus on obtaining global well-posedness, Lyapunov stability
and long-time asymptotic results for solutions to such nonlinear field equations
with experimentally natural boundary conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.