* 2307204
* Collaborative Research: Dipole Tilt Effect on Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability and Its Associated Ionospheric and Geomagnetic Signatures
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Hartinger, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 73,065.00

Magnetic reconnection and the Kelvin-Helmhotz Instability (KHI) are believed to
be the two major coupling mechanisms between the magnetosphere and the solar
wind. This coupling enables energy and particle exchange between the two
regions. This project studies these phenomena to provide insight into the
importance of Earth’s dipole as a function of time for plasma transport across
the magnetopause, the Ionosphere dynamic, and its implications for understanding
space weather. The broader impacts include support of a graduate student and the
research is led by early career woman scientists.

The project focuses on the dipole tilt effects on the KHI at the Earth’s
magnetopause boundary and the associated geomagnetic perturbations using both in
situ and MHD simulation data. The following Science Questions are addressed:
dipole tilt effects on KHI and its characteristics under different IMF and solar
wind plasma conditions, and the dipole tilt effects on KHI-associated
geomagnetic perturbations on the ground. A combination of observational data
(statistical study) and modeling with Open Geospace General Circulation Model
(OpenGGCM) will be used to address the dipole tilt effects on KHI and how that
affects the geomagnetic perturbations excited by KHI on the ground. The project
utilizes NSF funded ground-based data sets including magnetometer observations
and SuperDARN radar.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.