* 2307712
* Hamiltonian formalism in wave turbulence problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Philippe Guyenne, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 219,997.00

This project contributes to a better understanding of nonlinear phenomena
related to ocean waves. Of special interest are two problems that involve
complex interactions between surface waves and underlying currents or between
surface waves and floating structures. These coupled processes are still not
well understood and raise challenging questions in oceanography and engineering.
Wave-current interactions play a key role in many circumstances like the
generation of rogue waves or the transport of contaminants in the open ocean, as
well as the mechanism of sediment transport which drives beach erosion in
coastal areas. All these have far-reaching implications for a broad range of
human activities related to the shipping, tourism, fishing or oil industries,
and coastal infrastructure. An important application of wave-structure
interactions is to wave power extraction by floating wave energy converters.
Ocean waves have great potential as a source of renewable energy but entail many
scientific challenges. Wave farms where arrays of wave energy converters are
placed in a geometric configuration over extended maritime areas have been
considered as a serious option. Determination of the optimal configuration under
various wave conditions is crucial for maximizing power absorption in such a
system. This research develops new mathematical models for these coupled
phenomena that have so far been poorly represented in operational wave
forecasting yet are of great relevance in the context of climate change and
energy crisis. This project also provides opportunities for the participation
and training of graduate students.

Under consideration are situations where nonlinear wave interactions occur over
a wide range of length and time scales in a complex environment, which poses
serious difficulties for their asymptotic analysis and numerical simulation.
Examples include ocean waves interacting with a vortical current and ocean waves
interacting with an array of floating wave energy converters. In both cases, a
Hamiltonian formulation can be established to describe the problem and therefore
Hamiltonian techniques are ideal to properly analyze it. Such techniques however
are still not sufficiently advanced in the context of nonlinear partial
differential equations. The investigator constructs building blocks for this
Hamiltonian formalism where the presence of multiple scales can be naturally
accommodated in the asymptotic analysis while producing approximations that
preserve important structural properties such as energy conservation. This
research contributes to the development of the theory of weak wave turbulence in
complex media. Both deterministic and statistical viewpoints are adopted to
obtain reduced nonlinear models for the long-time evolution of the wave
amplitude and wave spectrum. Exact equilibrium solutions of these model
equations associated with invariants of motion are derived and numerical
simulations for more general nonlinear cases are performed to complement the
theoretical predictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.