* 2307354
* NSF-BSF: Dark-Matter Interactions at Cosmic Dawn
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julian Munoz Bermejo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 444,576.00

Decades after its discovery, dark matter remains one of the longest-standing
puzzles in astrophysics. This project will use observations from the cosmic-dawn
epoch, when the first galaxies formed, to advance our understanding of dark
matter. Scientists at the University of Texas and Ben Gurion University in
Israel will develop a theoretical framework to model the 21-cm signal of
hydrogen in the presence of different dark-matter scenarios, and use it to
analyze data from the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA). Even before a
clear detection of the 21-cm signal is reached, this proposal will deliver new
insights on the interactions between dark matter and our sector during cosmic
dawn. It will also further our study of velocity-induced acoustic oscillations
(VAOs), and their usefulness as a unique probe of the dark sector. As part of
this project, the team will provide mentoring for several graduate students and
postdocs. In addition, in an effort to promote inclusion of Hispanic and Latinx
students in scientific research, the team will initiate and lead a Spanish-
language journal club focused on astrophysics and cosmology. This project is
supported by both the National Science Foundation and the US-Israel Binational
Science Foundation to further collaborations between the astrophysical
communities in the two countries,

Cosmological constraints on the nature of dark matter (DM) are dominated by data
from either the cosmic microwave background (CMB, from z~1000) or the late
Universe (z~0). By comparison, little is known about dark matter from the
intermediate epoch of cosmic dawn at z~5-25. Cosmic dawn saw the first structure
formation and was the time when the gas was coldest in cosmic history. As such,
it is an ideal place to look for new processes that may heat up the gas, such as
decaying or annihilating DM; or cool it down, such as electrically charged DM.
The PIs will use 21-cm fluctuations, where foregrounds are limited to a “wedge”,
to place new limits on DM that are robust to systematics and foregrounds. This
includes using HERA data and the public code to be developed to thoroughly test
the models suggested to explain the claimed 21-cm detection from the Experiment
to Detect the Global EoR Signature (EDGES). This project will additionally
develop and implement novel tools to search for other phenomenologically
interesting models in data, including how they affect the amplitude and shape of
VAOs at cosmic dawn. The public software suite is an important deliverable of
this project, as it will interface with public Boltzmann solvers, allowing for
joint analyses of 21-cm data with the CMB and large-scale structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.