* 2307284
* MSA: Quantifying whole-stream denitrification and nitrogen fixation with integrated modeling of N2 and O2 fluxes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Amy Marcarelli, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Human activities on the landscape have increased the input of nitrogen (N) and
phosphorus (P) to freshwater environments. This nutrient pollution has led to
algae blooms and low-oxygen conditions in streams, lakes and the coastal ocean.
Nitrogen can by removed by denitrification, a natural process carried out by
microbes that transforms dissolved nitrogen (nitrate) into N2 gas. It is
important to understand where, when, and how much denitrification occurs in
streams and rivers to understand how to manage and protect these ecosystems.
However, measuring denitrification rates requires using separate substrates in
enclosed chambers, which creates unrealistic conditions for microbes. In this
project, we will develop modeling approaches to quantify denitrification in
stream sections by measuring concentrations of N2 gas over day-night cycles. We
will test these models in experimental and natural streams across varying
concentrations and ratios of N and P. We will create sampling methods and share
our model using an open-source framework so that our approach can be adopted by
researchers to study other streams and rivers. For broader impact activities, we
will provide training opportunities for undergraduate students and create a
summer short-course on coding and data training in ecology for high school
students.

Models that estimate freshwater denitrification rates using day-night cycles of
N2 concentrations have recently been improved by integrating inverse modeling
approaches that have been widely studied for estimating rates of primary
production and respiration using oxygen gas (O2) concentrations. However, many
different processes contribute to changes in N2 concentrations besides
denitrification that have not yet been integrated into these models. For
example, N2 gas can be removed from ecosystems by physical processes like
diffusion and bubble formation, as well as by biological processes like nitrogen
fixation (the biologically-mediated conversation of N2 gas to ammonium). We aim
to improve existing models to simultaneously resolve denitrification and
nitrogen fixation through a combination of experimental and field survey
measurements. First, we will apply open-water N2 flux models in experimental
streams where the relative activity of denitrification and N2 fixation will be
manipulated by varying water column N:P, and where we will quantify bubble
formation and gas exchange to parameterize our model. Second, we will apply
open-water models to nine streams that are part of the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON), selected to have a gradient of N:P and where prior
NSF-funded research has documented a gradient of denitrification and N2 fixation
activity. Together, these activities will both provide much improved estimates
of N2 fluxes from streams in different ecoregions in the United States, and
provide improved modeling techniques that can be applied by ourselves and others
to better understand nitrogen cycling and removal in streams and rivers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.