* 2307832
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Saltwater Rising: Understanding how sea level rise affects coastal amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Molly Womack, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 399,855.00

Climate change is increasing the amount of salt of coastal freshwater habitats,
driven by sea-level rise and intensified storm surges. Anurans (frogs and toads)
play a pivotal role in wetland ecosystems and are presumed to be intolerant of
saltwater, but recent syntheses indicate more salt tolerance than previously
thought. This project improves our understanding of the limits of salt tolerance
in anuran species occupying coastal habitats on two sea level rise fronts (Gulf
and Atlantic coasts). The project uses an experimental approach that
investigates multiple salinities, species, life stages, and levels of biological
organization, providing data that can guide coastal managers and practitioners
in improving coastal resilience and preventing biodiversity loss. Specifically,
the study will identify life stage-specific mortality from salt stress across
species to predict vulnerable life stages and breeding times. This research will
determine whether species relatedness and ecological traits can predict salinity
vulnerability and characterize the extent that the effects of saltwater at one
life stage cascade across life stages. Finally, this study aims to understand
how saltwater affects amphibian physiology across species and life stages,
focusing on membrane permeability, hormones, and cellular processes. In summary,
this research will produce diverse physiological, life history, phylogenetic,
and genomic datasets that span across life stages and species to determine the
salinity tolerance of anuran species that occupy coastal habitats with the goal
of informing conservation actions and predicting climate change impacts. The
project will also educate students and the public on various topics such as
conservation and physiology. Climate change-driven sea level rise is increasing
salinization of coastal habitats. Sea levels along the United States coastlines
are predicted to rise between 50 and 100 cm in the next 70 years, with the east
and gulf coasts facing intensified impacts. Anurans, or frogs and toads, are
expected to be severely affected by salinity increases, as they are considered
largely saltwater intolerant. However, salinity tolerance among amphibians is
more variable than commonly considered, leaving uncertainty in the predictions
of seawater inundation effects on coastal communities. To address these gaps,
this research will focus on 10 anuran species with known populations within five
miles of coastlines near Houston, Texas and Sapelo Island, Georgia. These
locations are dual sea level rise fronts with low-elevation coastlines and
freshwater wetlands expected to be inundated by the year 2050 under moderate sea
level rise scenarios. The project will use a comparative approach to investigate
how life history traits and evolutionary history affect stage-specific survival
in higher salinities, how chronic saltwater exposure affects long-term growth,
development, and fitness, and the physiological responses to saltwater exposure.
This research will inform questions on how complex life cycles affect
persistence in novel environments, how physiological mechanisms facilitate
saltwater tolerance, and how chronic versus acute exposure affect survival and
persistence. Additionally, this research will provide baselines for predicting
how different coastal species will fare as sea level rise pushes saltwater
further upriver and inland, which can guide coastal managers and practitioners
to improve coastal resiliency and prevent biodiversity losses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.