* 2307285
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Comprehension and Meta-comprehension Benefits of Learner-Generated Drawings in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Allison Jaeger, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2024
* USD 271,493.00

Academic success depends on students’ ability to comprehend text. Such
comprehension can be challenging in undergraduate science courses because the
text often describes things that are complex, dynamic, and invisible. One
critical factor in effective text comprehension is the ability to monitor and
regulate one’s own learning. Unfortunately, students are often inaccurate judges
of their learning, leading them to make ineffective study choices and to achieve
limited learning outcomes. This project will explore learner-generated drawing,
a promising strategy for enhancing self-regulated learning from science text.
Although creating drawings can enhance learning under some conditions, little is
known about how different components of the drawing process contribute to
comprehension and self-regulation. These components include making the drawing,
comparing one’s drawing to feedback, and revising one’s drawing in response to
the feedback. This collaborative project will conduct the first set of
experiments designed to identify critical elements of learner-generated drawings
across multiple scientific disciplines. By identifying which components of
drawing have the strongest benefits, this research can help instructors more
effectively implement drawing-based learning activities and support students who
are most at-risk of struggling in science courses.

This project will investigate how learning by drawing contributes to
comprehension, monitoring accuracy, and self-regulation. In a series of
laboratory experiments, this project will systematically isolate the cognitive
and metacognitive benefits of three core mechanisms of drawing: generation,
comparison, and revision. The project will test the hypothesis that the learning
conditions that best support comprehension may differ from the conditions that
best support meta-comprehension, depending on the diagnostic cues available
during learning. One project aim is to determine the optimal level of drawing
generation: fully-learner-generated, partially-learner-generated, instructor-
provided, or instructor-generated. The second aim will study the contribution of
actively comparing one’s fully or partially completed drawings to feedback in
the form of instructor-provided drawings. The third aim will identify the role
of revising learner-generated or instructor-provided errors in drawings based on
provided feedback. The final aim will combine optimal generation, comparison,
and revision conditions, and study students’ subsequent restudy behavior and
learning outcomes. Overall, understanding the mechanisms that support learning
by drawing will contribute to existing models of self-regulated learning and
provide a roadmap for future research investigating precisely how these
mechanisms work, including when they work and for whom.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.