* 2307278
* Collaborative Research: Massive Black Hole Binaries as Multimessenger Sources: The X-ray Counterparts to Gravitational Wave Emission
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tamara Bogdanovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 06/30/2026
* USD 510,590.00

This project will advance our understanding of massive back holes. Its primary
focus is on massive black hole binaries (MBHBs) that inspiral toward merger due
to the emission of gravitational waves (GWs). Their existence is anticipated but
is yet to be definitively confirmed in observations. The discovery of such
binaries would allow us to learn about their host galaxies and test some
fundamental laws of physics. The project will also benefit society through
innovations in teaching and learning and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.

In anticipation of imminent multimessenger observations of MBHBs inspiraling
toward coalescence this team proposes to model the X-ray counterparts to their
GW signal. The main goals of this work are: (a) to lay the groundwork for
observations of this type, (b) to investigate correlations between the X-ray and
GW signatures, and (c) to characterize the properties of MBHBs using both
messengers. This work will result in predictions about the time-dependent
photometric and spectroscopic X-ray signatures associated with inspiraling
massive black hole binaries. These predictions will help guide observational
strategy in X-rays in years leading to gravitational wave detections. They will
be directly tested once a detection of an inspiraling binary is made, making
such observations an essential ingredient in understanding one of the key
phenomena in modern astrophysics. This work is relevant for the current and
future X-ray observatories (XMM-Newton, Chandra, XRISM, Athena, Lynx, STROBE-X,
AXIS and others) and gravitational wave observatories, such as the Pulsar Timing
Arrays (PTAs) and the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.