* 2307376
* ADVANCE Journal
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Susan Shaw, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2028
* USD 655,013.00

Oregon State University (OSU) will implement the ADVANCE Journal, a peer-
reviewed, online, open access scientific research journal focused on
institutional transformation, intersectionality, inclusion, equity, and justice.
A major component of the work will be to develop a sustainability plan for the
journal. The ADVANCE Journal was begun in 2018. Since then, the journal has
become an important venue for sharing NSF ADVANCE grantee generated research and
lessons learned with both ADVANCE communities and the broader higher education
community.

The goal of the journal is to share knowledge that has the potential to improve
climate, processes, relationships, and experiences of STEM faculty regardless of
gender. The journal provides a forum for research, narratives, case studies,
art, and other genres of scholarship that increase knowledge and promote action
toward institutional transformation with inclusion, equity, and justice at the
center. The journal provides a unique publishing space for sharing lessons
learned by multidisciplinary authors that may not find acceptance in more
traditional journals. The journal team will work with the ADVANCE Resource
Coordination (ARC) Network and other organizations to create a business plan to
sustain the journal in the future.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. 
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.