* 2307713
* Common Envelope Evolution and the Origins of Massive Compact Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Ricker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 377,610.00

Close binary systems experience a brief period in which both stars become
embedded in a common gaseous envelope - the Common Envelope (CE) phase. Before
its ejection, drag forces within the envelope shrink the stars' separation,
leaving behind a much closer system. If both stars are massive (8-100 solar
masses), exotic binary systems comprised of neutron stars and black holes may
result, which are of great interest as being the likely progenitors of gamma-ray
bursts, kilonovae, and gravity wave sources. However, current simulations of the
CE phase are unable to achieve envelope ejection for many systems in which it
should occur, with the added problem of insufficient orbital shrinkage or
"inspiraling." This discrepancy has been attributed to missing physics or
insufficient spatial resolution/duration in the simulations. The principal
investigator (PI) and team will use 3D radiation-hydrodynamical simulations to
address several important questions regarding CE evolution in massive, close
binary star systems by considering for the first time the energy released by
H/He recombination in the envelope as well as stellar winds and pulsations. The
questions to be addressed include (1) the possible roles these mechanisms play
in envelope ejection, (2) what kinds of systems result, and (3) whether there
are observational signatures that will allow these events to be recognized. This
award will also support research efforts of one graduate and two undergraduate
students each year, an extension of the Illinois Astrophysical Dynamics Demos
site, plus participation in a summer astronomy camp.

The PI's team will use radiation-hydrodynamic simulations to study the evolution
of common envelope (CE) binaries comprised of a red supergiant and a neutron
star or black hole companion. This configuration plays a key role in formation
scenarios for high-mass X-ray binaries, binary black holes, and binary neutron
stars. To achieve envelope ejection and inspiraling in these systems they will
use adaptive mesh refinement simulations that include both H and He partial
ionization and radiation diffusion in a self-consistent manner. By including
time-dependent envelope heating, the researchers will also explore the role of
dynamical pulsations in assisting envelope ejection. And by directly monitoring
the emergent radiative flux they will also generate light curves to determine
which observational signatures might be useful as triggers for follow-up time-
domain survey observations. The results of these simulations will directly guide
the work of the binary population synthesis community, whose predictions for the
number of gravitational wave sources, double degenerate Type Ia supernovae, and
X-ray binaries are sensitive to this evolutionary phase.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.