* 2307413
* Collaborative Research: FieldSafe - Changing the Culture of Fieldwork in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Allison Mattheis, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2026
* USD 46,378.00

Field-based research is integral to many geoscience research programs and can
present unique challenges for scientists and other participants. Fieldwork is
often conducted in teams that include established researchers and their
students, which introduces complex power dynamics. These conditions create
challenges and stressors that increase vulnerability to hostile behaviors such
as bullying, harassment, and other identity-based exclusionary behaviors. The
need to address safety, identity-based harassment and other exclusionary
behaviors in field campaigns is growing more urgent to ensure safe and
productive research environments. This work supports the field-based geoscience
community by increasing field team preparedness and changing fieldwork team
culture to be inclusive, supportive, welcoming, discrimination-free and
productive. The project is a synergistic effort between FieldSafe and the
ADVANCEGeo Partnership to support researchers in meeting the new NSF proposal
requirement for the inclusion of a field safety plan in all field-based
proposals, and to support institutional change initiatives in other research
funding agencies and at academic institutions. This is especially novel because,
to date, no research has been conducted on the effectiveness of training focused
on field safety and/or anti-harassment and tools for the design of inclusive
field campaigns.

The goals of this project are to (1) create and widely disseminate a field
safety, anti-harassment, and bystander intervention training certificate program
through an online course platform, (2) develop a toolkit to support field teams
in planning safe and inclusive field campaigns and (3) research the impact of
these trainings and support tools for field culture change. This project
produces new knowledge of the effectiveness of a program that utilizes a
combined self-paced online course combined with synchronous guided debrief and
reflection sessions to support the development of inclusive culture in all field
environments. The results of this project will contribute a robust and
transferable research design and instruments to study the culture and safety of
fieldwork. The research will contribute important findings around critical
components for the instructional sequence and implementation of training and how
the application of this training may vary based on different field contexts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.