* 2307200
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Southern Nevada Northern Arizona
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Keith Rogers, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,398,417.00

The overall goal of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program is to assist universities and colleges in diversifying the
nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by
increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
persons from LSAMP populations LSAMP populations are defined as persons from
groups underrepresented in the STEM enterprise: Blacks and African-Americans,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders. The LSAMP Program priorities are to (a)
increase individual student retention and progression to baccalaureate degrees
for underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, (b) enable successful transfer of
underrepresented students from 2-year to 4-yearinstitutions in STEM programs (c)
increase access to high quality undergraduate research experiences, and (d)
facilitate seamless transition of underrepresented students into STEM graduate
programs.

The Southern Nevada Northern Arizona LSAMP (SNNA-LSAMP) is an alliance of higher
education institutions that includes research universities (University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, and Northern Arizona University) and community colleges
(College of Southern Nevada and Coconino Community College) in the Lower
Colorado River Basin. SNNA-LSAMP's goal is to increase substantially the number
of underrepresented minority (URM) students who earn science, technology,
engineering, and technology (STEM) baccalaureate degrees at alliance
institutions within five years.

SNNA-LSAMP will provide services and activities that bolster the academic
performance, persistence, and graduation rates of students underrepresented in
STEM at alliance institutions. Specifically, SNNA-LSAMP will provide these
students with intensive, near-peer mentoring; out-of-class STEM activities that
enhance socialization of STEM disciplines; undergraduate research opportunities;
internships; registration for enrollment in STEM courses; and access to all
academic support services provided on alliance campuses. Furthermore, SNNA-LSAMP
will facilitate the smooth transitions for participants transferring from its
community colleges to its universities, as well as provide upper-division
participants with step-by-step guidance through the process of applying to
graduate school. SNNA-LSAMP will improve the STEM classroom experience for
students from LSAMP populations by providing workshops that enhance the
multicultural competence of professors and instructors at alliance institutions.
The project will be a vital component of efforts to diversify and significantly
expand the pool of highly qualified STEM workers in southern Nevada and northern
Arizona, accelerating the region's ongoing transformation into fertile ground
for STEM startups and will be an attractive destination for established STEM-
based businesses seeking to relocate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.