* 2307623
* Collaborative Research: Establishing the Physical Picture for Rest-optical Emission Lines in Star-forming Galaxies from Cosmic Noon to Cosmic Dawn
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ryan Sanders, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 208,448.00

Astronomers aim to measure several fundamental properties of galaxies across
cosmic time. These include the rate at which new stars are being born, the
proportion of so-called heavy elements (e.g., oxygen) relative to hydrogen, and
the nature of the radiation field to which the interstellar medium (ISM) is
exposed (be it light from massive stars or from accretion onto a supermassive
black hole). These key galaxy properties are commonly inferred from the pattern
of spectral emission lines produced by the ionized ISM. However, it has been
shown that the translation between the spectrum of a galaxy and the underlying
physical conditions prevailing in that galaxy may be qualitatively different in
galaxies observed within the first few billion years of cosmic time, relative to
what is observed in the universe today. Shapley and Sanders will analyze data
from several hundred galaxies, observed roughly 10 billion years ago when the
universe was forming stars at its peak level, to establish this essential
translation between galaxy spectral and physical properties. They will also
build a publicly available software tool for the community for modeling the
spectra of galaxies all the way back to cosmic dawn within the first billion
years after the Big Bang. Shapley and Sanders will also engage in several
efforts in public outreach, partnering with the WorldWide Telescope Ambassadors
Program to develop interactive tours across the night sky on topics such as
astronomical spectroscopy. They will incorporate these pedagogical materials
into ongoing outreach efforts at each of their respective campuses.

There are important questions regarding the translation of rest-optical emission
line properties to physical ones (e.g., star-formation rate, gas-phase oxygen
abundance, ionization parameter) in distant galaxies. The co-PIs have assembled
the definitive sample of z=1.5-2.5 star-forming galaxies from the Keck MOSFIRE
Deep Evolution Field (MOSDEF) survey. They will use this sample to establish the
translation between galaxy emission-line and physical properties, and build and
publicly release a software tool for robust modeling of the rest-optical
emission-line spectra of distant galaxies all the way back to cosmic dawn (z>6).
The proposed products will provide a lasting legacy as we enter into a new era
for near-IR spectroscopy with great observatories in space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.