* 2307198
* How Bright is the Radio Sky?  A 310 MHz Absolute Map
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Richard Bradley, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 589,939.00

It is important to observe all of the light that comes to us from astronomical
sources in the universe, including the kinds of light that human eyes cannot
see, like the longer wavelength of light called radio waves.  In addition to the
radio waves that come from bright objects in space that we know about, there is
also diffuse radio emission which comes from every direction in the sky.  This
diffuse radio emission can only be properly understood by observing it over
large portions of the sky at different radio wavelengths.  This project will
make a new, modern map of these signals by utilizing the unique features of the
Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope along with advanced custom instrumentation
developed specifically for this project.  The investigators will leverage
cutting-edge radio receiver technology and contemporary computing capabilities
to achieve unprecedented accuracy.  The resulting picture of the radio emission
coming from our universe will be available to the astronomical community as an
important resource. This project will also provide essential direct training
opportunities for researchers and students.

This project will produce a new map of the absolute sky brightness at 310 MHz,
with angular resolution finer than Galactic features as well as polarization
information. The resulting map will be the first such large-scale, absolutely
calibrated radio map to be made in 40 years and the only one ever where an
absolute zero-level calibration is the primary goal.  This map of the whole sky
north of -47 degrees declination, with all Galactic latitudes observed, will
allow a determination, for the first time in a systematically reliable way, of
the absolute level of diffuse radio emission in the universe and from Galactic
structure.  It will provide an important new resource for understanding and
constraining almost all Galactic and extragalactic phenomena that manifest in,
or depend on the understanding of, diffuse radio emission. These include cosmic
microwave background studies, 21-cm cosmology, cosmic ray propagation, magnetic
field structures, supernova remnant and pulsar searches, composition of the
interstellar medium, finer scale radio structure, tracers for Galactic phenomena
at other wavelengths, investigations of the radio synchrotron background, and
many more.  The investigators will deploy a custom, novel polarization-sensitive
receiver and low sidelobe, high edge-taper feed on the Green Bank Telescope. 
The novel receiver technologies that will be deployed and characterized have the
potential to yield important applications in radio astronomy.  This project will
provide essential direct training for postdoctoral researchers and undergraduate
students, as well as many potential research opportunities for graduate students
given the wide variety of astrophysical investigations it will enable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.