* 2307273
* Neural Networks for Stationary and Evolutionary Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Stephan Wojtowytsch, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 33,100.00

Artificial neural networks have become one of the dominant models in data
science, used in applications from image classification to natural language
processing. Their empirical success in these diverse fields has sparked interest
in further applying such models in new directions, such as numerical analysis
and scientific computing. This project is aimed at developing a deeper
understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the role of neural network
models used for numerical analysis and scientific computing, particularly when
compared with more classic tools. This is essential in enabling neural network
models to be widely deployed in sensitive fields across engineering domains.
Graduate students will be trained as part of this project, modern tools from
data science and deep learning will be incorporated into graduate curricula, and
outreach activities are planned to attract undergraduates as well as
underrepresented groups in STEM into this research area.

The focus of this work is on the use of neural network models in numerical
algorithms used in models based on the calculus of variations, targeting two
case studies. The first is related to functionals that exhibit the Lavrentiev
gap phenomena, where an energy gap between the lowest energy achievable by
shallow neural networks and more general functions is considered. The second is
the Allen-Cahn equation, where the solution strategy of physics-inspired neural
networks is analyzed. In the second problem, the adaptivity of neural networks
to low-dimensional moving interfaces plays a key role when comparing to e.g.
fixed mesh finite element methods. The theoretical results are intended to
better understand two fundamental challenges. The first is whether the
adaptivity of neural networks can be harnessed for the numerical approximation
of spatially very inhomogeneous variational problems. The second seeks to
understand the precise situations in which neural network solvers are not
expected to outperform traditional solvers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.