* 2307813
* ORCC: Collaborative Research: Mechanisms underpinning the unusual, high CO2 sensitivity of sand lances, key forage fishes on the Northwest Atlantic Shelf
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* David Wiley, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 576,890.00

Ocean warming and acidification are direct, predictable consequences of
anthropogenic climate change with likely vast but still insufficiently
understood consequences for marine life. So far, most tested fish species appear
only mildly sensitive to ocean acidification, but sand lances are an exception.
Sand lances are small, eel-like, schooling fishes of enormous importance as food
for seabirds and mammals in temperate to polar ecosystems. Recent research
conclusively demonstrated that many sand lance embryos have trouble developing
and hatching under predicted future ocean conditions. This project uses modern
experimental and molecular tools to understand exactly WHY sand lance embryos
are so unusually sensitive and which genes and enzymes are responsible for this.
Genes will also reveal whether some specific genotypes are less sensitive to
warming and acidification, which can then be used to predict whether the species
could evolve to be more tolerant over time. Another important objective is to
test a closely related sand lance species to find out whether the high climate
sensitivity might be of general concern in this important group of forage
fishes. This research will provide critical information needed to protect the
bioeconomy of fisheries. The project combines innovative ecological,
evolutionary, and genomic research to help society anticipate looming marine
ecosystem changes in the 21st century, while equipping the next generation of
scientists with the needed tools and expertise to succeed in the challenges
ahead. The project also creates opportunities for high school students from
underprivileged Connecticut schools to accompany the team on sand lance sampling
trips to Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary.

Two recent studies on Northern sand lance (Ammodytes dubius), a key forage fish
on offshore sand banks across the Northwest Atlantic shelf, have robustly
demonstrated that predicted future CO2 conditions induce some of the most severe
reductions in embryo survival and hatching success seen yet among tested fish
species. This project has four objectives for revealing the mechanisms
underpinning this unusual, high CO2-sensitivity as well as the ubiquity and
genetic basis of this phenomenon. [1] For the first time, we will rear A. dubius
offspring produced from wild spawners to late larval stages at factorial CO2 ×
temperature conditions to test whether sand lance larvae are as CO2-sensitive as
embryos. [2] For the first time, we will use transcriptomic tools (RNAseq, RT-
qPCR) to elucidate mechanisms causing ‘CO2-impaired hatching’, focusing
specifically on hatching enzymes, to better understand a newly discovered
mortality mechanism due to high CO2 in fishes. [3] Modern genomic approaches
(low-coverage whole genome sequencing; allele frequency shifts, relatedness
analyses) will reveal whether high CO2-sensitivity has a genetic basis in sand
lance and could therefore evolve. [4] And for the first time, we will extend CO2
× temperature experiments to a congener, the American sand lance (A.
americanus), which provides an important scientific contrast between nearshore
vs. offshore species CO2-sensitivities and will yield critical insights whether
high CO2-sensitivity is a wider concern within the sand lance family.

This award was co-funded through the BIO/IOS Organismal Responses to Climate
Change Program and the GEO/OCE Biological Oceanography Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.