* 2307384
* Spectral Theory and Applications for Models with Localized or Boundary Defects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jeremy Marzuola, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 366,654.00

The project consists of three main research areas in applied mathematics: (i)
properties of model operators in condensed matter and topological physics, (ii)
performance of numerical algorithms for studying how waves propagate (either
electromagnetic waves or fluid waves), and (iii) a study on how the geometry of
a domain or graph impacts methods for “partitioning” it into smaller useful
pieces for identifying key communities or labels (such as identifying cancer
cells from certain genetic markers). Each of these might sound completely
unrelated, but the main idea behind the project is that similar methods from
harmonic analysis and optimization can be applied to each of these problems when
viewed through the right lens. A substantial part of the project will be
performed in collaboration with undergraduate and graduate students and
postdocs, towards developing theoretical and computational tools, while at the
same time maintaining and creating new collaborations with physicists,
especially in terms of applications. Special attention will be paid to working
with numerical analysts at the forefront of simulating problems in each
application domain.

Algorithms for solving complicated problems in physics, fluid mechanics and
data analysis will be considered, with a special focus on quantifiable error
estimates and rigorous constructions of various fundamental modes or resonances
for physically important examples. For instance, the principal investigator will
extend work that was performed with collaborators on solving the Helmholtz
problem using domain decompositions to give further quantitative bounds on
numerical schemes for obstacle scattering, in similar way to the cases of
scattering by inhomogeneous media. This will give enhanced error estimates for
numerical solutions to the Helmholtz equation, which play a major role in
various applications for inverse problems in medical imaging, sonar detection,
and more. In particular, although numerical simulations are by nature
constrained to certain bounded domains, one can understand how to provide
damping of a fluid at certain points to allow for a numerical simulation of the
way a wave propagates in the open ocean without getting effects from the
boundary. This is done by adding a “damping term” that could perturb the system
in a significant way. However, upon performing a certain transformation, the
essence of this damping lies in computing properties of operators that arise in
quantum mechanics with complex potentials. The complex and rich tools that have
been recently developed in microlocal analysis, optimization and elliptic theory
of partial differential equations allow us to give strong insights and new means
of establishing quantitative bounds. These apply to the efficacy of damped fluid
models, as well as to questions related to the behavior of a light wave in a
crystalline structure with defects. These methods apply to various fields,
including but not limited to imaging, lasing and community detection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.