* 2307830
* RAPID: Assessing the role of hurricanes and microbes in enhancing coastal sediment accumulation
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Elizabeth Trower, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 44,246.00

Over 60 million Americans live along the coasts of the Gulf of Mexico and
Atlantic. These regions of the United States are the most vulnerable to
hurricanes and sea level rise. However, stabilizing coastlines and increasing
sediment accumulation can reduce these hazards. This study explores how microbes
affect these processes on Little Ambergris Cay, a small uninhabited island in
the Turks and Caicos Islands. In September 2022, Hurricane Fiona passed near the
island. This study examines how microbes stabilize sediment in both lagoonal and
coastal settings after the hurricane. Results from this study will be shared
with local communities through partnership with the Turks and Caicos Islands
Department of Environment and Coastal Resources (DECR). This study also provides
proof of concept for interventions that could help communities stabilize their
coastlines. This would enhance resilience against sea level rise and increasing
hurricane intensity. The project educational Broader Impacts include
participation of a graduate student from University of Colorado and a postdoc
from University of California, Berkeley in the sampling trips.

This study tracks responses of microbial mat sediment stabilization and
cementation of hurricane breccias that occur during the recovery from Hurricane
Fiona, which passed close to Little Ambergris Cay as a Category 3 hurricane in
September 2022. Observations from a prior field season in June 2022 provide a
pre-hurricane baseline. Proposed work includes: (i) microelectrode profiles of
dissolved O2, H2S, and pH to track re-establishment of geochemical gradients in
mats and 16S rRNA gene sequencing to compare community recovery to our pre/post-
Irma and pre-Fiona observations; (ii) installation of small-scale surface
elevation table devices to quantitatively track net thickness of mat growth in a
suite of locations; (iii) repeated in situ microscopy observations and short-
term trapping-and-binding experiments to determine whether mat response to added
sediment is the same over time (i.e., the delivery of new sediment is the
primary requirement for vertical accretion) or if the mat response changes as
the ecosystem recovers (i.e., the hurricane perturbation to the microbial
ecosystem is as important as the delivery of sediment); and (iv) in situ
hurricane breccia lithification experiments to measure the timescale of
lithification and the microbial activity present. This work will be carried out
over three field seasons during 2023, allowing both short-term (daily) and
medium-term (months-long) observations of the island response during the first
year following hurricane perturbation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.