* 2307252
* Collaborative Research: MRA: A functional model of soil organic matter composition at continental scale
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* William Hockaday, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2026
* USD 215,029.00

Organic matter is a component of most soil that provides disproportionate and
critical services to society. Soil organic matter influences fertility and plant
growth, water quality and quantity, and global climate, due to its roles in
storing carbon and nutrients and releasing them during decomposition. Predicting
the distribution and functions of soil organic matter remains challenging
despite more than a century of research on this topic. The ecosystem properties
that influence soil organic matter vary tremendously over small and large
spatial scales, and many previous studies have focused on a single soil type or
geographic region. Scientists continue to debate the nature of soil organic
matter and why it persists, given that microorganisms can inevitably decompose
it over timescales of days to millennia. This project aims to reconcile previous
debates regarding what soil organic matter consists of, and the physical,
chemical, and biological factors that control its decomposition and capacity to
supply nitrogen to plants. The study will combine a wealth of existing data with
new samples and measurements from the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON), a monitoring network including diverse sites across the U.S. Researchers
will test a new quantitative framework to predict soil carbon and nitrogen
cycling by incorporating multiple trade-offs in environmental characteristics at
local to continental scales. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups in science, and will
develop soil-related curricula for a general educational audience. Many
influential scientific concepts related to soil organic matter were developed
within single ecosystem types and struggle to predict its distribution and
dynamics at continental scale. The leaf economics spectrum showed that numerous
aspects of plant diversity collapse along a fundamental axis of trait variation
corresponding to fast vs. slow return on investment. However, the tremendous
heterogeneity of soil and the lack of comprehensive and standardized data has
stymied efforts to develop a similarly simple framework for predicting soil
biogeochemical processes. This project will test whether variation in soil
organic matter properties and cycling can be explained by three fundamental axes
of ecosystem variation corresponding to fast and slow biogeochemical rates, each
linked to interactions among climate, minerals, plants, microbes, and organic
molecules, as supported by theory and preliminary data. Consideration of the
composition of individual soil samples along each axis, and their joint
influence on process rates, may help reconcile the importance of distinct
mechanisms of organic matter persistence demonstrated in previous work, and
thereby improve prediction of critical ecosystem functions that soil organic
matter provides. To test this model, the researchers will collect new
measurements of organic matter molecular composition, geochemistry and
mineralogy, short- and long-term biogeochemical process rates, and microbial
functional genes that leverage existing and ongoing data and sample collection
from NEON sites. The project will include recruitment, education, and training
of the future scientific, engineering, technical, and policy workforce and
leadership needed to pursue basic research on regional to continental scale
biology, as well as opportunities to engage a diverse community of learners and
educators in regional to continental scale research and the use of NEON.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.