* 2307328
* Design and Analysis of Algorithms for Structured Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jose Yunier Bello Cruz, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2026
* USD 161,259.00

This project aims to develop advanced tools for analyzing algorithms that solve
structured optimization problems, which play an important role for models in
various scientific and engineering fields, including massive data analysis,
machine learning, signal processing, and image reconstruction. While there are
several practical and successful algorithms for optimizing these frameworks,
their fundamental convergence theory is not yet fully understood. This project
seeks to develop new tools that will enable a better understanding of the core
features of both the models and algorithms, design more effective algorithms,
and tackle more challenging applications. The outcomes of this project will
contribute to a better understanding of how to achieve fast convergence in
modified classical iterations, which will improve their efficiency. The project
will integrate its findings into graduate-level courses and engage Ph.D.
students in research related to the project's topics.

This research project will focus on designing and analyzing novel efficient
projection/proximal-type schemes for solving (non)convex and (non)smooth
composite optimization and feasibility problems. The research will investigate
how the irregular phenomena of nonsmoothness and nonconvexity affect algorithmic
performance and will study the possibility of improving the convergence
complexity of the algorithms by exploiting the particular structure of the
problem. Splitting iterations frequently show signs of zigzagging, affecting
those schemes' convergence speed. The proposed research will advance and adapt
the Circumcentered-Reflection Method to enhance the performance and complexity
of splitting algorithms for solving more general structured problems. In the
absence of classical assumptions, the project will also investigate variations
of the FISTA algorithm for solving composite problems and semismooth Newtonian
iterations for solving generalized projection equations and complementarity
problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.