* 2307280
* NSF-BSF: The Physics of Multiphase Gas Streams feeding Galaxies from the Cosmic Web
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daisuke Nagai, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 733,325.00

Over the past two decades, a coherent picture of galaxy formation has emerged
whereby gas flows into massive dark matter halos from the Intergalactic Medium
(IGM) via a network of narrow filaments and sheets that together comprise the
"cosmic web‚Äù. This gas accretion supplies fuel for star formation, sets the
angular momentum and size of disk galaxies, and drives turbulence and disk
instabilities. We cannot fully understand galaxy evolution without a detailed
understanding of this accretion process. However, numerical simulations of this
inflow are extremely challenging. This research team will address these
shortcomings through an extended suite of cosmological magneto-hydrodynamical
simulations designed to resolve the filaments and IGM to accurately model their
evolution and explore the detailed physics of how galaxies are fed from their
earliest stages of formation. This work will provide mentoring and training for
two graduate students. The team will also create a cosmology module for Yale's
Pathway to Science program and run a free two-week summer STEM program for high
school students.

The proposed simulations will resolve the multiphase structure of gas over all
the relevant scales, from the Mpc-sized cosmic sheets and filaments to the dense
clumps (tens of parsecs) of gas that form within the streams and the stream-fed
disks. Such a comprehensive theoretical analysis promises to reshape the
understanding of galaxy formation in a cosmological context as well as deepen
our understanding of the physics of multiphase plasmas. It is also highly timely
to aid in interpreting current and upcoming observational data of the gas around
galaxies, Lyman-alpha blobs, the Lyman-alpha Forest, and metal-free Lyman limit
systems. In addition, this study aims to improve the understanding of how high-z
disk galaxies acquire their angular momentum and which mechanisms are
responsible for triggering turbulence and maintaining violent instabilities. All
simulations run as part of this study will be made publicly available. The team
will also build analytic models that encapsulate their findings and elucidate
the physics of galaxy formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.