* 2307142
* Analysis of Regular and Random Soliton Gases in Integrable Dispersive Partial Differential Equations.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Jenkins, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 209,496.00

Nonlinear wave interactions describe phenomena observed throughout science and
engineering, from the motion of water waves to fiber optic transmissions to the
physics of plasmas relevant to star and fusion reactors. Despite the disparate
physical contexts, similar wave patterns emerge, and their behavior can be
modeled by the same nonlinear partial differential equations. In applications
and real-world measurements, the nonlinear interactions lead to waves patterns
of exceeding complexity and apparent randomness. This project will further the
understanding of these waveforms by developing techniques to model them as
accumulations of special isolated traveling wave solutions, i.e., solitons. The
resulting ensembles of many solitons, known as soliton gases, will be studied
directly and statistically, when their properties are allowed to behave
randomly. The aim is to precisely describe, and ultimately control, the
nonlinear wave dynamics observed in applications, for example in fiber optic
transmission. The project will provide research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.

The project has three main mathematical goals: 1) to build a rigorous analytical
description of soliton gases, via characterization of their spectral properties,
and use this description to study their statistical properties; 2) to analyze
the small dispersion semiclassical limit of the focusing nonlinear Schrodinger
equation, as a mechanism for generating integrable turbulence and rogue waves
from initial data; 3) to study the long-time behavior of spectrally singular
solutions of integrable partial differential equations. The study will involve
using and further developing tools from complex and asymptotic analysis, with an
emphasis in the Inverse Scattering Transform method. The double scaling limit of
the focusing nonlinear Schrodinger equation has the potential to introduce a new
class of universality at wave breaking and further the understanding of rogue
wave generation. Mathematically, the work on spectrally singular solutions and
fat-tailed waves would lead to an extension of Inverse Scattering Transform
techniques to broader classes of initial data inaccessible by existing
techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.