* 2307327
* Star Formation, ISM, and Winds in Bursty vs. Steady Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Claude-Andre Faucher-Giguere, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 540,758.00

Stars form in galaxies wherever molecular gas becomes sufficiently cold and
dense to become gravitationally unstable, which initiates fragmentation and
subsequent collapse. Once formed, however, stars can profoundly affect their
surroundings through the energy injected by supernovae, ultraviolet radiation,
and fast stellar winds, processes collectively referred to as "stellar
feedback." Stellar feedback can suppress the star formation rate (SFR), regulate
the overall mass growth of a galaxy, and shape its multi-phase interstellar
medium (ISM). While there has been much progress in modeling stellar feedback,
previous work has focused primarily on Milky Way-like systems, where the SFR is
fairly constant. However, star formation in low-mass and/or high-redshift
galaxies tend to have highly episodic or "bursty" SFRs, where stellar feedback
may work in fundamentally different ways relative to local spirals. The
principal investigator and team will extend stellar feedback theory from
"steady" systems to bursty ones, and in particular, the small and highly gas
rich examples recently found at high-redshift that are likely the progenitors of
Milky Way-like systems, and which are the focus of many observational studies by
state-of-the-art ground- based and space-based observatories. In addition to a
postdoc, this award will support the mentoring of three undergraduate
researchers, outreach events at Chicago's Adler Planetarium and other public
events, and improvements in FIREFLY, an interactive scientific visualization
tool.

The proposed research will be centered on a large suite of zoom-in simulations
that resolve the ISM of individual galaxies in a cosmological context, and which
self-consistently model the transition from bursty to steady galaxies. The
simulations include all the main forms of stellar found in galaxies from dwarfs
to super-L*. The project will focus on three core science issues: (1) the
applicability of “equilibrium disk” or “pressure balance” models for the origin
of the Kennicutt-Schmidt star formation law, (2) the dynamical and thermodynamic
properties of the ISM and its relationship to the circumgalactic medium, and (3)
the launching of galactic winds and galactic fountains in bursty vs. steady
galaxies. Variants of the simulations will include additional physical processes
(e.g., magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and non-equilibrium ISM chemistry) to test
how the results depend on these additional variables. Observational predictions
will be made to test the simulation predictions in the different regimes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.