* 2307044
* Snake venom systems as a model for inferring the structure and evolution of regulatory networks underlying organism-level physiological traits
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Stephen Mackessy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,501,418.00

How new traits arise, how organism-level phenotypes manifest through variation
at the cellular level, and how trait variation is impacted by genomic changes
that modify gene regulatory networks are fundamental questions for understanding
the genomic basis of organismal phenotype. This collaborative project links
these topics through studies of snake venom systems and the genomic, regulatory,
physiological, cellular, and evolutionary mechanisms that drive variation in
venom composition. The research aims to transform current understanding of gene
regulatory mechanisms by integrating inferences across scales of biological
organization, from single cells to whole organisms, and from within populations
to distantly related species, and by applying new predictive frameworks to link
genetic and phenotypic variation. New statistical approaches that leverage both
cellular and evolutionary variation to generate, test, and refine hypotheses for
how gene regulatory networks function – innovations that are broadly applicable
to any eukaryotic system – will be developed and disseminated. The research will
advance fundamental understanding of how natural selection acts to evolve,
maintain, and finely tune complex traits. Mentoring and research training in
integrative biology will be provided for 22 undergraduate and 8 graduate
students across four institutions, and a course-based undergraduate research
experience (CURE) will be implemented. In addition, the project includes
workshops and online modules to enhance training in state-of-the-art genomics
and biological data science. By providing new insights into how snake venom
variation is regulated, the project will have broad ramifications for improving
global treatment of snakebite, with potential to impact millions globally.

The overarching goal of this research program is to advance the ability to
understand and predict how new gene regulatory networks arise and how variation
in these networks shape complex physiological traits, using snake venom as a
model system. This research aims to understand how complex physiological traits
are controlled, how these regulatory networks arise and subsequently re-wire
existing physiological systems, and to identify the mechanisms that shape
cellular and evolutionary variation in organismal phenotypes. This project will
formulate, refine, and test mechanistic hypotheses for gene regulatory networks
underlying venom composition by integrating across biological and evolutionary
scales, and by leveraging emerging statistical frameworks to link genomic
variation and gene regulatory variation with cellular and evolutionary trait
variation. New methods developed will integrate predictive approaches and
diverse functional genomic data to test mechanistic hypotheses and predict the
roles of regulatory elements, trans-acting factors and other features that
govern venom composition, and to test how cellular and evolutionary
heterogeneity together shape organismal-level phenotypes. Key products of this
work include novel approaches and software that leverage both single-cell
variation and evolutionary variation to explicitly test hypotheses for the roles
of gene regulatory components (e.g., cis-regulatory elements and trans-
regulatory factors) that will be broadly applicable for developing and testing
hypotheses for gene regulatory mechanisms in any eukaryotic system. The proposed
research includes methodological and theoretical scientific innovation,
development of new tools and software for understanding and testing hypotheses
of regulatory networks and their evolution, training, establishment of
collaborative networks, and impactful outreach.

This project is jointly funded by BIO-IOS-Physiological Mechanisms and
Biomechanics, BIO-DEB-Evolutionary Processes, and BIO-DEB-Systematics and
Biodiversity Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.