* 2307792
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Integrated mechanistic predictions of ecological and evolutionary responses to increasing aridity across the range of an iconic species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Jason Sexton, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2027
* USD 276,129.00

To persist in the face of changing environmental conditions, species must be
able to tolerate change, adapt across generations, and/or migrate to newly
suitable habitats. This project addresses a fundamental question: How does
genetic variation (within and across a species range) influence species'
ecological and evolutionary responses to environmental change? The research
studies the response of a widespread, foundational plant species to increasingly
hotter and drier conditions associated with climate change. Multiple approaches
including field observations, greenhouse experiments, population genetics, and
species distribution modeling are employed. Species often vary greatly across
their ranges in the traits of individuals such as drought tolerance, longevity,
and the number of seeds produced per year. The investigators aim to improve
predictions regarding species persistence in the face of climate change,
including expected migrations, informed by how individual plants differ across
landscapes. California poppy (Eschscholzia californica) is an ideal study
species because it is widespread, displays individual variation across its
range, and is often planted in restoration. It is also an iconic spring-blooming
wildflower, garnering public interest in conservation activities. Broader
impacts include graduate and undergraduate training, outreach to multiple
stakeholders, and development of conservation strategies to enhance adaptive
potential in species responding to climate change. With the accelerating pace of
both climate change and habitat loss, conservation efforts will need to
understand adaptive mechanisms that maximize the chances for species’
persistence. Species distribution models are a critical tool in the conservation
“tool box." This research aims to improve predictions of future species
responses to climate change by using a mechanistic process incorporating traits,
demography and evolutionary processes across scales, using Integral Projection
Models (IPMs). The investigators integrate population genetic and phenotypic
differentiation mechanisms of adaptation into predictions of range shifts, via
IPMs parameterized by experimental data and informed by demographic trade-offs.
A key aspect of the intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the development
of demographic distribution models (DDMs), a new class of species distribution
model that can incorporate evolutionary mechanisms into ecological and
biogeographic predictions. Although developed for the focal species, California
poppy, these models will be broadly transferable to other widespread,
foundational species with conservation, habitat restoration, and/or economic
significance. Training of graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research aimed at promoting professional development and
broadening participation of groups traditionally under-represented in STEM is an
integral part of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.