* 2307888
* Collaborative Research: Experimental General Relativity using Radio Interferometry of a Black Hole Photon Ring
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexandru Lupsasca, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 287,554.00

In April 2019, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) collaboration released the
first images of a black hole, a breakthrough result that has since prompted a
flurry of new theoretical studies. These have revealed that black hole images
carry distinctive relativistic signatures, which are embedded within a bright,
narrow ring encircling the black hole. A research collaboration between the
Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory and Vanderbilt University will
explore the fundamental properties of this “photon ring,” will show how it can
be studied using radio interferometry, and will determine the properties of a
black hole’s spacetime that can be probed with observations. These researchers
have already established the photon ring as a universal prediction of General
Relativity: it is a matter-independent effect caused by the extreme bending of
light near the event horizon of the black hole. Indeed, Einstein’s theory
predicts that Kerr black holes can deflect light rays to such a degree that they
circumnavigate the black hole—possibly several times—before eventually reaching
distant observers. Black hole imaging is a nascent field with an already global
reach and intense public engagement. As part of this project, the investigators
will engage the public with this research through the development of new
classroom activities for neurodiverse and special education students as well as
novel art exhibits conveying the elegance and mysteries hidden within black hole
images.

During this project, scientists will study the information that the orbiting
light encodes about the geometry of the black hole’s spacetime, as well as the
astrophysical conditions of the surrounding plasma and electromagnetic fields.
This will combine the pursuit of two parallel yet interconnected lines of work:
1) On the theory side, analysis of simple models will build intuition and
provide insight into interferometric properties of the photon ring, while
development of time- dependent, “slow-light” photon ring models with variability
informed by plasma astrophysics will clarify how the simple models relate to the
complex structure in a realistic accretion flow model; and 2) On the
observational side, the development of progressively more elaborate statistical
inference tools and numerical simulations will utilize these models to extract
increasingly precise knowledge of supermassive black hole astrophysics from
interferometric data, culminating in formal posteriors for the mass, spin, and
inclination of both M87* and Sgr A* from EHT data. Two major research outputs of
this project will be the comprehensive characterization of the unique photon
ring signatures that can be targeted with VLBI (very-long-baseline
interferometry), and model-agnostic estimates of mass, spin, and inclination for
M87* and Sgr A* using current EHT data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.