* 2307271
* DISES:Integrating human and biophysical factors to project future cropscapes under climate change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Andrea Rissing, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,597,234.00

Climate change is projected to alter the agricultural yields of many crops. Thus
it is important to understand the potential for technological change, farmer
adaptation and agricultural policy to mitigate the effect of climate change on
agricultural economies, food security, international trade, rural societies, and
ecological health. This project engages stakeholders in diverse agricultural
systems to investigate the social and environmental factors that drive
agricultural futures. The investigators integrate historical analyses,
predictive modeling, expert insights, and farmer perceptions to identify
emergent crops, technologies, policies, and on-farm realities that might alter
probable futures in each region. The project culminates in a convergence event
convening stakeholders from each agricultural region to envision relevant
strategies to catalyze more desirable agricultural futures.

Given the triple challenge of preventing biodiversity loss, mitigating the
effects of climate change, and food insecurity, transformative adaptation of
agricultural systems will be necessary and inevitable. This project co-produces
knowledge with stakeholders to understand how historical conditions have
affected the evolution of contemporary agricultural systems, draws on
stakeholder knowledge to develop scenarios of probable socio-environmental
system futures, and identifies transition pathways to move towards desirable
future conditions. The research team assembles what is known about diverse
agroecosystems to delineate the direction, bounds, and magnitude of probable
future change in disparate regions. The project identifies emergent agricultural
technologies, crops, management practices, and policies with the potential to
transform regional cultivation regimes and investigates how current farm
management influences social-ecological system dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.