* 2307729
* Three Topics in Stochastic Analysis: Kyle's model, Systems of BSDEs and Superrough volatility
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gordan Zitkovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 441,331.00

This research project contains three separate but related avenues of inquiry.
All three of them are either inspired by or are related to practical questions
arising from finance and economics. The first project focuses on a class of
models, known as Kyle models, which describe how information is exchanged among
participants in a financial market. These models can be used, for example, to
detect insider trading. The second project focuses on a class of equations,
known as Backward Stochastic Differential Equations, to better understand
strategic behavior of agents in a wide range of competitive environments.
Finally, the third project aims to understand the dynamics and the nature of the
kinds of random fluctuations one often observes in financial market volatility.
Finally, the project will have a significant impact on education and training,
not only through the improvement of advising and teaching at the PI's own
institution, but also through national and international dissemination of the
produced research findings and knowledge.

The first project concerning Kyle modeling focuses on the recent work of the PI
and his collaborators, where "noise trading" with stochastic volatility was
studied. The PI plans to extend these results in various directions, such as the
introduction of several assets, the study of the relationship with an intriguing
optimization problem, and an investigation of a related nonstandard
decomposition problem for stochastic processes. The second project will tackle
several problems related to the existence and uniqueness of solutions for
systems of nonlinear, fully-coupled, Backward Stochastic Differential Equations.
In particular, the PI plans to continue this study and focus on the non-
Markovian case using methods based on past results on the so-called
"submartingale" characterization as well as on linear systems with BMO-
coefficients. The third project will study the limiting theory for a class of
point processes, known as Hawkes processes, in the "nearly unstable" regime. The
PI and his students will be particularly interested in the class where the self-
excitation has a "long tail". It is expected that the limits of such processes
will belong to a new class of random fields, related to log-correlated Gaussian
random fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.