* 2307613
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Compositions of Exoplanetary Systems with Observations and Modeling of Dusty Circumstellar Disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jared Males, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Fabrycky
* 07/31/2026
* USD 242,524.00

The goal of this proposal is to determine the composition of rocky material
orbiting other stars. When rocks collide, they release small dust particles that
reflect and absorb starlight. This project will involve both observations of
this dust around other stars and modeling of that dust. The location of dust is
interesting because it reveals where small rocky asteroids formed and were left
unperturbed by planets. Modeling of the dust can reveal what it is made of, such
as the amounts of silicon, oxygen, ice, and carbon. Small rocky bodies are the
building blocks of planets. Dust and asteroid compositions provide a window into
the types of planets that may also orbit those stars. At Carnegie, each summer
an undergraduate student who does not have access to research at their home
institution will participate in this research program and be part of a cohort of
students who will participate in professional development and team-building
activities designed to enhance their research experience. A graduate student
will benefit from co-mentorship that includes training in astronomical
instrumentation at University of Arizona and in interdisciplinary scientific
research a Carnegie’s Earth and Planets Laboratory.

The investigators will use a new imaging system, MagAO-X, at the Magellan
Telescope. This system removes the distorting effects of the Earth’s atmosphere
so that images of other stars are as sharp as possible. Disks of dust around
other stars faintly reflect the light of their stars, and MagAO-X can observe
the color of this reflected light. To interpret the images, the investigators
will make models of how dust of different composition reflects starlight. A
graduate student and undergraduate students will work on the project. They will
get training in interdisciplinary astronomical and planetary sciences and in
telescope hardware.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.