* 2307870
* DISES Investigating mercury biogeochemical cycling via mixed-methods in complex artisanal gold mining landscapes and implications for community health
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Heidi Hausermann, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,537,666.00

Human activities lead to increased contamination in both terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. Contaminants can pose harm to both people and wildlife, with
specific harms and exposures dependent on complex socio-ecological factors. This
study investigates environmental risk vis-a-vis mercury (Hg) released from
artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) sites. Mercury is a potent
neurotoxin used to amalgamate gold in ASGM contexts globally. ASGM has become
the leading cause of mercury emissions worldwide and is particularly harmful
when burned off gold and emitted as gaseous elemental mercury (GEM). However,
little is known about the fate of mercury from ASGM activities, including if and
how mercury accumulates in crops, or local knowledge of mercury dangers and
exposure routes, all of which contribute to actual and perceived environmental
risk. This research asks: (1) What is the local and regional fate of Hg
vaporized from ASGM in terrestrial ecosystems? (2) To what extent is Hg
accumulating in crops grown near ASGM, and how do landscape and soil
characteristics impact crop Hg concentrations? (3) How do local people
understand Hg contamination and exposure, and how do spatialities of local
knowledge articulate with environmental contamination variability? Results from
this research will provide direct benefits related to the goals of the recently
ratified International Minamata Convention on Mercury.

The research focuses on mercury in Ghanaian ASGM systems with contrasting
geology, mining type, climate, and ecosystem. Ghana possesses extensive ASGM
activities, which increased dramatically in the last 15 years. To query the
research questions, the researchers employ mixed methods including community
mapping activities and semi-structured interviews, biogeochemical data
collection (passive air samples, bulk deposition, throughfall, litterfall, soil,
and crop) and modeling (empirically constrained mass budgets, Lagrangian plume
models). As farmers grow crops directly adjacent to ASGM sites, this project
models where mercury travels, and how it accumulates in agricultural fields and
specific staple crops grown in both communities (e.g. cassava, cocoa yam,
plantain). The data generated from this proposal will improve Hg models,
allowing for better understanding of environmental risks and contamination
dynamics (i.e., Hg use, atmospheric transport, deposition, soil storage, and
crop accumulation) associated with localized ASGM activity. Furthermore, this
research systematically investigates what soil and landscape features lead to
the accumulation of Hg within crops to better understand potential human
exposure pathways to Hg beyond occupational exposure and consumption of
contaminated fish. At the end of the project, workshops and training will be
organized to inform harm reduction practices, including agricultural and mining
practices to reduce mercury accumulation in crops, and other local exposures.
This research links together concepts from political ecology and landscape
ecology in a dynamic bi-directional coupling of socio-environmental systems that
determines where and when contaminants deposit and accumulate on the landscape.
The concept of “environmental risk landscape” can be further developed to
evaluate environmental risk in other socio-environmental contexts, including
environmental injustice in the U.S.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.