* 2307335
* Unraveling the Impacts of Ocean Surface Current Gradients and Ocean Surface Waves on Atmospheric Boundary Layer Physical Processes over the Gulf Stream Using COAWST Model
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Zhaohua Wu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2026
* USD 575,150.00

This research focuses on how ocean surface currents and waves work with the
atmosphere to cause winds that move heat and moisture in a manner that
influences weather related to the Gulf Stream. Location-to-location differences
in currents and waves cause differences in the surface friction felt by the
atmosphere, which results in areas of increased vertical motion over these
locations. That motion helps transport heat and moisture to heights that
influence weather. This study investigates if these processes are important
before storms and during storms. If these processes are found to be important,
the knowledge obtained will improve weather forecasts. A significant amount of
this research will be carried out by a graduate student; thus, contributing to
the training of the next generation of modelers with expertise in interaction
between the ocean and atmosphere. Modeling tools developed will also help future
science investigations of these processes.

This research will improve understanding of the atmospheric responses to
momentum-related air-sea coupling processes on fine spatial scales (10 to 40 km)
and at shorter timescales (from hours to several days). This project will focus
on the Gulf Stream region where horizontal gradient of ocean surface current is
large and where impacts on weather are more likely to be large. The Coupled
Ocean-Atmosphere-Wave-Sediment Transport (COAWST) modeling system will be
modified to more different types of models of surface drag because prior work
has shown surprisingly strong sensitivity to the surface stress parameterization
in high-resolution (2-6 km) two-way coupled ocean/wave/atmosphere models. Four
twin experiments will determine the atmospheric sensitivity to winds and waves
after accounting for how two-way coupling modifies the waves and currents. In
each twin experiment, the two-way coupled model is run to obtain the ocean and
atmosphere states. Then the ocean state obtained from the coupled run is
prescribed to force the atmosphere without the dependency on currents or waves.
Differences between couple runs and between members of each pair are diagnosed.
Validation of surface characteristics sensitive to stress parameterization will
provide insights about the strengths and weakness of each surface stress
parameterization. This project is anticipated to (1) determine how coupling of
winds, currents, and waves modifies budgets of heat, moisture, and horizontal
momentum; (2) determine the extent to which vertical transport within the
atmospheric boundary-layer (ABL) and between the ABL and free atmosphere is
enhanced by wave and current influences on stress; (3) determine how much the
enhanced vertical motion and transport in the coupled model contributes to
increased convection and storm intensity; and (4) determine how the answers to
the above three questions change depending on weather regimes (e.g., boundary
layer stability, wind speed, and interaction with atmospheric fronts).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.