* 2307070
* CDS&amp;E: A Modern Toolkit to Enhance the Scientific Productivity of Optical Survey Data
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michelle Ntampaka, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 456,869.00

The modern cosmological model describes how tiny density fluctuations in the
early Universe evolved into today's cosmic web of galaxies and dark matter.
Though the model successfully describes much of our present-day large-scale
structure, it also has unexplained tensions. For example, early- and late-time
observations make conflicting measurements of sigma-8, a parameter that
describes the clumpiness of the Universe. Large optical cosmological surveys are
ushering in a golden age for data-driven cosmology that can address this
tension: the Rubin Observatory and the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument will
soon provide exquisitely detailed maps of the sky, making it possible to explore
cosmology's fingerprints on large-scale structure. These modern observations
warrant being analyzed with equally modern data science methods, and this
research program will support a team of scientists at Johns Hopkins University
to develop understandable machine learning tools that can interpret upcoming
surveys and address the sigma-8 tension. To engage the next generation in
astronomy, this program will also support the development of play-based STEM
lessons that teach early elementary school students about light, shadows, moon
phases, and eclipses through stories and play. The kindergarten lesson plans
that are developed through this program will be made publicly available to
astronomers and educators. The decadal survey’s Pathways to Discovery identified
the crucial role that machine learning (ML) could play in the next decade,
leading to transformative discoveries from the decade’s rich, upcoming data
sets. While ML has historically been touted as a black box that can generate
order-of-magnitude improvements at the cost of interpretability, this does not
need to be the case – modern techniques are making it possible to develop ML
tools that improve results while still being understandable and leading to
physical discoveries. This research program will develop a toolkit of
understandable ML methods for interpreting detailed optical galaxy surveys from
the Rubin Observatory and the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument to explore
the sigma-8 tension. This research will 1) produce a statistical census of
cosmological information at small scales, probing techniques for describing how
sub-Mpc structures correlate with the underlying cosmological model, 2) produce
a low-scatter galaxy cluster dynamical mass proxy using symbolic regression to
provide a closed-form, complementary framework for quantifying the abundance of
massive clusters at low redshift, and 3) develop a deep learning approach for
estimating galaxy cluster ellipticity, a major source of systematic error in
weak lensing cosmological analyses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.