* 2307500
* Understanding how Nonlocal Diffusion Shapes Patterns in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gabriela Jaramillo, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 236,370.00

Many biological and physical systems are known for exhibiting interesting
periodic structures, like striped and spot patterns. In many instances, like in
the case of chemical reactions, these structures emerge from the interaction of
two competing processes that lead to an instability. Roughly, the first
mechanism relates to the intrinsic behavior of the system, while the second one
corresponds to a transport, or diffusion process. While in most cases diffusion
is the correct mechanism to consider, in many biological applications it does
not capture the observed behavior. This is particularly true when modeling
dispersion of populations or plant seeds, or when looking at hunting or foraging
behavior of certain animals. In this project, the investigator studies how these
nonlocal forms of dispersal affect pattern formation in physical and biological
applications. The main motivation comes from arid ecosystems, which are known to
exhibit patterns of banded vegetation. While most mathematical models use
diffusion to represent dispersal of plant seeds, numerical experiments suggest
that these equations, although more tractable, ignore critical information. For
example, the analysis of these 'local' models shows that changes in the spacing
between bands of vegetation due to reduced rainfall often signal a possible
irreversible transition to a fully desert state. However, when nonlocal seed
dispersal is considered, simulations indicate that the resilience of these
ecosystems with respect to such changes is increased. The discrepancy between
these two models highlights the need for more in-depth studies of long-range
dispersal effects. To study these effects, a nonlocal Gray-Scott model will be
used as a test case. This specific set of equations also provides a basis for
interesting projects for graduate students and for summer research experiences
for undergraduates.

Because nonlocal processes are often modeled using convolution operators, the
main obstacle for studying these systems comes from the limited set of
mathematical and numerical tools available to analyze these maps. Indeed, most
studies represent these operators using convolution kernels that have properties
which facilitate their analysis. At the same time, numerical simulations often
ignore the fact that convolution maps require information about the unknown
outside the computational domain, and thus incorrectly implement boundary
constraints. One of the project's goals is to provide methods for proving
Fredholm properties for these maps by choosing as their domain a specific class
of functions with algebraic decay. This work allows investigators to use the
implicit function theorem to prove the existence of patterns. Since the class of
functions being considered also provides information about the level of decay of
solutions at infinity, this information can then be used to construct numerical
schemes with appropriate boundary constraints.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.