* 2307933
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Ecological Genomics of Adaptation in a Rocky Shore Predator-Prey Interaction
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Emily Longman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 10/31/2025
* USD 331,979.00

Understanding the genetic basis of trait variation is a major goal for many
fields of biology. However, exploring this variation in nature is a challenge
because it is seldom possible to link trait differences in wild species to
underlying genetic variation, as well as determine the role that natural
selection plays in driving these patterns. In contrast to many plant and animal
populations on land, those in the sea were historically thought to be well mixed
and genetically similar across large regions because of the expansive nature of
the ocean and the broad dispersal of many marine species. Thus, studies of
adaptation in marine environments have lagged behind those on land in and other
ecosystems. The project PI is studying a striking example of trait variation in
the sea â€“ a predatory marine snail that can successfully drill through thick-
shelled mussels in some regions of the west coast of the United States, but not
in others. The proposed research will be one of the first to combine extensive
trait data and laboratory evolution experiments with ecological genomics in a
marine study system. This project will identify genetic signatures of adaptation
across space and time in this snail to better understand patterns of evolution
in the marine environment. In addition, this project will increase diversity,
awareness, and accessibility of STEM through undergraduate mentorship, graduate
level filmmaking courses, and a panel to introduce high school students to
opportunities in ecology and evolutionary biology. Despite the open nature of
marine ecosystems, there is growing evidence that many species display complex
patterns of genetic differentiation across their geographic range. The proposed
work builds on research exploring the interaction between the drilling dogwhelk,
Nucella canaliculata, and the mussel Mytilus californianus, a foundation species
that forms large mussel beds along the west coast of North America. Previous
research has shown that this marine predator displays genetically controlled
variation in drilling ability across its geographic range. This project has
three goals: 1) determine the level of migration and gene flow among populations
of a low dispersing invertebrate, 2) identify genomic patterns of selection
using environmental data and detailed phenotypic data from lab-reared
individuals, including investigating potential mechanisms of parallel
adaptation, and 3) identify signatures of rapid adaptation and selection imposed
in laboratory experiments by variation in early-life diet. Investigating these
patterns of genomic variation will allow us to better understand the nature of
selective forces in marine environments and the potential for rapid adaptation
as climatic conditions change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.