* 2307683
* ORCC: Sensory resilience and climate change
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2027
* Emilia Martins, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 09/30/2027
* USD 360,446.00

Climate change can have harmful impacts on sensory systems, making it hard for
animals to sense their environment, find food, and attract mates. This project
identifies the specific ways in which climate change impacts the sensory biology
and behavior of freshwater fish and uses that knowledge to develop tools to
enhance the survival of desert fishes in the southwestern US. The project begins
by measuring the effects of temperature, acidity, water flow rate, and lighting
shifts on zebrafish senses. Zebrafish have been well-studied as models for human
disease and as sentinels for pollution, such that the results of this project
will shed light on the detailed physiological mechanisms underlying the effects
of climate change on aquatic animals. For example, desert fishes in Arizona are
being severely threatened by climate change and by the introduction of non-
native fishes. Arizona Game and Fish Department researchers have been exploring
solutions that involve raising native fishes in hatcheries for future
reintroduction into the wild. This project contributes directly to those efforts
by using zebrafish to test and develop ways to enhance sensory resilience by
manipulating stress, reproductive state, and experiences, and by comparing the
sensory abilities of native and non-native desert minnows. In addition, the
project partners with the Arizona Game and Fish Department to share information
on desert native fishes with local anglers, K-12 students, and teachers.

Acidification impedes olfaction in aquatic animals, increased temperature
impairs tactile sensitivity, and murky water can hamper vision. However, sensory
systems are malleable and intertwined, such that when one sensory system becomes
unreliable or ineffective, animals may compensate by relying more heavily on
other senses. Such compensation may be enhanced or limited by underlying
physiological mechanisms that link sensory systems to each other and to other
organismal functions. This project tests whether and to what degree sensory
systems are resilient to ecological shifts associated with climate change in
aquatic habitats, making use of the expansive genomic toolkit available for
zebrafish to place the results in a rich and broad context of cutting-edge
neuroscience and genomics research. In addition, the project tests whether
resilience can be enhanced by manipulating hormone physiology and recent sensory
experiences. To solidify a foundation for future collaboration with Arizona Game
and Fish Department scientists, the project also tests whether sensory
differences can explain why native desert fishes survive better than do non-
natives in streams with intermittent flow. The project leadership team includes
a diverse team of researchers, and engages students in all aspects of the
research, including summer internships, career development opportunities in
wildlife and biomedical science, and course-based research experiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.