* 2307928
* Dust Formation in Core Collapse Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Maitrayee Bose, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 467,964.00

Supernovae (SN) not only forge chemical elements beyond H, He, & Li - making
possible a diverse chemistry (and biology) - they are also sources of cosmic
dust, which is essential for the formation of planets. Chemical abundance
anomalies among nearby stars suggest the injection of enriched material into our
parent molecular cloud by SN, with unclear implications for planet formation. To
better understand the possible impact of SN, the team will model dust formation
in core-collapse SN using 3D simulations. Dust grain abundance variations will
be calculated and compared with laboratory data on elemental and isotopic ratios
in pre-solar grains from meteorites. Joining numerical simulations of dust
formation in evolving SN remnants with laboratory isotopic analysis of
meteorites will lead to a better understanding of how the former is transformed
into the latter. This award will also support graduate student training as well
as the design of planetarium presentations based on the proposed research.

The three main objectives of this study are: (1) predicting the dust composition
of SN remnant structures as the they evolve. This includes computing the
ejecta's isotopic composition and calculating dust formation/destruction; (2)
comparing the modeled dust grain's isotopic composition with those of pre-solar
dust grains using laboratory measurements and results from the literature; and
(3) assessing grains as a source of isotopic anomalies in the early solar
system. A suite of supernova explosions will be modeled using the team's
Supernova Smooth Particle Hydrodynamic (SNSPH) code. Simulations will be carried
out from the explosive "launch" of the ejecta to the Sedov phase of the remnant
evolution. Isotopic yields of each SNSPH particle in the simulations will be
calculated using the PRISM post-processing code. Subsequent dust formation
calculations will use use nuDust, which couples gas phase chemistry, grain
formation, grain growth as well as grain destruction and weathering. nuDust will
also use the simulated thermodynamic histories of the material to predict the
composition and size distribution of dust grains in each particle of the SNSPH
simulation. Laboratory measurements and a compilation of published high
precision isotopic data, grain sizes, and mineralogies from a variety of whole-
rock meteorites, calcium-aluminum inclusions, and stardust grains will be used
to assess isotopic correlations between and among non-carbonaceous and
carbonaceous chondrite reservoirs in the context of new models produced by this
work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.