* 2307827
* Recovering structured signals: atoms, matrix separation, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Xuemei Chen, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 198,963.00

High dimensional data sensing, representation, and recovery that utilize the
data’s intrinsic low dimensionality have become pervasive in many applications,
including signal processing, computer vision, and machine learning. This project
involves the development and analysis of new solutions for sensing and analyzing
high dimensional data, inspired by the electrodermal activity (EDA) signal
decomposition problem. A cleaner EDA decomposition allows scientists and data
analysts to extract better features to serve a variety of tasks such as market
research, seizure detection, human stress analysis, and emotion recognition,
leading to social and economical benefits. In particular, this project aims to
increase the recovery rate of medication-assisted treatment in rehabilitation
centers. Many of the expected results will also be applicable to other imaging
modalities as well as machine learning applications. Undergraduate and master
students from diverse backgrounds will be mentored as part of this project. The
students will also have opportunities to work with peers and researchers to
better understand and contribute to real world applications.

This project aims to recover structured signals that are intrinsically low
dimensional with significantly subsampled measurements. The project involves an
analysis of the sensing conditions needed for the subsampled measurements and
how they benefit the structured signals expressed in terms of few atoms. A
framework for a generalized matrix decomposition will also be developed, which
will be suitable for the EDA decomposition setting. Efficient algorithms for
solving the associated novel optimization problems will also be developed and
implemented. The new framework developed in this project combined with rigorous
theoretical guarantees are expected to strengthen existing partnerships with
other disciplines such as psychology and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.