* 2307031
* Conference: Developing Effective Tools for Leading Sustainable Campus Culture Change in Hispanic-Serving Institutions to Eliminate Equity Gaps in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Sarah Torres Lugo, NATIONAL CENTER FOR HIGHER EDUCATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 94,658.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this conference proposal aims to create and validate
institutional self-assessments to inform HSI campus academic leadership, as they
lead culture change to increase the numbers of successful students in STEM
courses and programs. This work will create a unique tool to help campus leaders
understand the steps they can take to assure their campus’ culture really
supports Hispanic students’ success. The impact of this work will increase the
academic success of diverse students in STEM careers that is reflective of
national demographics.

Based on two years of in-depth research, four levers for campus culture change
needed to remove equity gaps for student success were identified and validated.
The National Center for Higher Education Management Systems (NCHEMS) plans to
create campus-level self-assessment tools related to those levers to allow
campus leaders at HSIs, to understand and share with institutional stakeholders
how well they are doing in supporting Hispanic students in STEM fields. In
addition, the convening of academic leaders will provide a space for them to
identify the policies and practices needed to address equitable STEM academic
success. Individuals within two groups of five HSI presidents each (one from
community colleges, the other from four-year colleges and universities) will
work together to help the researchers evaluate the practical application of the
tools and allow them to create useable resources for other colleges/university
leaders. The tools will enable leaders who are new to the HSI designation to
have a starting place to reorient the campus community toward greater student
success in STEM fields. The methodology is based on past successful practices in
developing campus self-assessment tools. The tools will be disseminated through
presidential associations where HSI leaders gather. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.