* 2307178
* Collaborative Research: Revealing Exoplanet Atmospheres Using High-Resolution Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Line, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2026
* USD 421,796.00

A team led by the University of Chicago and Arizona State University will carry
out an observational program to help answer four science questions regarding the
atmospheres of close-in giant planets orbiting distant stars: How do chemical
abundances trace planet origins? How does atmosphere temperature depend on
external radiation, gravity, and composition? How do the dynamic and magnetic
fields of planets govern wind speeds? And what are atmosphere properties across
chemical transitions? The team will train the science community in the use of
new techniques for probing planet atmospheres with workshops. Workshops will
focus upon early career researchers and will broaden participation by providing
monetary support for junior scientists from underrepresented groups.

Ground-based, high-resolution spectroscopy using the cross-correlation technique
is a powerful, but complex method for probing exoplanet atmospheres. The project
team have developed an atmospheric retrieval approach for cross-correlation
spectroscopy which enables the extraction of detailed constraints on chemical
compositions. The team will apply this technique to state-of-the-art high-
resolution datasets to measure carbon-to-oxygen abundance ratios, atmospheric
metallicity, carbon isotopic abundances, refractory species abundances, and how
atmospheric temperature varies with pressure. The team will be carrying out a
survey using three of the most sensitive high-resolution spectrographs: IGRINS
on Gemini South, MAROON-X on Gemini North, and ESPRESSO on the VLT. These
instruments span the optical to the near-infrared, yielding access to
spectroscopic lines from major refractory (Fe, Ti, V) and volatile (C, N, O)
elements and their isotopologues (C, Ti) in a variety of atomic and molecular
species. The surveys will utilize both transmission and phase-resolved thermal
emission measurements, targeting more than 30 planets with a broad range of
physical parameters. Workshop attendees will be walked through how to prepare
observations and the full end-to-end reduction and analysis of high-resolution
data. The workshop lectures will be recorded and posted online and a suite of
data analysis and atmospheric retrieval software will be made publicly
available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.