* 2307983
* Radiation GRMHD with Non-Thermal Particle Acceleration: Next-Generation Models of Black Hole Accretion Flows and Jets
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jason Dexter, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2026
* USD 707,214.00

One of the most striking phenomena revealed by radio telescopes are relativistic
jets that can stretch over a million parsecs and have been shown to be
physically connected with supermassive black holes (SMBH) in the centers of
giant elliptical galaxies. Despite decades of effort, our understanding of the
steps by which gas accreting onto a spinning SMBH is collimated into a narrow,
magnetized beam of electrons and launched at near light-speed is still
incomplete. General Relativistic Magneto-Hydrodynamic (GRMHD) fluid simulations
have lately shown promise in being able to correctly account for the relevant
physics and have successfully reproduced jet power and structure in low-
luminosity active galactic nuclei (AGN), as well as predicting the Event Horizon
Telescope's images of M87 and Sgr A*. The principal investigator will lead a
team that will develop next-generation GRMHD code appropriate for a wider range
of AGN luminosities that will link multi-wavelength observations of jets to
properties of the central SMBH and its near environment. The award will also
support the training of a postdoc in state-of-the-art computational techniques,
provide opportunities for undergraduate research, and develop public planetarium
shows. All GRMHD models and source code will be made publicly available.

The next-generation GRMHD models will be used to predict radio to gamma-ray
emission from a broad range of low-luminosity accretion flows and jets. These
will be used to address longstanding questions about the structure of hot
accretion flows, including the fundamental question of how relativistic
electrons are loaded into jets causing them to radiate energy. The electron
distribution function will be evolved using kinetic prescriptions for particle
acceleration and a frequency- dependent, Monte Carlo method for radiative
cooling. GRMHD simulations will be run for a sufficiently long duration to
establish equilibrium properties up to ~100 gravitational radii from the black
hole, in order to reliably predict the accretion flow and jet structure.
Broadband spectra and polarized radio emission maps computed from the
simulations as a function of (e.g.) mass accretion rate will be compared to
observations of representative sources and used to make predictions for the
visibility of the black hole shadow for next-generation long baseline radio
interferometers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.