* 2307621
* The Origin of the Elements in the Milky Way and Its Closest Neighbors
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 457,353.00

Understanding the origin and distribution of the elements is essential for
understanding the processes that govern galaxy formation. This research project
comprises a program of data analysis and modeling to interpret the elemental
abundance patterns of stars in the Milky Way and its dwarf satellite galaxies
observed by large spectroscopic surveys. Results from the project will allow
astronomers to build a coherent picture of stellar and galactic scale phenomena
that govern the synthesis of the elements. The project will train a graduate
student in methods of advanced astronomical analysis and support a program of
research mentoring for undergraduate students.

Building upon models developed by the research team, the studies undertaken will
yield strong empirical constraints on the contributions of core collapse
supernovae, Type Ia supernovae, and asymptotic giant branch stars to the
observed stellar elemental abundance patterns. They will provide stringent tests
of Milky Way chemical evolution models that explore different assumptions about
accretion and star formation history, galactic winds, fountains, radial gas
flows, and stochastic enrichment events, as well as incomplete mixing in the
interstellar medium. They will also yield new insights on the origin of chemical
abundance differences between the components of the Milky Way (thin disk, thick
disk, bulge, halo) and between the Milky Way and its dwarf satellites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.