* 2307093
* Transport in Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Elgart, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

This award will fund research on disordered quantum matter, an interdisciplinary
research area interlinking physics, computer science, and mathematics. Disorder
is an inherited feature of any physical system, but the miniaturization of
physical devices makes them especially sensitive to noise and imperfections. A
longstanding goal of this project is to understand the behavior of materials
that could play a crucial role in creating quantum computers robust to defects
and noise. The principal investigator will develop an underlying mathematical
theory that will allow for a better understanding of the properties of such
materials, shed light on how to manipulate them more effectively, and harness
disorder to enhance the stability of the desired outcomes. Progress in
understanding the behavior of such systems will increase the scientific
community's understanding of models in theoretical physics and applied
mathematics. Students involved in this project will work alongside the PI and
gain expertise in the area.

The project will proceed through a program to build a self-contained, systematic
transport theory in the many-body, disordered framework. The first goal of this
project is to make substantial progress in understanding the time evolution of
such systems, particularly the many-body localization phenomenon and its
robustness to (time-dependent) perturbations. This step requires understanding
the quasi-locality properties associated with this framework, which have so far
been obtained only in the context of the gapped ground states associated with
local Hamiltonians. The project's second goal is the analysis of the transport
properties of disordered many-body Hamiltonians, particularly spin systems. It
relies on constructing a many-body index theory that remains stable in a
mobility gap region of the associated system and on the justification of Kubo's
transport formulae for the linear response.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.