* 2307505
* Investigation of Small-scale Jets In and Near Sunspot Penumbrae: Early DKIST Science
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sanjiv Tiwari, Bay Area Environmental Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2026
* USD 473,175.00

This project from the Bay Area Environmental Research Institute (BAERI) and the
University of Alabama, Huntsville seeks analyze observations of sunspots from
National Science Foundation’s (NSF’s) Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST).
This highest ever-resolution data in different wavelengths offers a unique
opportunity to explore dynamics of jets and dots in sunspots. Improving
understanding of fine-scale dynamics in the strongest magnetic field regions on
our nearest star, the Sun, has broad social impact. Large scale features such as
coronal jets and coronal mass ejections, which are responsible for space
weather. Small-scale features, such as those examined in this study, have some
similarities to large scale structures, but also contribute to the complexity of
the solar environment. The broader impacts of this project include training REU
students, and high school interns, who will not only be introduced to solar
physics research but can also get motivated to pursue a career in any science.
The proposed work will also increase the partnership between three institutions,
BAERI, University of Alabama, Huntsville, and the National Solar Observatory.

Specifically, this project seeks to utilize data from Hinode’s Solar Optical
Telescope, NASA’s Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS), and DKIST in
combination with MHD simulations of sunspot penubrae to (i) understand the
mechanisms that generate jets and bright dots in and around sunspot penumbrae,
(ii) investigate to what extent penumbral jets contribute to transition region
and coronal heating, and (iii) investigate whether penumbral jets have mixed-
polarity field at their base, and whether they spin, similar to X-ray jets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.