* 2307920
* RUI: Vertical Structure of Gas and Dust in Debris Disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Meredith Hughes, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Fabrycky
* 07/31/2026
* USD 337,701.00

Debris disks are belts of dust and gas that orbit a host star, similar to the
Kuiper Belt in our own solar system. The dust, and at least some of the gas, is
generated through collisions between rocky bodies that range in size from tiny
grains of sand to the scale of Pluto. This project will characterize the
vertical structure of debris disks at radio wavelengths, measuring whether they
are puffy (like a donut) or flat (like a pancake), to help us understand how
planetary systems evolve. The vertical structure can tell us how common planets
like Uranus and Neptune are around other stars. It can also tell us about how
often Neptune-like planets migrate through their dusty disks, and it can provide
clues to the amount and type of gas that is present during the last stages of
planetary system evolution. Van Vleck Observatory’s public outreach program will
be reinvigorated after the disruption of the Covid-19 pandemic. Both the
research and public outreach components will allow deep involvement from
students in Wesleyan’s existing masters and affiliated summer research programs,
which are explicitly targeted at drawing students with non-traditional
backgrounds into research astronomy.

The investigator and her students will use the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) to image disks to reveal the distribution
of gas and dust in fine detail, with multiple resolution elements across the
vertical dimension of each system. The work is part of the large program ARKS
(the ALMA survey to Resolve exoKuiper belt Substructures), and also includes
follow-up programs with a focus on characterizing the vertical structure of gas
and dust in debris disks across a wide range of millimeter wavelengths.
Comparisons between different gas spectral lines and between multiple millimeter
wavelengths and scattered light data promise to provide insight into the elusive
composition of the gas component of the debris disks, which is important for
understanding late-stage planetary system evolution, including the composition
of exoplanet atmospheres. In order to reinvigorate the Van Vleck Observatory’s
public outreach program, research students will also be trained in the skills
necessary to productively engage with a diverse science-interested public. A
dedicated media intern will raise awareness of public programs and rebuild a
base of sustained communication with the surrounding community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.