* 2307650
* Dynamic bifurcation of patterns through spatio-temporal heterogeneity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ryan Goh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project is focused on how naturally occurring, and man-made spatial
patterns interact with spatio-temporal heterogeneities. In this context,
patterns refer to recurrent geometric spatial structures, and occur in a variety
of physical domains. In both natural and experimental settings, spatio-temporal
heterogeneities, such as impurities, external forcing, dynamic quenching, and
slow evolution of system parameters have been shown to select the type of
structure formed in a system and mediate the formation of defects. This project
is motivated and organized by three examples: directional quenching in light-
sensitive chemical reaction systems, slow spatial ramping in fluid convection
rolls, and defect formation in slowly quenched systems. It seeks to rigorously
understand the interaction of dynamic heterogeneities with patterns in important
and relevant mathematical models, and will focus on how heterogeneities can
induce novel behavior not observed in spatially homogeneous settings. The
results of this project will aid in the understanding of pattern formation in
many other scientific domains, including animal digit formation, skin
patterning, tissue formation, vegetation patterning in semi-arid climates,
structure formation in the early universe, and slow cooling of crystalline
phases in functional materials. The results of this project could also aid in
the design and assembly of functional materials at various length scales. The
project will foster the development of early career researchers through
undergraduate research experiences and graduate research projects.

The project seeks to develop new mathematical tools to rigorously study
coherent structures and their interactions with dynamic heterogeneities in
prototypical partial differential equation models. It focuses on how such
heterogeneities can induce dynamic bifurcations in spatially-extended systems.
It will develop and apply novel techniques from finite and infinite dimensional
dynamical systems theory, functional analysis, and numerical computation in
three project areas, studying patterns and quasi-patterns in quenched systems,
fronts and patterns in the presence of slowly-varying spatial ramps, and dynamic
bifurcation of patterns via slow temporal quenching. The first area will
evidence the use of the moduli space of quenched patterns in an experimentally
relevant reaction-diffusion system. It also seeks to extend spatial dynamics
techniques to 2- and 3-dimensional domains which do not have a single
distinguished unbounded direction. In addition to gaining insight into the
effect of quenching and other heterogeneities on patterns in such domains, these
techniques will be widely useful in many different settings across the field of
nonlinear waves and coherent structures. It will also study how heterogeneities
affect the formation of seldom studied super-lattice and quasi-patterns. The
second and third project areas will also contribute in several ways to the
recently flourishing field of dynamic bifurcation in PDEs. The second area will
investigate how slow spatial ramps select and control patterns, while the third
will reveal new front, pattern, and defect formation phenomena through such
slowly-varying temporal quenches. Both will study new types of dynamic
bifurcation in PDEs, and develop new tools in infinite-dimensional geometric
singular perturbation theory, such as slow invariant manifolds, and geometric
blow-up for systems in the presence of neutral continuous spectrum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.