* 2307109
* CDS&amp;E: Probabilistic modeling of fields and point clouds in cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Moritz Muenchmeyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,660.00

Cosmological observations provide a unique window into fundamental physics, such
as the ultra-high energy physics of the primordial universe. Upcoming galaxy
surveys such as Rubin Observatory will produce vast amounts of data, but the
extraction of fundamental physics from this data will be difficult. To fully
exploit the statistical sensitivity of upcoming experiments, new methods which
leverage high performance computing and machine learning must be developed. In
this project scientists from the University of Wisconsin, Madison will make use
of novel techniques from probabilistic machine learning and apply them to the
dark matter and galaxy distribution of the universe. Using these tools, the team
will be able to measure fundamental physics parameters from galaxy data more
precisely than was previously possible. This research project will also provide
exciting research opportunities for several undergraduate students from UW
Madison's URS program, which supports and encourages students with non-
traditional backgrounds, contribute to outreach efforts, and improve education
in the important field of artificial intelligence for science. The scientific
goal of this project is to develop normalizing flows to model two types of
cosmological data, as well as their statistical connection: field level data,
such as the non-linear matter field, and point cloud data such as halos and
galaxies. For this task, the team will adapt recently developed normalizing
flows for point clouds. Similar tasks appear in 3-dimensional computer vision
and molecular design, but cosmology has unique properties that will feed into
new machine learning developments. The team will design a scale decomposition to
treat very large point clouds and will then use their normalizing flows for two
important applications in cosmology. The first application will be to generate
super-resolution simulations, where a conditional normalizing flow is used to
augment the resolution of dark matter simulations, as well as to include
baryonic physics. The second application will be to use the point cloud flow to
establish a probabilistic dark matter to galaxy connection in a forward modeling
framework, which will improve the reconstruction of cosmological initial
conditions with respect to previous approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.