* 2307736
* New perspectives in contract theory: Optimal incentives for interacting agents in a common random environment
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Emma Hubert, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 82,956.00

Continuous-time principal-agent problems offer a relevant mathematical framework
for the study of optimal incentives between agents, especially with information
asymmetry. In the seminal model by Holmström and Milgrom (1987), a principal
(she) is imperfectly informed about the actions of an agent (he) on a random
process representing the value of a project over time. To incentivize the agent
to act in her best interest, she can offer him a contract, namely a terminal
payment indexed on the value of the project. These problems are fundamentally
related to the design of optimal incentives and are therefore present in a wide
variety of situations, including not only economics but also politics, finance,
etc. Although this theory has been extended to allow the principal to contract
with many agents, the possibility that agents may be impacted by common hazards
and risks is currently mostly neglected. This research focuses on the
development of principal-agent problems to incorporate the fact that the agents
may live in a common uncertain environment and may interact with each other but
also with this environment. This research theme is motivated by several concrete
applications, where this common uncertain environment cannot be neglected when
looking for the optimal actions or incentives to implement, e.g., optimization
of electricity production and consumption, regulation of financial and systemic
risks, or design of optimal and sustainable insurance policies. The themes are
at the heart of current economical and societal challenges, both nationally and
internationally. Studying them in a quantitative way can therefore help inform
public policy, and thus contribute to the achievement of societally relevant
outcomes. This research will also have an essential mentoring orientation,
involving graduate students from the Operations Research & Financial Engineering
Graduate Program, who will be partially supported by the funds awarded.

Considering a common random environment induces a wide range of additional
mathematical difficulties, which have only been recently addressed, albeit only
for pure mean-field games. To address this type of general problem, technical
results will be further developed, notably on second order backward stochastic
differential equations (2BSDEs), which are typically used to determine the
optimal form of contracts in principal-agent problems. To consider general
multi-agent problems with Nash or mean-field interactions, it is necessary to
develop generalized notions of 2BSDEs, namely multidimensional or mean-field
2BSDEs. Moreover, even in a classical framework, the idea of considering common
jumps in a multi-agent or mean-field setting has never been investigated,
despite its relevance to model collective accidents such as climatic hazards and
will involve the study of (multidimensional or mean-field) 2BSDEs with jumps.
Finally, with the idea of ensuring the implementation of realistic contracts, a
principal’s problem with constraints on the contract can be reformulated as a
stochastic target problem. These theoretical developments will considerably
advance knowledge in the field of 2BSDE and more broadly of stochastic control
and will allow the study of the various applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.