* 2307229
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Do diatoms use proton-pumping rhodopsins as an alternative energy source under high light
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Brittany Zepernick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2025
* USD 298,228.00

We are well aware that algae living in the global oceans play a critical role in
the cycling of carbon and climate. Notably, algae called diatoms are responsible
for a large proportion of carbon uptake and sequestration in the world’s oceans.
Due to this, diatoms are considered “first responders” to climate change. More
specifically they offset increasing carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere by
transferring it to the deep ocean. However, climate change is altering the
oceans and the ability of diatoms to survive. Specifically, climate change is
increasing the intensity of light in the oceans via a process called “shoaling”
and decreasing the amount of iron. Both conditions negatively affect diatoms by
hindering photosynthesis. Recently it was discovered some diatoms possess proton
pumping rhodopsins, which may serve as an alternative means to generate energy
when photosynthesis is not feasible (for example during low iron and high light
conditions). Yet while previous work found diatoms increase the use of proton
pumping rhodopsins when they are iron-limited, it did not investigate the other
condition which hinders photosynthesis, namely high light. The purpose of this
project is to investigate how diatom proton pumping rhodopsins function under
low iron and high light stress. Broadly, this work will extend to other algae
and bacteria which use proton pumping rhodopsins to harvest light and generate
energy. In turn, this work will provide insight on how diatoms will respond to
the future oceans and how carbon cycling may be altered. This project will
broaden diversity and engagement within the field of oceans science through
various classroom and community outreach activities in addition to mentoring
opportunities. Cumulatively, this work will enhance the ability to model and
predict future climate scenarios across the global oceans.

Diatoms are phototrophic protists responsible for ~40% of global marine primary
production and organic carbon export. Recently, it was discovered some diatoms
possess proton-pumping rhodopsins (PPRs), light-driven proton pumps that may
contribute as much to cellular energy generation as photosynthesis. Prior data
suggests PPR contributions to energy generation increase under iron-limitation,
implying diatoms elicit a “phototrophic trade-off” by increasing PPR phototrophy
when conditions for photosynthesis are unfavorable. While photosynthesis may
become light-saturated at low light levels (e.g., 60-80mol photons m-2 s-1 in
polar diatoms), based on photocyclic turnover rates, PPRs become light saturated
at ~2000 mol photons m-2 s-1, suggesting PPRs are favored under high light.
Yet, diatom PPR phototrophy has not been studied under high irradiance. Further,
photosynthesis in iron-limited cells tends to become inhibited at lower light
compared to iron-replete cells. This is of pertinence as ocean stratification
serves to increase irradiance, and ~30% of marine primary production occurs
under iron limitation. This proposal will investigate how high light levels +
iron limitation alter the two major phototrophic strategies (and competitive
fitness) of a diverse group of marine diatoms via a combination of in vitro
laboratory analyses and biochemical assays. Photosynthetic phototrophy will be
assessed via 14C isotope tracing, FIRe fluorometry, and photopigment extractions
(HPLC). PPR phototrophy will be assessed via intracellular pH and calculations
using retinal quantifications (LC-MS/MS). Ecological insights on how the
presence vs. absence of PPRs alters diatom competitive fitness under high light
+ iron limitation will be assessed, with competitive fitness determined via
growth dynamics and transcriptomics. Cumulatively, this work will characterize
the present role of PPRs in diatom phototrophy and provide insight on the role
of PPRs in a more stratified (and variable light) future. Classroom and
community STEM engagement will be facilitated with local schools and the
Morehead Planetarium and Science Center of UNC Chapel Hill. Broadly, this
project will offer novel insights regarding the influence of iron limitation +
irradiance on PPR phototrophy and competitive fitness, a strategy common to many
marine protists. In addition to the biogeochemical and ecological implications
of this project, our study will provide transformative insights into diatom
evolution under changing ocean conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.