* 2307202
* Global kinetic modeling of the intrabinary shock in spider pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lorenzo Sironi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 527,708.00

Among the most fascinating astrophysical objects are the “spider pulsars,” which
are a particular type of very rapidly-rotating, extremely compact neutron stars
in a binary system. Spider pulsars, which are classified as either Redbacks
(RBs) or Black Widows (BWs), are in tight binary orbits with a low-mass stellar
companion. The pulsar emanates an intense relativistic wind. When impacting on
the companion star, the wind exacerbates ablation and mass loss of the
companion, which is then “devoured” by the pulsar wind --- hence, the evocative
name of these systems. A research team at Columbia University will use state-of-
the-art computer simulations to better understand spider pulsars, and
astrophysical shock waves in general. The lead researcher will also design a new
course, “Back-of-the-envelope physics, astronomy, and beyond," to introduce
students in the Columbia Bridge to Ph.D. scholars program to the art of looking
at reality with quantitative eyes, using personal experience and prior knowledge
as a guide to drawing order-of-magnitude conclusions, and thus to being prepared
to make decisions that are grounded in quantitative reasoning.

The relativistic pulsar wind consists of toroidal stripes of opposite magnetic
field polarity, separated by current sheets of hot plasma. The wind terminates
in a strong shock, where the ram pressure of the pulsar wind is balanced by the
companion wind or its magnetosphere. The intrabinary shock may be an efficient
site of particle acceleration, which would then explain why X-ray and gamma-ray
lightcurves of spider pulsars are often modulated on the orbital period.
Therefore, the scrutiny of BWs and RBs can help uncover the largely unknown
physics of pulsar winds in millisecond pulsars, and aid in understanding where
the transition occurs from a Poynting flux-dominated to a particle-dominated
flow. This project will involve first-principles global kinetic Particle-In-Cell
simulations of the intrabinary shock in spider pulsars, so one can
simultaneously capture the microscopic physics of magnetic field dissipation,
particle acceleration and ensuing emission, as well as the global morphology and
curvature of the shock and the resulting macroscopic flow dynamics. While the
main focus is on spider pulsars, the question of particle acceleration in
magnetically-dominated striped shocks is of profound relevance to the physics of
Poynting-flux-dominated relativistic outflows in other systems, like jets of
active galactic nuclei and gamma-ray bursts. This award advances the goals of
the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.