* 2307395
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Coherent radio and x-ray precursor transients to gravitational wave events: Simulations in general relativity and kinetic theory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Philippov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 375,000.00

A central issue in astrophysics today is understanding the merging of neutron
stars (NS), highly compact celestial objects, or NS with black holes (BH). Such
mergers produce gravitational waves (GW), a counterpart electromagnetic signal,
and ultimately the heaviest atomic elements in the universe. In addition to
counterparts produced during and after the merger of such systems, it might also
be possible to create prompt transient events before the collision, due to the
presence of strong magnetic fields in the inspiraling NS. Such a precursor event
was recently reported for the long gamma-ray burst GRB 211211A. Understanding
whether and how such transients can be launched will be crucial both as an
additional tool for prompt sky localization by aiding follow-up searches for GW
afterglows, as well as constraining currently inaccessible parameters such as
the magnetic field strengths in the pre-merger system. A research collaboration
between California Institute of Technology and the University of Maryland,
College Park, will investigate these issues through a program of computer
simulations in general relativity and kinetic theory. The project will provide
training for undergraduate and graduate students and include the creation of a
summer school at the intersection of computational relativity and plasma
astrophysics.

The researchers will perform the first numerical simulations of the crustal
shattering mechanism, which is the leading hypothesis for the production of a
precursor. To uncover the actual emission mechanism in the system, they will
calculate the efficiency of coherent emission mechanisms associated with mergers
of plasmoids in relativistic magnetic reconnection, in regimes applicable to the
magnetospheres of compact object mergers and magnetars. Finally, they will
explore a novel radiative regime of reconnection in strong magnetic fields and
calculate the spectrum of escaping high-energy X-ray photons. The results
(including predicted frequency ranges and luminosity scalings with system
parameters) and simulation codes provided by the research team will be directly
relevant for multi-messenger observations of NS-NS and NS-BH mergers. This
summer school program will fill a gap in the training opportunities of early
career scientists, preparing them for research forefront of relativistic and
multi-messenger astrophysics. In addition, postdoctoral scholars and graduate
students supported by this project will receive extensive professional,
educational, and equity, diversity, and inclusion training, including
transferable skills acquired through work on this project. This will enable them
to be well-positioned throughout their careers to contribute also to technical
advances and discoveries in other areas of science and engineering. This award
advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.