* 2307950
* The Untimely Deaths of Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Stephen McMillan, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2026
* USD 546,269.00

Most stars, including our own Sun, form in clusters of hundreds to millions of
stars. As these clusters grow older, they quickly begin to lose stars. This
happens both from stars pulling on each other with gravity, and from the gravity
of nearby massive gas clouds. These stars spread out from the cluster but still
move with a similar velocity. Such groups of stars moving together are observed
in the neighborhood of the Sun. The stars heat the gas with ultraviolet
radiation, winds, and supernova explosions. The investigators will study how
clusters form and disperse, using computer simulations. The proposed work has
three goals: 1) to predict the kind of cluster that will form from a given gas
cloud; 2) to test whether the stars lost from clusters in the model behave like
real, observed stars in the neighborhood of the Sun; 3) to test whether the
force of gravity from gas clouds can explain how large clusters shrink over
time, as observed clusters appear to do. An international collaboration will
develop a textbook and educational resources for K-12 teachers. Two masterâ€™s
students will develop graphical displays of the new models and encourage their
use at public events. They plan a Hayden Planetarium Space Show to be viewed by
millions around the country and the world.

The investigators will study star cluster formation and destruction using a
combination of multiple software tools. At the small scale, they will model
cluster formation and gas expulsion with the open-source Torch software. This
uses the AMUSE framework to couple the Flash adaptive mesh refinement
magnetohydrodynamics code with direct N-body codes that model collisional
stellar dynamics and stellar evolution codes that follow the secular evolution
of each star, determining the radiative and mechanical energy they produce over
time. They include a ray-tracing treatment of stellar photoionization as well as
jets, winds, supernovae, radiative cooling, and self-gravity. At the large
scale, they will use the SMUGGLE star formation and feedback framework in the
AREPO code to determine self-consistent initial conditions and tidal fields. The
scientific goals of this work are to: (1) Develop semi-analytic models that
connect properties of self-consistent dense gas clouds (a) to the resulting
cluster mass, size, central concentration, and virial parameter and (b) that
determine the mass loss from clusters subject to strongly fluctuating tidal
forces. (2) Compare the properties of stars dispersing from low-mass clusters to
the systems of moving groups, associations, and clusters observed in the Solar
neighborhood, and to observations of asymmetric tidal tails from open clusters.
(3) Use the semi-analytic models to follow populations of clusters through a
self-consistent galactic tidal field to test the hypothesis that these tides
determine the evolution from power-law mass distributions of young massive
clusters to log normal distributions of old globular clusters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.