* 2307754
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Climate and adaptation deficits: Mechanisms of response to climate change by the endangered North Atlantic right whale
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Peter Countway, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 924,137.00

A rapid climate shift in the Gulf of Maine in 2010 caused an abrupt
redistribution in the endangered North Atlantic right whale (Eubalaena
glacialis), leading to changing foraging patterns, higher mortality rates due to
vessel collisions and entanglement in fishing gear, as well as a drop in the
calving rate. This decline in population size and health has triggered the
International Union for Conservation of Nature to re-classify right whale
conservation status from endangered to critically endangered. The case of the
right whale illustrates the ecological and socio-economic consequences of a lack
of understanding of how an organism responds to climate change. Such rapid
redistributions have previously been unpredictable, as right whale monitoring
and modeling efforts are focused on known and accessible historic habitats. This
project develops a new modeling framework to integrate novel right whale data
with trans-boundary prey surveys to understand adaptation, identify potential
habitats outside regular monitoring regions, and predict changes to right whale
distribution in future decades. Model results will guide the development and
implementation of protective policies administered by federal agencies and
provide theoretical support for expanding dynamic management efforts. Project
synthesis will be applied in organizations including the Atlantic Large Whale
Take Reduction Team and the Regional Wildlife Science Collaborative for Offshore
Wind. A publicly-available data science lesson plan will be developed to teach
spatial analysis techniques and engender discussion on conservation management.

This proposal seeks to utilize robust right whale and zooplankton monitoring
data to build a next-generation species distribution model to explain and
predict right whale foraging decisions and spatial distribution patterns. The
research will test the hypothesis that there are measurable thresholds of prey
density that cause individual animals to utilize or abandon a foraging site.
However, these prey density thresholds may vary depending on environmental
factors such as prey species, site, and season, or by demographic factors such
as right whale age and reproductive status. Using consecutive sightings of
identified individuals, an individual movement model will be developed to
understand foraging decision-making and estimate prey density thresholds across
this range of environmental and demographic variables. This model will be
coupled with genetic analysis of right whale fecal samples to identify prey taxa
and prey ratios in distinct habitats and foraging seasons. Prey thresholds will
be incorporated into a prey patch model spanning the North Atlantic to
characterize the spatial and temporal occurrence of suitable foraging habitat.
Then a next-generation species distribution modeling framework will be used that
draws on behavioral thresholds resolved from the individual movement model and
prey patch occurrence models parameterized by prey content in the fecal samples.
This modeling framework will provide new predictive capacity for determining
when right whales may shift foraging patterns and which habitats are suitable
for becoming a novel foraging hot spot. Model results will be used to quantify
the bioenergetic and anthropogenic components of the climate change effect on
right whale populations.

This award was co-funded through the GEO/OCE Biological Oceanography Program and
the BIO/IOS Organismal Responses to Climate Change Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.