* 2307357
* Turbulence, Shocks, and Stability in Fluids and Plasmas
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Matthew Novack, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 115,031.00

This project will develop the mathematical theory of liquids, gases, and
plasmas, which are ubiquitous in problems from engineering, meteorology,
aerodynamics, and more. These fundamental states of matter exhibit a wide range
of behaviors, including turbulent and chaotic behavior, shock waves, and
stability. The first goal is to advance the mathematical theory of turbulent
fluids, which may be observed everywhere from the wakes of vehicles to the
atmosphere. Second, this project will study shock waves, or the apparent
discontinuities in properties such as density and flow velocity, which are
observed in astrophysical plasmas and more. Finally, the project will
investigate the stabilizing properties of fluids and plasmas near background
shears, which may be used in a number of important applications to control the
behavior of the fluid or plasma. This project also includes training and
mentoring opportunities for graduate students and the organization of
conferences and seminars.

The first portion of this project will construct dissipative solutions of the
incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, as well as other models of
fluid and plasmas. Intermittency, wavelet-based iterations, and more will play a
key role in the analysis. The second portion of this project will begin by
building small-amplitude kinetic shock solutions to the Boltzmann and Landau
equations which approximate traveling wave solutions of the compressible Navier-
Stokes equations. Tools from the study of compressible fluids, the hydrodynamic
limit, and kinetic theory will be developed and then used to investigate models
of dilute charged particles, such as the Vlasov-Maxwell-Boltzmann system.
Finally, this project will study hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic stability
and control. Stabilizing mechanisms, mixing, and enhanced dissipation are often
observed in the vicinity of shear flows and will be used in a novel way to solve
control problems for fluids and plasmas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.