* 2307610
* Nonlinear Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Seeger, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 169,408.00

Statistical uncertainty plays a significant role in a diverse range of models
for complicated dynamic phenomena, leading to wild, stochastic behavior. Such
probabilistic effects are caused, for instance, by unpredictable market shifts
in the global economy, or turbulent or chaotic weather patterns at the evolving
front of a massive forest fire. The investigator will develop a mathematical
understanding for the equations arising in these applications, while also
studying the stabilizing and regularizing effects of stochastic noise, for which
there is often experimental or numerical evidence. This project will generate
opportunities to mentor graduate and undergraduate students by providing both
professional advice and mathematical knowledge related to the project.

Dynamical random behavior under various complex influences is often described by
nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations. Such equations cannot be
solved through the superposition of simple formulae and are therefore not yet
well-understood mathematically. The project will draw on tools from functional
analysis and probability to resolve the well-posedness of nonlinear stochastic
partial differential equations arising in competitive large population dynamics
and in stochastically forced interface evolutions. The effects of stochasticity
will be further analyzed by studying the long-time behavior of solutions,
probabilistic averaging and regularizing phenomena, and stochastic selection
principles for models with a small level of background noise. The material
influence of stochasticity indicates that the statistical fluctuations in
experimental data cannot be completely ignored, thereby justifying the technical
study of those stochastic partial differential equations involved in this
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.