* 2307863
* Collaborative Research: White Dwarfs in Binaries Across the H-R Diagram with the APOGEE-GALEX-Gaia Catalog
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Mathieu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 124,781.00

More than 95 percent of stars will eventually end up as white dwarfs - the
remains of stars that have used up their nuclear fuel and collapsed to a size
equivalent to Earth but with a mass comparable to the Sun. Many of these white
dwarfs are locked in a cosmic dance with stellar companions, where they orbit
around each other and exchange mass. Such close white dwarf binary systems offer
an excellent opportunity to study the late stages of stellar evolution. They can
also be used as tracers of the dynamics of the Milky Way galaxy, and they are
potential sources of gravitational waves. The goal of this project is to collect
data on these systems at a wide range of wavelengths to characterize them and
investigate fundamental properties, like what they are made of and how much mass
they are sharing. This work will also provide several projects for science
students at various stages, and the investigators will work with experts in
accessibility to create training programs to teach astronomy to blind and
visually impaired people.

Most white dwarfs inhabit multiple systems, and a large fraction of those are
compact enough to exchange mass, changing the structures and subsequent
evolution of both stars. The physical mechanisms that mediate these mass
exchanges include common envelope evolution, Roche lobe overflow, wind
accretion, mass stripping, and stellar mergers. The main goal of this proposal
is to further our understanding of mass transfer processes in interacting
systems by assembling a unique observational sample of thousands of post mass-
transfer binaries. The source sample combines the GALEX and Gaia databases with
APOGEE — a high resolution (R=22,500), high signal-to-noise, multi-epoch,
infrared (1.51 μm to 1.69 μm), spectroscopic survey of stars across the Milky
Way — to build the most exhaustive survey of post-mass transfer binaries,
containing systems with main sequence, subgiant, red giant, and red clump
companions. The creation of this APOGEE-GALEX-Gaia Catalog and the proposed
analysis of the resulting data set will improve our knowledge of the population
of post-mass transfer binaries containing a white dwarf, and map the changes in
their properties as a function of the evolution of the non-degenerate companion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.