* 2307526
* DISES: Governing Green Stormwater Infrastructure for Just and Adaptive Urban Flood Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Sara Hughes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,549,418.00

Stormwater flooding is currently responsible for $9 billion in damage each year
in the U.S., and the frequency and intensity of this flooding are expected to
increase. Low-income communities are often disproportionately exposed to
stormwater flooding events due to aging and inadequate infrastructure. Green
stormwater infrastructure (GSI) has the potential to contribute to effective
solutions to stormwater flooding with many environmental co-benefits. However,
there are gaps in technical knowledge that can make it difficult to effectively
integrate GSI with traditional stormwater infrastructure and existing stormwater
governance systems. This project will use a mix of engineering, policy, design,
and community-based methods to generate new knowledge of the interactions
between traditional infrastructure and GSI and the multi-jurisdictional
decision-making best suited to evaluate new and adaptive stormwater management
practices. The project focuses specifically on stormwater flooding in the
Detroit Metropolitan Area, an older post-industrial region with aging stormwater
infrastructure, a combined sewer system, and high levels of social and economic
segregation. This research addresses the critical need to manage stormwater
flood risk in ways that address socio-spatial inequalities. The findings will
inform more effective and just approaches to incorporating Green Stormwater
Infrastructure and managing stormwater flooding in other urbanized regions. The
project will disseminate science- and community-driven recommendations and tools
for stormwater managers, urban planners, community organizations, and city
leaders, particularly those working in post-industrial or shrinking city
contexts.

The project will integrate multiple methods for studying social-environmental
systems to examine the interactions between stormwater hydrology, green and gray
infrastructures, community awareness and preferences, and decision-making about
stormwater flooding. The project will incorporate novel sensor data into
computational stormwater models to determine stormwater flood risk and optimize
GSI locations best suited to reduce flooding. Municipal stormwater policies and
resident surveys will provide new insight into the ways political and
institutional context affect policy decisions and investments that drive
inequitable exposure to stormwater flooding. Participatory research in case
study neighborhoods will allow researchers to explore with communities GSI
investment scenarios and tradeoffs they produce between flooding, justice,
feasibility, and desirability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.