* 2307324
* DISES: Social-ecological drivers and consequences of human-carnivore interactions within and among American cities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Kelli Larson, Lincoln Park Zoo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,595,162.00

Human coexistence with carnivores is vital to global conservation efforts, but
coexistence is difficult because conflicts arising from the transmission of
zoonotic diseases and attacks on people and domestic animals can reduce human
tolerance for carnivores. Interactions between humans and carnivores are
becoming more common with growing urbanization worldwide, leading to calls for
carnivore eradication from some residents while others demand management
approaches that promote coexistence. Conflicts between humans and carnivores and
between different groups of people create a research need to predict negative
human-carnivore interactions in cities and understand how to improve management
to foster coexistence. This project examines 1) which characteristics of humans
and carnivores either lead to conflict or to coexistence, 2) how management
decisions are made about the use of lethal and non-lethal methods for
controlling carnivores in cities, and 3) the heterogeneous impacts of different
management strategies on carnivore genetics and public acceptability of
carnivores. This research focuses on two urban carnivores with broad regional
distributions, coyotes (Canis latrans) and raccoons (Procyon lotor), within
cities involved in the Urban Wildlife Information Network, a collaborative of
researchers and managers in over 50 cities who study urban wildlife using
similar methods. This project particularly focuses on four cities: Chicago, IL;
Washington D.C.; Phoenix, AZ; and San Francisco, CA. Complementary analysis
draws on camera trap data from 20 cities to understand how the geographical
patterns of carnivores and conflicts vary based on characteristics of the
respective cities.

Part of the challenge in preventing negative interactions between humans and
carnivores is that it is typically approached as a wildlife management issue
rather than a complex social-ecological system. Human-carnivore interactions are
influenced by the presence of carnivores near people, but human responses
ultimately affect the likelihood of interactions (e.g., providing food
attractants), outcomes (e.g., whether carnivores are lethally removed), and
diverse forms of coexistence (e.g., whether carnivores are tolerated or
celebrated in urban natural areas). This project helps to address this challenge
by combining data on coyote and raccoon distributions from camera traps with
resident attitudes, as elicited via survey methods, and management perspectives,
as inferred from interviews. This approach facilitates inferences about the
extent to which carnivore distributions explain spatial patterns in conflicts
and if there are communities where conflict is evident but not reported to
managers. Similarly, the multifaceted approach helps to identify contexts where
lethal management is used and if these measures result in changes to the genetic
diversity of local carnivore populations. Lastly, the transdisciplinary approach
elucidates how wildlife disease can dynamically influence the likelihood of
human-wildlife interactions and how humans respond to those interactions. This
project engages thousands of urban residents in participatory science via the
tagging of wildlife images. It also provides educational training for K-12
students through the Lincoln Park Zooâ€™s Partners in Fieldwork program, in which
students monitor wildlife using cameras and analyze mammal community data from
cities across the Urban Wildlife Information Network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.