* 2307467
* Unseen Architectures: Revealing Low Mass Planets on Long Period Orbits
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Brewer, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2026
* USD 697,725.00

A team will find and characterize new planets around distant stars in order to
understand planet formation. The team will detect low mass planets in systems
similar to our own Solar System, small planets close to their stars that also
have cold, more massive companions. The team will detect these low mass planets
in time for follow up by the James Webb Space Telescope during its primary
mission lifetime. This continuing survey may detect Earth-like planets in
habitable orbits around Sun-like stars. This work will be carried out by
undergraduate and masters students from a minority serving institution. In
addition to research, students will prepare related Spanish language outreach
content both to involve the local community and share science more widely.
Students will also organize and run monthly Spanish language outreach events,
with talks, planetarium shows, and telescope viewing.

Long running radial velocity surveys have begun to identify large planets as far
out as 10 Astronomical Units from their host stars. However, their spectroscopic
sensitivity has been unable to find many of the super-Earths and sub-Neptunes
that are ubiquitous in transit surveys, especially beyond 1 Astronomical Unit.
The 20 cm/s nightly precision of the EXPRES spectrograph opens up precisely the
parameter space that is missed from these prior surveys. Characterizing the
planet architectures in this region will directly test the pebble accretion
model, which predicts a lack of systems with inner super Earths and outer more
massive planets. The team will use the EXPRES extreme precision radial velocity
spectrograph to find low mass planets out to 4 Astronomical Units from their
host stars. The program builds on 4 years of high-cadence observations with
nightly spectroscopic precision of 20 cm/s. Students will actively participate
in observing, both remotely and in person. A postdoc will focus on reducing
photospheric noise and characterizing planet atmospheres and migration pathways.
The ultra-stable instrumental profile of EXPRES allows other analyses using the
time series spectra; the team will improve our understanding of photospheric
activity through line profile variations and analysis of solar variability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.