* 2307373
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Optimal Follow-up for Multimessenger Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Stanislav Djorgovski, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,476.00

Mergers of black holes and neutron stars emit gravitational waves that can be
detected on Earth by advanced detectors that sense minuscule disturbances in the
fabric of the universe. In some cases, such events are accompanied by a burst of
electromagnetic radiation that can also be seen by telescopes. These light
signals combined with gravitational waves provide us with unprecedented insights
into some of the most extreme objects in the Universe. However, the detection of
such emission is challenging as it usually brief and faint. This project aims to
develop cutting-edge artificial intelligence (AI) systems that will optimize the
search for such sources among the hundreds of cosmic explosions that light up
the night sky. Such systems will represent some of the first that make real-time
scientific decisions in astronomy, determining the most efficient use of limited
telescope resources to streamline the discovery process. This allows astronomers
to focus on the scientific interpretation of results. The project will also
train students in the advanced techniques required to design similar systems in
other domains, such as robotics and finance.

The investigators will develop a system that automates the follow-up decision-
making step of the kilonova discovery infrastructure. Specifically, given an
alert of gravitational wave mergers and gamma-ray bursts in the form of survey
light curves and image stamps, and any value-added information, like galaxy
redshift, the system will direct a series of resource assignments within a
finite horizon that maximize a designated objective. The novel approach involves
an AI agent that adaptively learns to make the best sequence of decisions given
incomplete information and stochasticity concerning future survey and
supplemental follow-up data from other sources. It will use the framework of
reinforcement learning to rehearse gravitational wave trigger scenarios and
learn how taking a certain action influences benefits achieved downstream, to
solve for the optimal set of decisions that maximizes benefits given an unseen
scenario. The AI agent will be trained to handle both photometric and
spectroscopic follow-up and simultaneously maximize both kilonova discovery and
inference objectives.

This project addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.