* 2307232
* Dormant black holes and neutron stars in stellar binaries
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kareem El-Badry, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 475,345.00

Black holes (BHs) are perhaps the most bizarre prediction of Einstein's theory
of general relativity: regions of spacetime where gravity is so strong that
nothing, not even light, can escape. Models predict that more than 100 million
BHs exist in the Milky Way, yet only about 20 have been discovered to date. This
proposal seeks to increase that number by using telescopes on the ground, data
from the Gaia spacecraft, and novel data analysis methods to detect BHs via
their gravitation effects on stars that orbit them. A research group at the
California Institute of Technology will carry out the investigation using a
variety of observational and theoretical tools developed by that group. Along
the way, the researchers also expect to discover an unprecedented sample of
neutron stars -- close cousins of BHs with lower masses -- orbited by stars like
the Sun. The ultimate goal is a census of our Galaxy's BH and neutron star
population, which will ultimately improve our understanding of the physics of
stellar evolution, supernovae, and compact object formation. A majority of the
research will be carried out by a PhD student and will form the central pillar
of that student's thesis. The group will also develop open-source material for
undergraduate labs centered around orbital dynamics. The PI will continue to
give public talks and work with the Future Ignited program at Caltech to support
students who are members of under-represented minorities in STEM (for example,
Black, African-American, Native American and Pacific Islanders).

The team will use a range of ground- and space-based facilities to discover and
characterize the first statistical sample of dormant black holes (BHs) and
neutron stars (NSs) in binaries with widely separated stellar companions.
Candidates will be selected from the recent 3rd data release of the Gaia
mission, which provides orbital solutions for an unprecedented 350,000
astrometric and spectroscopic binaries. The dataset represents a factor of 50
increase in sample size over all previous work and thus provides novel
opportunities to search for rare objects. The group will use ground-based
telescopes to follow-up the best candidates spectroscopically. The main goals of
the program are to (1) obtain spectroscopy and multi-epoch radial velocities for
all ~100 binaries in the Gaia sample with high probability of having BH or NS
components; (2) measure the mass distribution of BHs and NSs from 1 to 15 solar
masses, detecting or ruling out the mass gap; (3) constrain the frequency and
magnitude of natal kicks for BHs and NSs from binary eccentricities and
separations; and (4) detect or rule out the presence of unseen tertiaries within
binaries containing BHs. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on
the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.