* 2307189
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Elucidating the multi-dimensionality and scaling of avian diversity-vegetation relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Benjamin Zuckerberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2027
* USD 297,323.00

This project will study the impacts of habitat structure on biodiversity; that
is, the variety of forms of life. Habitat structure is the spatial arrangement
of plants and resources in natural communities. This structure is important for
biodiversity because it affects where organisms can live. The goal of this
project is to effectively plan for the future of ecosystems in the face of human
impacts. To date, studies have focused on one small aspect of habitat
structure—tree canopy height—and have only done studies at small spatial scales.
But, habitat structure is more complex than tree canopy height and might change
at larger spatial scales when considering local communities up to entire
continents. To address this knowledge gap, this project will use bird sightings
and data collected from airplanes and satellites to test how habitat structure
affects biodiversity at local to continental scales. Findings from this research
will help understand the impacts of human disturbance and natural disturbance on
habitats and biodiversity. The project will provide results and data for the
scientific and educational communities. The project will also train a diverse
workforce in ecological research by training middle- and high-schoolers and
postdoctoral researchers from groups typically underrepresented in science.

This project will provide new insights into the mechanistic underpinnings of
avian diversity-vegetation associations through the exploration of the
relationships between taxonomic and functional facets of avian diversity and
three-dimensional (3-D) vegetation structure across spatial scales from local to
continental. This project will expand on existing studies by recognizing the
multi-dimensionality of vegetation structure, including both its vertical and
horizontal heterogeneity of vegetation. To do so, the project will use air-borne
and space-borne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors. Second, this
research will identify traits that mediate the associations of avian diversity
with 3-D vegetation structure through the exploration of trait-environment
relationships. As such, the project will provide a basis for identifying traits
that consistently respond to changes in vegetation structure and might hold the
strongest potential for predicting future states of avian diversity in the face
of habitat modification and loss. Finally, by exploring multiple spatial scales,
the project will advance the theoretical foundation of scale dependence in
biodiversity-vegetation relationships. Ultimately, the findings will have
implications for understanding the impacts of environmental change on
biodiversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.