* 2307699
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Theoretical Study of Cosmological Magnetic Fields and Turbulence: from the Early to Late Time Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Vogelsberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 318,113.00

The invisible magnetic fields permeate our Universe everywhere, at different
length scales ranging from planets (as Earth’s magnetic field) and stars (as
Sun’s magnetic field) to the large-scale fields observed in galaxies (as the
Milky Way – our Galaxy’s magnetic field) and galaxy clusters, and even at larger
scales filling the space between galaxy clusters. Recent observational data
suggest the existence of magnetic fields in voids – the emptiest and darkest
regions – as well. Scientists at Carnegie Mellon University and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology propose to carry out a theoretical
research program aimed at understanding the origin of cosmic magnetism, which is
one of the most challenging questions in modern astrophysics that impacts scales
from the space surrounding Earth to the faraway regions of the Universe. As part
of this project, the PIs will participate in a series of public outreach
activities, with programming designed to engage local middle and high school
students and teachers, disabled veterans, as well as the general public.

The focus of this research program is to investigate the origin, evolution and
observational consequences of cosmic magnetic fields, including physical
processes in the early-universe as well as in the interstellar medium. It is
commonly assumed that the observed cosmic magnetic fields originated from the
weak seed fields of unknown origin. Two basic scenarios are generally
considered: (1) a bottom-up (astrophysical) scenario, where the seed is
typically very weak and the magnetic field is transferred from local sources
within galaxies to larger scales; (2) a top-down (cosmological) scenario, where
a strong seed field is generated prior to galaxy formation in the early universe
on scales that are now large. This project will investigate the top-down
scenario in order to illuminate the role of magnetic fields as a probe of
fundamental physics. The physics of primordial magnetogenesis can be broken down
into three main motifs that are addressed in the research program: the
generation of a magnetic field in the early universe, the evolution of this
field subject to magnetohydrodynamic effects through the various cosmological
epochs, and the detection of this magnetic field with a comprehensive array of
astrophysical and cosmological observations. To study these processes, the team
will perform coherent theoretical and computational modeling as well as
statistical analysis used to interpret the simulations and observational data.
This work will provide the tools needed to discriminate between different
magnetogenesis scenarios, and will establish whether the observed cosmic
magnetic fields require physics beyond the Standard Model of cosmology and
particle physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.