* 2307223
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging the interactions between carbon nanomaterials and DNA molecules for mitigating antibiotic resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Xitong Liu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2026
* USD 220,000.00

Antibiotic resistant bacteria ("superbugs") are considered one of the greatest
challenges facing humanity in the 21st century. In the U.S., more than 23,000
deaths per year are associated with antibiotic resistant bacteria, and
approximately $55 billion is spent annually to combat antibiotic resistance. The
spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria is causing global concern that we may be
returning to a pre-antibiotic era. Resistance to antibiotics is carried by the
genetic materials of bacteria called antibiotic resistance genes. These emerging
contaminants are being rapidly transmitted in built environments such as
wastewater treatment plants. Recent studies are exploring the feasibility of
using new approaches and materials, such as carbon nanomaterials, to remove
antibiotic resistance genes. Despite the great potential, previous studies
consistently report inefficient removal due to a lack of in-depth understanding
of the interactions between antibiotic resistance genes and carbon
nanomaterials. The goal of this project is to understand the fundamental
chemistry when antibiotic resistance genes interact with carbon nanomaterials.
Based on the knowledge gained from this project, a robust carbon nanomaterial-
membrane system can be developed and applied to wastewater treatment plants to
combat antibiotic resistance. The system is also expected to be broadly
applicable to the treatment of various emerging contaminants that are difficult
to remove using conventional technologies. In addition to advancing engineering
applications and fundamental chemistry, this project will provide educational
opportunities for highly motivated, low-income high school students.
Undergraduate students from groups traditionally under-represented in STEM will
also be involved in the research. This early exposure to research is expected to
be transformative in broadening the horizons and academic/career goals of
participating students.

Antibiotic resistance genes are considered an emerging contaminant and can
spread rapidly in the built environment such as municipal wastewater treatment
plants. One of the promising approaches to combat antibiotic resistance is the
use of carbon nanomaterials to adsorb and degrade antibiotic resistance genes.
However, because the effects of their nanoscale properties on adsorption and
degradation are not well understood, inefficient removal is consistently
reported in the literature. The goal of this project is to develop a mechanistic
understanding of the interactions between antibiotic resistance genes and carbon
nanomaterials. This goal will be achieved by pursuing three interrelated
objectives: 1) understand the interactions with membranes coated with reduced
graphene oxide; 2) enhance the electrostatic adsorption of antibiotic resistance
genes on the modified membranes; and 3) enhance the electrochemical degradation
of antibiotic resistance genes by the modified membranes. By immobilizing carbon
nanomaterials on membranes, the interactions are expected to be readily tuned
and enhanced with pressure-driven filtration. In addition, the membranes can act
as a support layer for carbon nanomaterials to be electrically charged, allowing
electrostatic adsorption at anodic potentials as well as reactive oxygen
species-induced degradation at cathodic potentials. Alternation of the
electrical potential will also result in synergistic interactions. This project
is expected to provide insight into the design of nanostructured materials and
heterogeneous nanosystems for water and wastewater applications. The "trap-and-
zap" strategy (i.e., adsorption followed by degradation) developed in this
project is expected to be applicable to the treatment of emerging contaminants
in heterogeneous environments. A major benefit of this project will be
addressing the societal need for alleviating the ever-growing energy demand for
water and wastewater treatment. This project will promote teaching, training,
and learning by supporting \high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in
research. The principal investigators have been and will continue working
closely with the Society of Women Engineers, the National Society of Black
Engineers, and the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers to engage students
from groups traditionally under-represented in STEM in research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.