* 2307787
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Systematic Predictions for Dynamical Signatures of New Dark Matter Physics in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Robyn Sanderson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 622,334.00

Dark matter is a mysterious substance that does not emit, absorb, or reflect
light, yet makes up over 80% of the matter in our Universe. Its existence is
inferred through the gravitational force it exerts on visible matter, but its
identity remains one of the driving scientific questions of our time. Since
scientists have not directly detected dark matter particles, the goal of much
current research, including this proposal, is to predict ways to indirectly
constrain dark matter’s properties. The team of scientists at the University of
Pennsylvania, MIT, and Princeton, will study how to test dark matter with
individual galaxies. The team will implement several well-motivated models for
dark matter in simulations of galaxies like the Milky Way and smaller, creating
for the first time a set of controlled experiments in galaxy formation where
only the type of dark matter is varied. They will use these simulations to
identify which indirect tests can use observations of galaxies to distinguish
between dark matter models and make predictions for those tests tailored to
next-generation observatories. The team will reach across several traditionally
siloed subfields of physics to give a new generation of diverse researchers the
broad theoretical and computational background needed for this groundbreaking
work. By implementing evidence-based best practices to foster equity within
their collaboration, this team will make a significant advance toward growing a
more inclusive computational astrophysics community.

Specifically, the main outcomes of the proposed work are: (1) a new, public set
of validated software modules implementing key classes of DM particle models in
the well-developed, extensively tested GIZMO codebase for cosmological-
hydrodynamical simulations of galaxy formation; (2) a public set of simulated
Milky Way-like and dwarf galaxies with identical initial conditions, and exactly
the same baryonic physics, evolved under a variety of DM models; (3) a set of
concrete, observationally testable predictions—derived from traditional and
machine-learning-based analyses—for current and future observatories that can be
used to constrain or rule out classes of DM models; (4) a network of new
graduate researchers and postdocs with the broad training and expertise to
complete, for the first time, the connection between theoretical models of dark
matter, the study of galaxy formation and observational predictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.