* 2307595
* Collaborative Research: The Importance of Binarity on the Origin of Wolf-Rayet Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Desmond Hillier, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 121,727.00

This project is designed to demonstrate how high-mass stars lose their outermost
layers, exposing their cores. Such objects are known as Wolf-Rayet (WR) stars.
Most of their hydrogen is gone, and they are made up of the products of nuclear
burning such as helium, carbon, and oxygen. WR stars are near the ends of their
lives and are destined to explode as spectacular supernovae. There are two
methods by which these WRs might form. In the first of these, the outer layers
are removed by "stellar winds," in which matter is pushed off the star by the
pressure of their intense light. In the second method, material is pulled off
the star by the gravity of an orbiting companion star. It is likely that some WR
stars form one way, while others form the other. The goal of this project is to
find what fraction of WR stars is formed by each method. This result will be
important scientifically, because these high-mass stars play a vital role in the
ecology of the Universe, manufacturing the elements that make up our planet and
the life on it. Their intense explosions at the ends of their lives release
these elements into space, triggering the formation of the next generation of
stars and planets. These observations will also provide summer internship
projects for undergraduates. The project includes the construction and free
distribution of college-level exercises in astronomy.

The investigator team will use three complementary approaches. First, they will
measure the luminosities and chemical composition of representative samples of
nitrogen-rich Wolf-Rayet stars (WN) and compare these to those predicted by the
evolutionary models. Second, the nature of the enigmatic "WN3/O3" stars will be
investigated. These are either archetypes of stripped binaries or a missing link
between O stars and WRs. Third, they will conduct a systematic survey for O-type
stars in the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds. The relative number of O and WR
stars as a function of mass (luminosity) is one of the most fundamental
diagnostics of the origins of WRs. Together these three programs will put
numbers and uncertainties on the fraction of binaries formed by each mechanism.
The authors will also construct a high-resolution spectral atlas of 1000 bright
stars covering a wide range of spectral types and luminosity classes. This atlas
is intended as a heuristic resource available not only for astronomers but also
for astronomy students. It will be used in undergraduate lab exercises at
Northern Arizona University. These spectra and teaching units will then be made
freely available to everyone through a website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.