* 2307504
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Using machine learning to investigate temporal dynamics of methane seep fauna at the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Katharine Bigham, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2025
* USD 308,540.00

Methane hydrate seeps are unique chemosynthetic marine environments where
organisms use chemicals from the seafloor rather than sunlight to create energy.
They are found on continental margins worldwide (with more than 1,300 off the
coast of Oregon and Washington alone) providing important services such as
energy storage in the form of methane hydrates and habitat for commercially
important fish stocks, as well as contributing to regional biodiversity and
productivity. However, it is still unclear whether these relationships are due
to enhanced productivity from chemosynthetic production, increased seafloor
habitat complexity, or a combination thereof. Nor is it known what timescales
these habitat users operate under: are they random one-off interactions by
individuals, or regular, predictable interactions by a broader population?
Therefore, it is difficult to quantify and fully describe the services methane
seeps provide, which is vital information for successful management of these
potentially critical habitats, energy resources, and carbon sinks. This research
will explore these questions by using a unique time series of imagery and video
collected by the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array over
more than a decade at Southern Hydrate Ridge, a methane hydrate seep off the
coast of Oregon. The project will also involve the development of machine
learning pipelines which will make future work with OOI imagery more accessible
for researchers and the public, since current, manual methods of annotating
imagery are incredibly time consuming. Additionally, this project will support
an early career post-doctoral researcher, give two undergraduate students an
opportunity to participate in research, and produce a classroom module - geared
to a broad undergraduate student audience - on marine technology and imagery
based marine research.

Specifically, this project will develop multi-taxon detectors as a part of a
machine assisted annotation pipeline to process an estimated 37 TB of imagery
and video collected by the OOI Regional Cabled Array. The pipeline developed for
this project will contribute to a fast-moving field of marine automated imaging
which aims to make the large amounts of imagery collected in the world’s oceans
every day, as well as historically collected data, more readily usable for
scientific research. Visible animals, bacterial mats, and geologic structures
will be annotated in the imagery, quantifying the changes in abundances and
diversity of the community at the site over time. This data will then be used to
investigate the temporal trajectory of the benthic megafauna community at the
methane seep and examine how the community is influenced by environmental
conditions. Insights will help us understand daily, monthly, and yearly cycles
in these environments, which will create better understanding of baseline
temporal dynamics. Overall, this project will contribute knowledge of methane
hydrate seep ecologic dynamics, providing vital information for characterization
and management of these biodiverse, high-carbon, and energy-rich habitats.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.