* 2307307
* Keystone Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Jerry Ross, Millersville University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,215,079.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: Blacks and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared students,
highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.
The need for cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United
States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Keystone Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation STEM Pathways Implementation-Only project is
comprised of four of the ten Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education
(PASSHE) institutions: East Stroudsburg University, Millersville University
(lead), Slippery Rock University, and West Chester University.

The goal of the project is to increase recruitment and retention of students
from LSAMP populations, and ultimately increase STEM B. S. degrees and entry
into graduate STEM programs. To accomplish this project goals, the Alliance will
build new strength in areas of recruitment and retention while improving on
existing strengths alliance wide. Specific strategies include annual two to
three-week summer bridge programs for entering students, Alliance specific
curriculum and co-curricular activities, recurring multi-cohort summer programs
focused on research preparation for future research experiences for
undergraduates or internship opportunities, preparation for work or graduate
school, formative evaluation for continuous improvement, and summative
evaluation to show impact. Overall, the Keystone alliance addresses a variety of
NSF goals, specifically (1) increasing participation in STEM for students from
underrepresented groups in STEM, (2) improving STEM education by integrating
inclusive curriculum, increasing public engagement through community-based,
civic engagement projects, and (3) building a strong partnership of alliance
institutions to better collaborate and cooperate in the PASSHE diversity, equity
and inclusion action plan for developing highly competitive STEM professionals
for the nation's workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.