* 2307175
* DISES: Coevolutionary dynamics of humans and maize in the Americas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Graham Coop, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,599,717.00

Corn, or maize, originated in the Americas but is now the most productive crop
in the world, used for food, animal feed, fuel, and industrial manufacturing.
Unlike some cultures that cultivated a broad array of staple crops, many
indigenous peoples in the Americas relied primarily on maize. The survival and
growth of many human populations and economies in the Americas was tied to the
success of their maize crop, and many indigenous origin stories even posit that
humans were literally created from maize. In turn, maize population growth and
dispersal were dependent on human cultivation, and the modern maize form is the
result of thousands of years of human selection for dietary, cultural, and
economic needs. An interdisciplinary team of geneticists and archaeologists will
synthesize publicly available data on humans and maize in the Americas and
develop and apply novel analytical approaches to understand their entwined
history. Previous studies of the relationship between humans and their
domesticated plants and animals have been largely one-sided, but the approaches
developed in this project will provide other researchers the tools to explicitly
study the interactions driving such systems. These events occur and will be
studied in the context of changing environments. Researchers will incorporate
these interdisciplinary approaches into an educational video game for K-12
students that includes lessons on genetics, archaeology, and botany. The project
will combine existing approaches with newly developed methodologies for co-
estimating dispersal and demographic shifts to build co-evolutionary models and
test specific a priori hypotheses about the evolution of humans and maize.
Combining population genetics with archaeological data, researchers will
reconstruct histories of admixture and population size change to how maize
enabled human population and cultural change and how human movement and economic
exchange patterned the dispersal of maize. Phylogenetic comparison of indigenous
linguistic data to maize genetic data will further evaluate the impact of human
culture and economy in patterning maize diversity, and researchers will use
additional genetic, archaeological, and morphological data to test hypotheses
about reciprocal cultural and genetic changes in each species.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.