* 2307501
* Development of a pre-optics module for spectroscopic wavelength splitting and pupil slicing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Samuel Barden, Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 433,564.00

This project seeks to develop a new tool for astronomers to study the spectrum
of light from objects in space. Spectroscopy allows scientists to determine
characteristics of an object -- such as temperature, distance, and motion -- and
potentially to discover distant exoplanets. Current technology uses fiber optic
cables to feed light into spectrographs. Existing spectrographs are large,
complicated instruments. The principal investigator will develop new technology
that will make spectrographs can be smaller, more efficient, and less costly. He
will also explore using a special surface treatment on the lenses to reduce
unwanted reflections. These technological advancements will benefit not only
astronomy, but also and other applications of spectroscopy. The community
outreach initiatives will engage students and promote STEM activities related to
the project's objectives.

This study will advance a concept for separating the wavelength channels of a
spectrograph into simpler and smaller spectrographs that would allow more
compact instruments. This is useful for massively multiplexed spectroscopic
facilities, where the number of spectrographs is quite large and space to locate
the spectrographs limited. Such wavelength splitting in a pre-optics module
rather than in the spectrograph reduces the size and risk associated with
wavelength beam splitters. It also allows for locating blue channels closer to
the telescope to significantly improve the transmitted light shortward of 500
nm. Additionally, the study will explore the use of nanostructures for
antireflection purposes and investigate mass production techniques for future
scalability. These units also allow the implementation of pupil slicing, which
can further simplify spectrograph complexity. The project's intellectual merit
lies in advancing the design aspects of wavelength splitting and pupil slicing,
benefiting the field of astronomical spectroscopy and other spectroscopic
applications. Furthermore, community outreach initiatives will engage students
and promote STEM activities related to the project's objectives.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences in MPS
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.