* 2307800
* The inverse backscattering problem and the inverse fixed angle scattering problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Rakesh Rakesh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2026
* USD 132,364.00

The main goal of this project is to study the recovery of acoustic properties of
a medium, such as the earth, by probing the medium with sound waves mechanically
generated on the boundary of the medium and measuring the medium response on the
boundary. This question will be studied theoretically with a focus on the
recovery of the acoustic property from the data coming from a small number of
experiments. This results of this study will provide insight in a variety of
settings, including the exploration of the subsurface of other planets as well
as medical imaging settings, where it may not be possible to generate acoustic
waves at many different locations in the medium or measure the medium response
at many different locations.

The project will focus on two specific problems - the potential recovery
backscattering problem for the constant velocity wave equation and the fixed
angle velocity recovery problem for the non-constant velocity wave equation. The
backscattering problem measurements are equivalent to certain measurements for
the ultra-hyperbolic equation with potential, so the corresponding coefficient
recovery problem for the ultra-hyperbolic equation will be studied by an
adaptation of the Bukhgeim-Klibanov method. The fixed angle velocity recovery
problem will be studied by an adaptation of the Bukhgeim-Klibanov method used to
study the fixed angle potential recovery problem, with new techniques devised to
overcome the difficulties associated with the unknown velocity affecting the
structure of the solution of the differential equation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.