* 2307442
* The Realizability of the Double-Detonation Mechanism for Type Ia Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dean Townsley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2026
* USD 259,858.00

Type Ia supernovae (SN) play an essential role in measuring the accelerating
expansion of the Universe, produce half of the Universe’s heavy metals, and
serve as testbeds for stellar hydrodynamics, nuclear physics, binary stellar
evolution, and many other aspects of astrophysics. However, despite their
importance and several decades of observational and theoretical investigation,
the detailed nature of the stellar systems that give rise to these explosions
remains uncertain. A research team at the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa will
use computer-based numerical simulations to investigate one of the most
promising candidate scenarios for a SN Ia explosion. This scenario, called the
“double-detonation” mechanism, starts with an explosive helium detonation on the
surface of a highly compact white dwarf star, which in turn yields a carbon-
burning detonation in the core of that star. The research will involve the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in high performance computing
and the development of scientific software. Along with research products, this
work will produce short videos of scientific results intended for a general
audience, a portable planetarium program for small groups, and simple
simulations of stellar explosions that can be run by students in upper-division
astronomy courses.

Obstacles remain to understanding the double-detonation mechanism and this work
will help resolve them. The detailed mechanism of the first ignition in the
helium shell of the star is still unclear, calling into question the robustness
of this critical stage of the beginning of the explosion. In order for this
scenario to be viable as a major contributor to SNe Ia, the ignition process
must not just be possible under fine-tuning, but robust and almost universal.
Secondly, based on recent simulations, it is clear that the detailed structure
of the outer layers of the exploding star and the presence of the companion star
are critical to determining whether the resulting supernova matches those
observed. Using tailored simulations, the work will determine whether a
realistic ignition and surface layer structure placed in a binary star system
leads to realistic supernovae. This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Astronomical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.