* 2307313
* DISES: Socio-environmental transformation and change following system collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Jorge López-Rocha, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,599,400.00

This project will study transformation of integrated human and natural systems
to help equip society with knowledge necessary for confronting drastic changes
to earth’s ecosystems and impacts on the people who depend on them.
Transformation refers to a fundamental change in the identity, structure, and
function of a system. It is different from resilience, which is the ability of
systems to retain their basic structure and function in the face of shocks and
disturbance. Although important recent advancements in sustainability science
have illuminated factors and conditions associated with resilience, processes
such as climate change and habitat degradation can push systems beyond
sustainability. This can amplify rates of extinction, poverty, food insecurity,
and social unrest. Therefore, society also requires a science of transformation.
Following the recent collapse of the sea cucumber fishery in Yucatan, Mexico,
the project team will track changes in small-scale fishing communities and
adjacent marine environments, answering two general research questions. First,
how do socio-environmental systems behave following a collapse? Second, why do
some socio-environmental systems transform after collapse while others revert to
unsustainable patterns similar to those observed prior to collapse? The goal of
answering these questions is to help society turn collapse and extinction events
into opportunities to reorganize and transform integrated human and natural
systems and provide more sustainable and equitable futures. Broader impacts of
the study include graduate student training in science diplomacy this will equip
them with the skills necessary to navigate ecologically and politically complex
environmental challenges. Through established professional linkages with
government agencies in Mexico and the United States and international
organizations, the students, alongside the mentors on the project team, will
employ science diplomacy skills to apply insights from the project to ongoing
efforts in society to operationalize socio-environmental transformation.

The project will advance theory and methods for socio-environmental
transformation science. Integrating recent scholarship on socio-environmental
transformation and findings from the Yucatan, Mexico sea cucumber fishery, the
study will produce a Socio-environmental Transformation Framework. The Framework
will facilitate scientists to identify and test combinations of factors
associated with four divergent trajectories of transformation and resilience: 1)
resilient socio-environmental systems, 2) resilient social systems linked to
transforming environmental systems, 3) transforming social systems linked to
resilient environmental systems, and 4) transforming socio-environmental
systems. Compilation of fisheries data, scuba diving transects, and deep-water
video transects will evaluate how remnant sea cucumber populations change
following the collapse of the fishery and related ecological interactions.
Social surveys, interviews, and focus groups will generate data to evaluate
governance, livelihood, and gender dimensions of post-collapse social change.
Based on these data, the international team will innovate and apply multi-
disciplinary methods for detecting socio-environmental transformation and
differentiating it from resilience: social-ecological network analysis, spatial
analysis, and narrative analysis. Finally, a fuzzy-set Qualitative Comparative
Analysis will test hypotheses about which combinations of conditions are
associated with transformation in 12 small-scale fishery socio-environmental
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.