* 2307385
* A Search For Failed Supernovae and Other Observational Constraints on the Supernova Mechanism
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Christopher Kochanek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2026
* USD 412,328.00

A research team at the Ohio State University will carry out a project to better
understand the fates of massive stars and the formation of black holes using a
multifaceted observational and theoretical approach. Understanding the formation
of black holes is of enormous importance as scientists detect more black hole
mergers with gravitational wave instruments. The centerpiece is a unique project
using the twin 8.4m Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) to monitor all the massive,
evolved stars in 27 nearby star-forming galaxies. The primary goals of the
project are to (1) Measure the fraction of massive star core collapses that
fail, producing a black hole without a supernova (SN) explosion, and
characterize the properties of these failed supernovae; (2) Measure the
properties of SN progenitors, in particular with pioneering studies of their
variability; and (3) Characterize the multiplicity of stars just before and
after death. While doing so, the project will advance the training of students
and postdoctoral researchers and broaden the public’s understanding and interest
in science, aided by their fascination with stars and their complicated roads to
death.

Searches for the progenitors of SNe are finding a deficit of high mass
progenitors. This problem can be solved if 20% of core collapses fail and
produce a black hole without a SN explosion. This failed SN fraction also
naturally explains the compact object mass function. The research team has
already identified one excellent candidate, implying a failure fraction of 16%.
During the current project they will further confirm this candidate, identify
others, and better constrain the fraction of core collapses that fail. Very few
SN progenitors are well characterized, making it difficult to determine the
mapping between progenitors and outcomes. The project will characterize
progenitors of SN in the LBT survey, pioneer constraints on the progenitors of
Galactic supernovae, and better characterize and improve constraints on
progenitors using local stellar populations. Multiplicity and binary
interactions are crucial to understanding anything about the evolution of
massive stars, supernovae and gravitational wave merger events. The project will
expand on pioneering studies constraining the multiplicity of stars just before
and after their deaths, in particular by accurately determining the distances to
Galactic SN remnants. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.