* 2307443
* Precision Spectroscopy of Fullerenes: Towards Resolving Astrophysical Molecular Complexity
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marissa Weichman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 518,980.00

Fullerenes --- hollow, symmetric carbon cages --- represent the largest
molecules identified in astronomical environments and have dramatically altered
our understanding of molecular complexity in space. Given the prevalence of the
fullerenes C60, C70, and C60+ in astronomical objects, other closely related
fullerenes and fullerene derivatives are also expected to be present there, but
because they are challenging to study in the laboratory, accurate data required
for their astronomical identification are unavailable. Employing novel
laboratory techniques, this research project will yield high-resolution
measurements of the long-wave infrared (LWIR) spectra of fullerenes and their
derivatives that are plausible candidates for astronomical detection and may be
responsible for numerous unidentified infrared emission features observed in
astronomical objects such as planetary nebulae. The newly acquired spectra will
be compared with data from large infrared telescopes with the goal of
identifying the molecules responsible for the unidentified features. This
project will directly support and train a graduate student and a postdoctoral
scholar in methods of advanced laboratory astrophysics, as well as provide
research opportunities to undergraduate students.

Using a custom-built cavity-enhanced frequency comb spectroscopy apparatus which
combines high spectral resolution, high sensitivity, and broadband detection,
the research team will measure rovibrationally resolved low-temperature LWIR
spectra of fullerenes and fullerene derivatives in the 6.5-10.5 micrometer
wavelength region. The measurements will serve as important benchmarks for
astronomical observations and quantum calculations of large molecules. Systems
for study will include the symmetric fullerene C70, as well as the polar
fulleranes C60H2 and C59N, whose successful measurements will pave the way for
investigations of yet more complex molecules including metallofullerenes (metal-
bearing fullerenes) and endofullerenes (fullerenes encapsulating an atom or a
molecule). This project will take advantage of strong academic-industrial
partnerships to develop novel light sources, high-resolution spectrometers, and
cameras with the potential to greatly advance precision infrared spectroscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.