* 2307424
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Diving into the chemical signatures and spatial variability of Caribbean coral reef health
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Brianna Garcia, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 343,157.00

Coral reefs are one of the most diverse, productive, and threatened ecosystems
on the planet. The rich biodiversity hosted by coral reefs has enhanced the
economies of coastal countries and the livelihoods of people around the world.
Unfortunately, coral populations have declined by 50% in the last 50 years due
to both natural and human-caused stressors, including increasing rates of
disease. New diseases are spreading quickly, affecting many coral species and
causing downstream ecological consequences. To help protect these important
ecosystems, it is necessary to develop better methods to detect and intervene
early in the disease process. This project aims to identify small biomolecules
called metabolites that are associated with a specific type of coral disease
called Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD), which is spreading rapidly
throughout the Caribbean. By characterizing these metabolites, researchers can
better understand the metabolic changes that occur during the onset and
progression of SCTLD, and potentially identify early warning signs of the
disease before visible symptoms appear. Current methods for detecting changes in
metabolites are inefficient and lack spatial resolution. This project seeks to
provide a more thorough investigation of the chemical changes associated with
SCTLD and improve our understanding of how metabolites can serve as traceable
signatures of coral disease. This will allow for earlier intervention and
prevention efforts to protect these essential ecosystems. The Broader Impacts
for this project include support for a first-generation female PI from an
underrepresented group. The PI will work with groups that have been
underrepresented in STEM through local (Woods Hole, MA) and global (United
States Virgin Islands) activities. Additional broader impacts include
participation in: (1) efforts aimed at improving science communication, (2)
public outreach activities, and (3) undergraduate mentoring.

Current studies of SCTLD have relied on bulk homogenates or slurries of coral
tissue using untargeted metabolomic surveys and/or microbial measurements using
RNA sequencing. The primary objective of the proposed research is to leverage
targeted and untargeted metabolomics, ultrahigh-resolution mass spectrometry,
and recent advances in the analysis of dissolved metabolites to characterize the
metabolic profiles of SCTLD across a spatial gradient. The work will allow us to
quantify the chemical composition of three individual coral microhabitats (i.e.,
tissue, mucus, and skeleton) in addition to the surrounding seawater and
correlate these dynamic profiles with disease progression. Metabolites released
or taken up by the coral holobiont serve as invisible signals that can improve
our understanding of disease progression, provide diagnostic biomarkers, and
allow for earlier intervention and prevention efforts. Using novel metabolomics
methods and chemical derivatization, this project will allow us to capture and
quantify ecologically relevant, labile polar metabolites with extraction
efficiencies of less than 1% using traditional dissolved phase analyses. This
project will establish a link between metabolome changes and disease
susceptibility by studying the intra- and inter-species variability of coral
microhabitats across six different coral species ranging in SCTLD
susceptibility. The identification of chemical biomarkers of SCTLD and
understanding the role different coral niches play in disease progression will
supply coral reef conservationists with rapid detection methods, in addition to
providing researchers with new information essential for elucidating pathogens
and mechanisms of disease inception. Products of this research will be of broad
interest to a diverse group of scientists, including chemists, ecologists, and
coral reef disease experts, in addition to the broader public, especially those
in coastal regions affected by the ecological and socio-economic impacts of
SCTLD or other coral diseases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.