* 2307479
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: The genetic basis of disease resistance in the critically endangered  black abalone (Haliotis cracherodii)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Tyler Wooldridge, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 294,986.00

The black abalone is a large shelled mollusk found in rocky tidal areas along
the California coast. These animals have long been a prized food source for
humans, and the shells have served many cultural roles for both early and modern
humans in California. The species is now near extinction due to a combination of
overfishing and the recent spread of a devastating disease – ‘withering
syndrome’ – that has reduced populations by as much as 99%. Recent work has
shown that surviving populations exhibit some resistance to the disease, but the
mechanism of this resistance and how it relates to the local environment is
poorly understood. This project aims to use ancient shells and modern abalone to
identify the genetic basis of resistance to withering syndrome. The results of
this research can guide the survival and recovery of this valued species.
Regular communication with state and federal fisheries managers will inform
conservation efforts. The project will support public engagement through the
University of California Santa Cruz's (UCSC) Seymour Marine Discovery Center and
the Indigenous Communities involved with abalone shell archaeology. The research
will also provide multiple types of training opportunities for students at UCSC,
which is a Hispanic-Serving Institution.

This project aims to understand the genetic basis of adaptation to withering
syndrome through the lens of black abalone biology, population history, and
local environmental variation. Extreme natural selection events can result in
rapid evolution occurring on observable time scales. In historically large
panmictic populations like the black abalone – and many other marine organisms –
it is unclear how this adaptive process will proceed, especially against a
backdrop of fisheries- mediated decline and spatially variable selection. This
research will contribute substantially to our understanding of this process by
examining how, at the population genomic level, black abalone have changed in
response to the rapid spread of withering syndrome. The project has three
primary objectives: 1) Use ancient DNA obtained from abalone shells to identify
genetic loci under selection in response to withering syndrome; 2) Apply
transcriptomic analyses to populations across the species’ range to home in on
selected loci associated with changes in gene expression and local environment;
and 3) Assay the performance of live abalone in a common garden setting testing
whether different genotypes at loci under selection are contributing to local
adaptation in today’s populations. Altogether, the resources and results
generated by this project will address key questions about the genetics of
adaptation in marine organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.