* 2307538
* Self-excitation, Limit Cycle Oscillations, and Control of Large Deflection Plate Models in Engineering Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Justin Webster, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 290,000.00

This work focuses on the prediction, suppression, and optimization of elastic
instability in three engineering settings: (i) bridge decks, (ii) piezo-electric
energy harvesters, and (iii) aircraft and projectile paneling. In these
settings, airflow may lead to the onset of flutter instability, giving rise to
pervasive oscillatory behaviors in the structure. We perform a comprehensive
analysis of this phenomenon through the examination of particular partial
differential equation models of flexible plates. Although the relevant models
are based on applications, these plate equations are quite recent. The research
work will determine if, when, and how thin structures are destabilized by
ambient airflows. Accordingly, improvements can be made in the implementation
and understanding of large deflection modeling in engineering and will improve
predictive capabilities for the purposes of developing technologies, such as
next-generation projectile paneling and piezo-elastic energy harvesters.
Understanding these nonlinear dynamics translates into the ability to design new
devices efficiently and effectively. This research may impact additional
application areas, including biological control of human tissue. This award also
provides research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral scholars.

We address three plate configurations in a unified manner through a focus on
nonlinear plate modeling and the (in)stability of associated evolutionary
partial differential equations. We determine and execute related computational
methods and numerical studies. The physical configurations require mixed and
higher boundary conditions for 4th-order PDEs on spatial domains with corners.
In each configuration, we analyze the qualitative properties of PDE solutions,
which requires an understanding of the dynamics as a function of system
parameters and geometry. Via the self-destabilization framework, we investigate
limit cycle oscillations (and global attractors) for the dynamical systems
generated by these plate systems. Qualitative studies allow us to reflect on our
modeling choices, and this work: (i) improves plate modeling to yield better
predictions; (ii) develops a rigorous theory for novel models; (iii) addresses a
gap in the literature concerning unstable nonlinear plates with mixed boundary
conditions; (iv) represents a synergy of modeling, theory, and computation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.