* 2307171
* Characterizing the Early Co-evolution of Galaxies, Black Holes, and Gravitational-Wave Sources
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Laura Blecha, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2026
* USD 538,767.00

The recently launched James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has already transformed
our understanding of the early Universe. The discovery of rich populations of
galaxies at cosmic epochs shortly after the Big Bang has challenged models for
galaxy formation and evolution. Supermassive black holes (BHs), which live in
galactic nuclei, have also been observed by JWST at very early epochs. These BHs
are the next frontier in science with gravitational waves (ripples in the fabric
of spacetime); gravitational waves from close pairs of BHs may soon be detected
with pulsar timing arrays and with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna.
However, this coming wealth of data will require robust theoretical models of
these complex processes. The PIs will address key gaps in our understanding of
BH and galaxy evolution in the early Universe, including systems that produce
gravitational waves. Using a suite of state-of-the-art cosmological simulations,
they will determine the impact of different BH evolution models on galaxy and BH
properties in the early Universe. Their results will provide a transformative
leap in understanding how BH formation, growth, and dynamics impact their co-
evolution with galaxies, as well as the environments in which gravitational-wave
sources are found. They will also expand the University of Florida (UF) Gator
Computing Program (GCP) to be a residential summer program for historically
excluded high school students, with additional programming that leverages the
resources of the new UF Artificial Intelligence Initiative.

Supermassive black holes (BHs) are fundamental components of galaxy evolution,
and they are the next frontier in gravitational wave (GW) astronomy: GWs from BH
binaries may soon be detected with pulsar timing arrays (PTAs) and with the
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA). In the meantime, initial results from
the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) have already transformed our understanding
of the high-redshift Universe. The coming wealth of JWST data will unveil early
BH and galaxy evolution and provide crucial complements to GW observations, but
their interpretation will require robust theoretical models of these complex
processes. Although the highly biased population of luminous z ~ 6 quasars
constrains BH formation and early growth for those massive objects, they tell us
nothing about the origins of much more numerous, "ordinary" BHs. This project
will address these major questions: (1) How do galaxies evolve in concert with
BHs and AGN in the early Universe? (2) What are the host characteristics of
inspiraling BH pairs and GW sources?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.