* 2307614
* RUI: Identifying reproductive roles for the Super-conserved Receptors Expressed in Brain (SREB) G protein-coupled receptor family using novel agonists and a comparative fish model
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew DiMaggio, University of Maine Farmington
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 236,033.00

SREBs (Super-conserved Receptors Expressed in Brain) are a group of hormone
receptor proteins in vertebrate animals whose function is poorly understood.
This knowledge gap stems from a lack of verified hormones that bind to SREBs on
the surface of cells. Previous studies have supported functional roles for SREBs
in the brain, gut, and gonads that may be conserved in animals. This project
applies novel, artificially synthesized molecules that are known to bind to SREB
receptors in ovaries of three fish species to assess SREB function in
reproduction. The species were chosen based on previously identified genetic
differences resulting in different profiles of SREB subtypes across these
species. Results will be compared among the fish species to identify unique and
shared functions. The resulting improved understanding of SREB functions may
provide a foundation for future commercial applications in animal reproduction
and in aquaculture. The research will generate databases that will foster
undergraduate and high-school student research experiences in bioinformatics in
rural western Maine, which has a high proportion of first-generation college
students. Local high-school teachers will be trained to use these databases in
their classes and to develop independent bioinformatics modules for sustainable
use. These educational activities serve as a scalable model to bring
bioinformatics training to under-served student populations, contributing to
biotechnology workforce development. In addition, through a collaboration with
two researchers at the University of Florida, the project will contribute to
training of a graduate student and post-doctoral fellow.

The recent development of novel and specific agonists for the orphan G protein-
coupled receptor family SREB has enabled new approaches to understand the
physiological mechanisms of receptor function. Two synthesized and validated
agonist molecules are being used in combination with a potential endogenous
ligand (phoenixin) in in vitro ovary treatments and RNA-sequencing of three
genetically enabled fish species: zebrafish (Danio rerio), mummichog (Fundulus
heteroclitus), and pufferfish (Dichotomyctere nigroviridis). Each of these
species exhibits a different complement of SREB receptors, which enables
comparative transcriptomic approaches to identify both conserved reproductive
functions across the family as well as SREB member-specific effects. These
methods will be used in combination with steroid quantifications and RNAScope to
identify reproductive hormone changes and specific gonadal cell types associated
with SREB gene expression, respectively. The development of this comparative
multispecies model impacts future SREB studies beyond reproduction, such as
investigations in the brain and gut where SREBs have also been implicated in
conserved functions.

This project is jointly funded by the BIO-IOS-Physiological Mechanisms and
Biomechanics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.