* 2307516
* ORCC: The Role of Betaine Lipid Biochemistry in Coral Thermal Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ty Roach, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 607,459.00

Reef building corals are a symbiotic association between a coral animal and its
many microbial associates, including algae. Climate change is threatening corals
worldwide by causing a phenomenon called coral bleaching, which is a breakdown
of the symbiosis that can lead to death during thermal stress. However, some
corals show an inherent resistance to bleaching. This project will aim to
understand how molecules from symbiotic algae contribute to coral thermal
resistance. Preliminary work has shown that thermally resistant corals contain
unique lipids that are not present in those susceptible to bleaching. This
project will explore the role of these lipids in the response of corals to
thermal stress. Methods, including DNA and RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry,
will be used to characterize thousands of molecules from corals during thermal
stress experiments in aquaria and on live reefs in Hawai’i. The ultimate goal is
to understand how these lipids contribute to bleaching resistance and to use
these methods to identify thermally resistant stock for restoring threatened
Hawaiian reefs. Corals will be selectively bred based on this data and monitored
for bleaching years after the project’s completion to determine whether these
corals remain resistant to thermal stress associated with climate change.
Integrated into the project are programs to involve historically
underrepresented groups in the STEM fields, including individuals from Hawai’i
and Michigan. Collectively, this project will have broader impacts on coral reef
restoration while synergistically increasing access of underrepresented groups
to the exciting field of marine biology.

Reef building corals are a symbiotic association of a Cnidarian host, algal
symbionts, and myriad microorganisms. Thermal stress is threatening reefs
worldwide due to coral bleaching, which is a breakdown of this symbiosis that
can lead to coral death. However, some corals show an inherent resistance to
thermal stress, driven by interactions among its symbiotic constituents. This
collaborative project will aim to understand how unique lipids from symbiotic
algae and other biochemicals contribute to coral thermal resistance. Preliminary
data has shown that resistant corals contain abundant, saturated ‘betaine
lipids’, specifically the DGCC class, which are a novel group of phosphate-free
membrane lipids unique to unicellular algae. This project will use advanced
metabolomics and mass spectrometry methods to characterize the biochemical
relationships between symbiotic algae and their coral hosts and characterize the
biosynthetic pathway for the production of the saturated betaine lipids.
Resistant coral stock will be selectively bred based on their lipid profiles to
improve restoration efforts. The ultimate aim is to understand the dynamism
and/or plasticity of corals during thermal stress and provide a biochemical
understanding of how corals will respond to climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.