* 2307146
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Compact Binary Formation With Gravitational Wave Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emanuele Berti, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 08/31/2026
* USD 413,757.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) in the US and the
Virgo detector in Europe have ushered in a new era in the exploration of the
Universe. These observations have resolved old puzzles in physics and astronomy,
and they have revealed a new population of astronomical objects. LIGO and Virgo
with upgraded sensitivities and new detectors will soon observe a much larger
catalog of sources. This research program has two goals. The first is to use the
catalog of events from the upcoming observing runs to better understand how
compact binaries form and merge. The second is to study how gravitational waves
can be used to study the early Universe, measure its expansion rate, and infer
the properties of dark matter particles. The programâ€™s investigators will
educate students in Centre County, PA and in the Baltimore area through lectures
and demonstrations at schools, summer camps, and internships. They will continue
to organize the successful "Physics and Astrophysics at the Extreme" (PAX)
series of workshops. In addition, they will initiate a new series of workshops
on the populations of compact objects discovered by LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA:
"Gravitational wave populations: what's next?" (or "POPX").

Since the discovery of compact binary mergers by LIGO and Virgo, astrophysicists
have explored several different formation scenarios. A catalog of merger events
with precisely measured masses, spins and redshifts is critical to infer how
often compact binaries merge, how they form, and their redshift evolution.
Moreover, compact binary sources can provide accurate distance measurements.
Together with the redshift from electromagnetic observation of their hosts, this
is a new tool for deducing the expansion rate of the Universe. Over the past two
decades, the members of this team have pioneered methods to address these
problems and have developed tools that have been made public. This program will
use the larger gravitational-wave catalogs from the next two observing runs of
LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA to address unsolved problems in astrophysics and
cosmology. The investigators will implement astrophysical spin models in
population synthesis for field binaries. They will develop rapid, consistent
models of dynamical formation channels, compare tools for population inference,
and study how waveform systematics affect gravitational-wave astronomy. The
proposal will also study stochastic foregrounds of compact binary systems and
their effect on model inference. It will harness gravitational-wave observations
to resolve the Hubble tension, and explore the properties of dark matter and
primordial black holes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.