* 2307996
* DISES : Through the Prism of Groundwater Pollution: The Interplay of Extreme Wet Events, Socio-Economic Well-Being, and Polity in Unincorporated Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Isabel Araiza, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,599,931.00

Coastal unincorporated communities, those not formally organized under a local
municipality, face multiple challenges, including contaminated underground water
resources, due to legacy pollution and vulnerability to natural disasters. This
research advances our understanding of the complex relationship between
socioeconomic factors, water quality, and residents’ wellbeing by evaluating how
factors like poverty, limited resources, and environmental hazards impact
coastal unincorporated communities. The research combines social and
environmental data to model potential risks, improve decision-making, and
enhance the resilience of coastal unincorporated communities in the face of
future challenges. The project emphasizes inclusivity by involving
underrepresented minority students and residents from socio-economic
disadvantaged and predominantly marginalized populations in water resource
management and educational programs. This research contributes to scientific
knowledge, helps address real-world issues, and empowers communities to make
informed choices about their water resources.

This research project addresses the challenges faced by unincorporated coastal
communities in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico, particularly those vulnerable to
natural and human-made hazards. These communities are at a higher risk of
groundwater contamination due to their socio-economic and polity attributes,
such as proximity to landfills, abandoned oil wells, and inadequate
infrastructure. The project uses a community-level approach to understand the
interplay between socioeconomics, aquifer recharge areas, groundwater
contamination, and wellness. The project supports a transdisciplinary consortium
of researchers at a Hispanic-Serving Institution. The research advances our
understanding of how extreme events impact coastal zone processes, groundwater
recharge, and water chemistry, using the continuous input of contaminants into
groundwater as a natural tracer experiment. This research: (a) substantiates
conceptual information on the extreme wet event-induced aquifer recharge and
contamination of groundwater in the context of socio-economic attributes; and
(b) advances our knowledge and understanding of communities with variable levels
of political, economic, and cultural capital, often excluded from scientific
inquiry and collective decision-making processes. This research contributes to
the science of Coupled Human and Natural Systems and transforms the way
environmental and socioeconomic evaluations are performed in unincorporated,
groundwater-dependent communities. The resultant model integrates groundwater
recharge and quality with residents’ wellbeing, socioeconomic information,
hydro-climatic conditions, and land use providing future scenarios for
resiliency planning and management. The project provides cross-disciplinary
education and training opportunities for underrepresented minority students at
Hispanic-Serving Institutions and actively engages local disadvantaged
communities in water resource governance through workshops and K-12 educational
programs. The resultant model, informed by stakeholder and policymaker
involvement, enhances decision-support tools, and promotes environmental justice
and equitable resource management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.