* 2307546
* Sharpening our view of Cluster Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Simon Dicker, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,057.00

Clusters of galaxies are excellent tracers of the matter distribution in the
Universe. Significant resources have been put into compiling cluster catalogs,
because such surveys can be used to derive important cosmological parameters.
One survey technique is to use the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect (SZE), which is
when hot gas inside galaxy clusters distorts the spectrum of light from the Big
Bang. However, radio emission from individual galaxies and cluster mergers can
complicate interpretation of the SZE, resulting in sources of bias in
cosmological parameters derived from cluster catalogs. High resolution images
taken at radio frequencies can be used to quantify these biases. The
investigators will use the MUSTANG2 camera on the Green Bank Telescope (GBT) to
map clusters. Results from this program will help produce more accurate results
from investments in past, current, and future galaxy cluster surveys. During
this work, the investigators will maintain MUSTANG2, ensuring it remains
available to the wider astronomical community. To help train a more diverse next
generation of STEM workers, the team will work with the Simons Foundation and
the Society of Black Physicists to host students working on MUSTANG2 projects.
Outreach to middle school students is planned by participation in the Girls
Exploring The Universe (GETU) summer camp run by the University of Virginia. In
addition, the PI will continue public outreach activities in the Philadelphia
area.

The large scatter in cluster masses between the overlapping ACT (Atacama
Cosmology Telescope) and eROSITA surveys will be investigated first. The team
will (1) Finish a blind survey of clusters for compact sources at SZE
frequencies (2) Use the results to correct the masses of the observed sample (3)
Build a model for how likely sources are in different types of clusters that can
be used to correct the mass-SZE relationship in a statistical sense and (4) Use
deeper observations of selected clusters with remaining discrepant masses
between surveys to find the cause. As part of the maintenance of MUSTANG2, the
team will better integrate the pipeline into the observatory software
infrastructure, further facilitating the use of MUSTANG2 data by the
astronomical community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.