* 2307068
* Inhibitory Long Range Interaction in Pattern Forming Physical and Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xiaofeng Ren, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 288,446.00

Inhibitory systems, such as block copolymers, are known for their structured
patterns of morphological phases. Studying these patterns reveals the
mechanical, optical, electrical, ionic, barrier and other properties for
applications. For instance, block copolymers are commercially used as
thermoplastic elastomers: outer coverings for optical fiber cables, adhesives,
bitumen modifiers, or in artificial organ technology. The mathematical theory to
be studied by the investigator will offer insights into the nature of these
materials and ultimately inform the building of industrial devices. This project
will also provide laboratory experience and research mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.

Inhibitory interaction appears in geometric variational problems with
connections to phenomena in other branches of mathematics: bubble clusters in
geometric measure theory, elliptic curves in analytic number theory, and sphere
packing in geometry. The negative fractional and the negative fractional
screened Laplace operators provide accurate descriptions of inhibitory
interaction and are relevant to other mathematical theories. The first task in
this project is to identify the ranges for the fractional exponents in which
these operators possess inhibition properties. The second is to construct
building blocks for periodic structures in inhibitory systems, such as the non-
standard double bubble, and to use them to find periodic stationary points for
the whole space. A related question is to find an optimal lattice that gives
rise to a periodic configuration with the least free energy density. Building
blocks can also be used to forge near periodic stationary assemblies on a
general bounded domain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.