* 2307026
* Towards Robust Measurements of H0 with Dark Standard Candles
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dragan Huterer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 647,356.00

Measurements of the expansion rate of the universe -- the Hubble constant --
have historically been uncertain, but have in the past two decades converged to
the concordance value. However, a major recent development in cosmology has been
the disagreement between the Hubble constant determinations by two major
cosmological probes. Namely, the precision (indirect) measurement of the Hubble
constant by the cosmic microwave background anisotropies gives a much lower
value for the expansion rate than the direct determination from nearby galaxies
and type Ia supernovae. The two measurements are mutually inconsistent at the
"five sigma" level, corresponding to confidence of about 99.9999%. Search for
the explanation of this so-called Hubble tension has become a central effort in
cosmology. Scientists at the University of Michigan and the University of
Pennsylvania propose to dramatically improve the reliability of an alternative
method to measure the Hubble constant, which has the power to shed new light or
outright resolve the Hubble tension. This method utilizes the so-called ``dark
standard siren'' gravitational-wave events. As part of this project, the team
will also engage in a number of outreach activities, including running an annual
summer course for high-school students and organizing the biannual Cosmology
Summer School (at Michigan); as well as organizing lectures during AstroFest and
running the Neighborhood Workshop on Astrophysics and Cosmology (at Penn State).

Standard sirens are mergers that result in observed gravitational-wave
signatures whose wave-forms provide distances to these events. The dark sirens
are those events in which the electromagnetic counterpart is not discovered (and
the corresponding redshift not measured), complicating the consequent
determination of the Hubble constant. The team will study how the cross-
correlation between galaxies and gravitational-wave dark sirens can be used to
measure the Hubble constant. This cross-correlation approach should allow a much
cleaner separation of the cosmological signal from biases that are due to a
variety of systematic errors, but can also be purely statistical. The team will
thoroughly test this method against the systematic errors, then apply it to
current data, and identify prospects for Hubble-constant constraints with future
data. Finally, the team will also investigate the effect of astrophysical
systematics on the ability to recover the Hubble constant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.