* 2307886
* Collaborative Research: The Radiation Magnetohydrodynamics of Tidal Disruption Events
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shane Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 298,380.00

A tidal disruption event (TDE) is an astrophysical phenomenon that occurs when a
star approaches sufficiently close to a supermassive black hole (SMBH) to be
pulled apart by the black hole’s tidal force. As this happens, part of the
star’s mass is captured in an accretion disk around the black hole (BH), and as
this matter falls into the black hole, it accelerates, generating
electromagnetic radiation, which can be detected by astronomical telescopes. To
better study these events, which can help scientists understand strong
gravitational fields, the space around the cores of galaxies, and physics of
accretion, a research collaboration between the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee and the University of Virginia will use numerical simulations to probe
the radiation magnetohydrodynamics (the study of emission from highly magnetized
plasmas) of TDEs and how the physics is manifest through observational
signatures. The investigators will also provide outreach and educational
opportunities for students and the community, including presentations at the
Manfred Olson Planetarium in Milwaukee, teaching at a summer school in
computational science, and mentoring undergraduate students in the VA-NC
Alliance and UVA-Spelman exchange summer programs, with the goal of increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM research fields.

The investigators will use the numerical codes MANGA and Athena++, for which
they have made significant algorithmic investments, and which are ideal for
numerical simulations of this TDEs. The investigators will realistically model
the tidal disruption of stars from initial disruption to fallback and subsequent
accretion. In particular, they will determine how magnetic fields and radiation
pressure affect the tidal streams from the star’s disruption, drive the
evolution of stream-stream collisions, and impact the subsequent accretion onto
the black hole, allowing them explore the physics of super-Eddington accretion
in TDE events and their observational signatures. This work is crucial for the
intepretation of the the large number of events that will be discovered with the
current transient surveys and the Vera Rubin Observatory in the near future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.