* 2307199
* Dust Concentration in Gas Substructures of Non-Ideal MHD Planet-Forming Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhi-Yun Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 08/31/2026
* USD 396,467.00

The discovery of rings and gaps in the disks around young stars was a
significant breakthrough in planet formation. These disk substructures are
essential because they gather dust particles, which are the building blocks of
planets. However, how these substructures form in the magnetized disks where
planets originate remains unclear. This limitation hampers our understanding of
how planetary systems come into existence, including our own solar system. The
research team plans to perform sophisticated computer simulations to gain deeper
insights into this important problem. The simulations will shed light on how
magnetic fields influence the formation of rings and gaps in the gaseous disk
under realistic physical conditions, how these gas substructures give rise to
the rings and gaps observed in dust emission, and how the distribution of dust
impacts the overall dynamics of the disk. The program offers graduate and
underrepresented undergraduate students valuable opportunities to participate in
cutting-edge scientific research, contributing to the training of the next
generation of scientists and promoting diversity within the STEM workforce. This
research program builds on the preparatory work that has demonstrated the
feasibility of forming rings and gaps in the lightly ionized gas of magnetized
protoplanetary disks under simplifying assumptions. The team will improve on the
initial work by incorporating more realistic physical processes, including the
Hall effect, which is important for regulating the interaction between the
magnetic field and lightly ionized gas. They will also couple the dynamics of
the dust particles to that of the gas through aerodynamic drag and quantify how
the dust distribution affects the ionization level of the gas, which, in turn,
affects the overall dynamics of the magnetized disk. These improvements will
significantly enhance our understanding of how a more realistic treatment of the
disk physics impacts the formation of the rings and gaps in the gaseous disk.
They will enable the research team to quantify whether the gas substructures can
concentrate dust particles to the observed levels and evaluate the efficiency of
the feedback of the particle distribution on the dynamics of the magnetized gas
through its effects on ionization. The research program will improve our
understanding of the origins of the rings and gaps that are ubiquitously
observed in protoplanetary disks and key to planet formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.