* 2307727
* Precision Cosmology and Astrophysics with CMB Secondaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mathew Madhavacheril, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2026
* USD 603,824.00

The distribution of dark matter and its evolution over cosmic time contain a
wealth of information on fundamental physics. The team of scientists led by the
University of Pennsylvania will use new high-resolution data from the NSF-funded
Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) to map out dark matter through the way its
gravity bends light from the early universe. This cosmic microwave background
(CMB) lensing signal will be measured at high precision with a novel pipeline
that combines ACT data, Planck satellite data and neutral hydrogen maps of the
Milky Way, with the latter two allowing clean separation of contaminating
signals. The high fidelity of the mass maps produced will allow for a
measurement of the masses of neutrinos, the least understood particles in our
universe. This work will be carried out by two graduate students who will
receive advanced training in data analysis and statistical methods in cosmology.
The project will result in a library of resources for astronomical data analysis
aimed at the undergraduate level, as well as material for a course on Python for
data science. The project will also aid in public outreach efforts through
software applications that provide interactive Virtual Reality visualizations of
dark matter and gas maps.

This project is timely since current measurements suggest that the growth of
structure in the high-redshift and low-redshift universe are not perfectly
concordant. This project will obtain a precise percent-level measurement of the
amplitude of matter fluctuations that will help distinguish between possible new
physics resolutions to this anomaly. As a secondary objective, the team will
produce maps of ionized gas pressure measured through the thermal Sunyaev-
Zeldovich (SZ) effect through a careful foreground-cleaning procedure that uses
a novel combination of millimeter-wave and 21-cm line data. Public release of
the resulting CMB lensing mass maps and tSZ gas pressure maps will aid a variety
of additional astrophysical and cosmological goals that include searches for
primordial non-Gaussianity, primordial gravitational waves as well as studies of
galaxy formation and the non-linear Universe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.