* 2307858
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing smart grid technologies in Pacific Northwest (OR, ID, WA)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Robert Bass, Portland State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,898.00

This Regional Engine Development Award is focused on achieving energy equity and
prosperity through an ecosystem characterized as Smart, EQUitable,
INteroperable, and Secure. The SEQUINS mission is to become a hub of regional
innovation by coordinating and connecting the activities of academic
institutions, new and established businesses, risk capital, and governments
across the Pacific Northwest. This region is ideally positioned to create
transformative, industry-defining innovations in the electric power sector that
are of national significance. Within the region is a diverse range of urban and
rural communities that exhibit favorable conditions for deploying renewable
energy and have the underused capacity for consumer-participation programs.
SEQUINS partners will innovate smart energy products and services based on the
principle that technology must be dependable and safe. Under a common socio-
technical framework, namely interoperable smart grid architectures built around
cyber-physical security innovations, that provide resilience and security of
electrical infrastructure while ensuring equity, privacy, and trust. The SEQUINS
team is an interdisciplinary group of 31 partners across the Pacific Northwest.
Member organizations represent the cybersecurity and electric power industries,
utility customers, regional governments, higher education institutions, cutting-
edge researchers, impacted stakeholders, and the entrepreneurial community.
Leadership partners include Portland State University, Oregon State University,
the University of Oregon, QualityLogic, Galois, and the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory.

SEQUINS will promote development and innovation within the ecosystem through
five core activities: 1) entrepreneurship and business development, 2) use-
inspired research and development, cyber-physical security, and end-user
research, 3) interoperability and standardization, 4) consulting, advocacy, and
policy support, 5) and workforce development. These activities will foster a
smart grid technology ecosystem growth that enables large-scale participation
based on open communication protocols, customer-driven transactions, privacy
protection, state-of-the-art cybersecurity, and open-to-all practices. SEQUINS
will convene stakeholders to translate activities into practice through four
phases: Discovery - data-driven investigation of regional capacities, discover
barriers and drivers; Problem Formulation - identify long-term strategic goals
for closing capacity gaps, identify metrics for tracking progress towards goals;
Design - engage in a use-inspired, pragmatic search for solutions that close
gaps and create movement towards achieving strategic goals; and Selection -
create a roadmap that selects, prioritizes, and strategically aligns the
solution proposals, then plan the work structures and processes needed for their
implementation. This Regional Engine Development Award will facilitate
coordination between research, entrepreneurship, industry, capital, and
government to scope a roadmap for an equitable smart grid across the Pacific
Northwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.