* 2307581
* New Interference Detection, Mitigation, and Fusion Methodologies for Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Natalia Schmid, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2026
* USD 510,811.00

Radio astronomy is the study of the universe by detecting and analyzing radio
waves. Radio waves are a form of electromagnetic radiation, just like light, but
with a longer wavelength. This means that radio waves can travel through dust
and gas clouds, which makes them ideal for studying objects that are obscured
from view in visible light. One of the challenges of radio astronomy is that
there is a lot of man-made radio interference. This interference can come from
things like cell phones, televisions, and radar systems. It can make it
difficult to detect faint radio signals from astronomical objects. This proposal
aims to address this challenge by developing new algorithms and hardware to
remove radio interference from observed data. The methods will be made freely
available to the astronomical community and could also be used in other fields,
such as self-driving cars and collision avoidance radar.

The detection of extremely weak Galactic signals and the study of the radio
transient sky, including fast radio bursts represent a powerful new tool for
astronomy. Due to the transient nature of fast radio bursts, radio frequency
interference (RFI) excision is critical and is a limiting factor for survey
sensitivity. This project engages faculty, graduate students and undergraduates
to address overcoming this challenge through developing ; real-time RFI
detection, characterization, and flagging ; hardware prototyping of new RFI
detection and characterization algorithms ; metrics of performance tailored to
different astronomical observation cases. The algorithms, firmware, and software
developed will be made available for use to the world radio astronomy community
through GitHub, advertised through summer RFI workshops organized at the Green
Bank Observatory, and disseminated through the programs run by the NSF's
SpectrumX Center. Undergraduate students will participate in the research
activities through this project and the programs such as Research Apprenticeship
Program and Summer Undergraduate Research Experience at West Virginia
University. The new methodology developed in this work can be applied beyond
radio astronomy by any groups that use radar data, for instance in the
development of self-driving cars and collision avoidance radar in the automotive
industry.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.