* 2307117
* Collaborative Research: Empirical Constraints on the s- and r-processes from Precision Nebular Abundances
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Harriet Dinerstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 112,681.00

The origin of elements heavier than the iron-peak elements is an important
question in modern astrophysics. The goal of this research project is to better
define the relative contributions of the slow (s-) and rapid (r-)
neutron(n)-capture processes, which occur respectively in dying Sun-like stars
and in mergers of neutron stars, to the cosmic abundances of the trans-iron
elements. To achieve that goal, the investigators will measure infrared and
optical spectra of the ions of six n-capture elements (Se, Br, Rb, Te, Xe, and
Kr) in a diverse sample of planetary nebulae (PNe) in the Milky Way and the
Magellanic Clouds. Their analyses will reveal accurate abundances that reflect
the amount of each element produced in the star before it became a planetary
nebula. Results from the project will advance astronomersâ€™ understanding of
nucleosynthesis and galactic chemical evolution. This project will provide
authentic research experiences to undergraduate students and support a vibrant
program of science outreach to high school students.

Using multiple ions of each element, the investigators will derive elemental
abundances with far higher precision relative to previous determinations. The
robust abundance determinations will yield reliable s-process elemental
enrichment factors in Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) stars, which are the
progenitors of PNe and major s-process sites in stellar populations. Quantifying
the s-process contributions in PNe spanning a wide range in progenitor mass and
metallicity will allow the investigators to place stringent empirical
constraints on the range of r-process contributions to these elements and their
candidate sites. It will also allow them to distinguish between different sets
of evolutionary and nucleosynthetic models for AGB stars.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.