* 2307668
* Elucidating the Diversity of Outflows in Tidal Disruption Events
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kate Alexander, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,133.00

It has long been known that feedback between immense outflows of gas from
supermassive black holes (SMBHs) in the center of galaxies and the environment
of the galaxies themselves plays a key role in galaxy evolution. However, the
mechanism by which these outflows are launched and a definitive model of SMBH
accretion have remained elusive. An important opportunity to study these
phenomena occurs when a star is scattered onto an orbit that crosses the SMBHâ€™s
tidal radius, temporarily increasing the accretion rate by orders of magnitude
as the SMBH consumes gas from the disrupted star. A research team from the
University of Arizona will use radio observations of these tidal disruption
events (TDEs) in combination with supplemental multi-wavelength data to conduct
the first systematic investigation of mass ejection from SMBHs in the local
Universe. The project also includes a number of related efforts to increase
public awareness of astronomy through a partnership with the Flandrau
Planetarium and Science Center. These will include public talks, field trips for
students from local Title I schools, and a one-week summer camp for children in
grades 5-6 focused on black holes. The research team will track the evolution of
TDE outflows via radio and millimeter observations of the radio synchrotron
emission produced in the shock between the outflow and the ambient interstellar
medium. Modeling of the synchrotron radio emission will allow the researchers to
calculate the energy carried by the outflow, the density profile of the ambient
medium, and other physical parameters that are otherwise difficult to measure
observationally. These calculations in turn inform numerical simulations of TDEs
and provide critical physical insight into jets, shocks, accretion flows, and
SMBH feedback. In the past three years, the discovery rate of TDEs has increased
to roughly 10 per year, providing an opportunity to conduct a systematic radio
study of a statistically significant population.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.