* 2307519
* DISES: Understanding invisible socio-environmental systems through pesticide exposure across human-wildlife interactions in tropical forest-agricultural mosaics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Karen Bailey, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,026,146.00

Faced with global climate change, farmers must learn to cope with the altered
timing of when to plant crops, reduced crop production, and more pests like
insects and fungi. One solution farmers have turned to is increased reliance on
and use of pesticides. The increase in pesticides can create problems for
agricultural systems that aim to provide healthy food and protected areas. For
instance, national parks often aim to conserve two different adjacent land uses.
This is especially true in regions with tropical forests. The increased use of
pesticides in response to climate change often overlooks consequences for both
humans and wildlife. Therefore, this research project will examine how variables
such as rainfall, pest pressure on crops, previous land use, and pesticide and
labor availability around a tropical forest-agricultural system in Uganda
(Kibale National Park) interact to influence human and wildlife well-being
through tradeoffs between food production and pesticide exposure. This research
will also increase the understanding of tradeoffs between agricultural
practices, human well-being, and conservation of biodiversity globally. In
addition to the scientific research, the researchers will train students from
underserved communities and postdoctoral scholars. This project will provide
training about connections between climate variability, land use change, pest
pressure on crops, agricultural practices, food security, and pesticide exposure
and practical options to manage and mitigate risk. The project will work with
the Uganda Wildlife Authority to enhance public awareness regarding pesticide
use. Tools will be employed to educate local and national media on proper
pesticide application and ways to reduce pesticide exposure to people and
wildlife.

To accomplish the project’s goals, the researchers will use a unique approach
based on methodology and theory from the diverse fields of geography,
environmental chemistry, anthropology, human biology, and wildlife ecology.
Specifically, the researchers will (1) quantify environmental pressure across
multiple farms around Kibale National Park; (2) evaluate household decisions
about pesticide use; (3) measure concentrations of pesticides across the
landscape; (4) determine exposure to pesticides in wildlife using feces and in
humans using silicone wristbands; (5) determine susceptibility to pesticide
exposure using measures of cortisol in saliva for humans and feces for wildlife;
and (6) model relationships and feedback loops across environmental and social
components of the socio-environmental system using an agent-based model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.