* 2307781
* CASPER: Digital Instrumentation for Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jonathon Kocz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,194,180.00

The Collaboration for Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics Research
(CASPER) is an international community of astronomers, physicists, engineers,
and computer scientists. The collaboration develops and maintains a collection
of tools primarily used for radio astronomy research. This includes open-source
hardware, software, libraries, and instrument designs. These tools can be used
as templates to enable researchers to create the instruments they need to
achieve their science goals in a cost effective and timely manner. CASPER
hardware and software is used in over 100 instruments at astronomy observatories
around the world. Instruments include everything from small experiments in
undergraduate teaching labs to large, advanced telescope facilities. CASPER
tools were used, for example, as part of the Event Horizon Telescope that
produced the first images of the black hole at the center of our galaxy. They
can also be used to drive advances in brain research, genomics, radar
applications, and neutron and magnetic field imaging.

CASPER research has positively impacted the cost and time scale for development
of radio astronomy signal processing instrumentation. This project will leverage
the past work of the CASPER community, in tandem with current developments in
the super-computing industry, to provide the infrastructure to cost effectively
build the next generation of astronomical instrumentation. This includes new
wide-band spectrometers and transient-detection machines, correlators for large
antenna arrays, and millimeter wave cameras. The low cost-of-entry associated
with building instruments with CASPER technologies has allowed many students and
early career scientists to gain instrument design experience using the same
equipment and tools that are deployed at observatories. The new research to be
undertaken in this project will assist in instrument designs for observatories
and research groups to enable spectral imaging (correlation), beamforming, RFI
mitigation, pulsar searching and timing, fast radio burst searching, SETI, VLBI,
and wideband high-resolution spectroscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.