* 2307502
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Do dead shells make good homes? Assessing the Development, Stability, and Evolution of Shell Gravel Habitats Across Space and Time
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Broc Kokesh, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 296,303.00

The aim of this project is to assess the coevolution of benthic invertebrate
communities and shell gravel habitats along a latitudinal gradient. Benthic
communities directly modify their physical habitat as the skeletal debris
(shells, bones, sclerites, etc.) of dead organisms over many generations
accumulate in the sediment, creating patches of coarse substrates upon which
epibenthic (surface-living) organisms can colonize. Despite being rare on modern
continental shelfs, shell gravel habitats are hotspots for biodiversity and
perhaps the best modern analogs of early fossil assemblages from before the
onset of pervasive soft-sediment infaunal communities (> 65 million years ago).
Further, while the evolutionary origins and ecological consequences of the
global latitudinal gradient have been rigorously assessed to explain both modern
and deep-time biodiversity, we still know little about latitudinal variation in
the processes that determine the production, persistence, and preservation of
fossil assemblages. The PI will collect and assess sediment samples from various
substrate conditions (gravel vs mud, shallow vs deep) from two notable shell
gravel environments along the Eastern Pacific coast of North America: The warm-
temperate Channel Islands of Southern California and the cold-temperate San Juan
Islands of Washington, forming a latitudinal gradient across which benthic
communities, sediment substrates, and their local feedback effects will be
quantified. The PI will further increase scientific engagement in the San
Francisco Bay area by collaborating with biomonitoring agencies, creating lesson
plans for local schools, volunteering with the University of California Museum
of Paleontology, and mentoring undergraduates in research.

Three overarching investigations will be conducted during this project: (1) the
development, persistence, and temporal scale of dead-shell assemblages with
respect to sedimentation rates, water temperature, and bioturbation intensity,
(2) the fidelity between dead-shell assemblages and living benthic communities,
and its relationship with dead-shell persistence, and (3) feedback effects that
link these ecological and taphonomic dynamics. The first investigation will use
postmortem ages determined via radiocarbon dating to quantify the duration of
time averaging and determine shell loss parameters (disintegration,
sequestration, and burial) within and between each field area. The second
investigation will assess correlations in both univariate ecological metrics and
multivariate composition among sampled communities and dead-shell assemblages.
The third investigation will combine these physical and biological results to
model their interactions and identify taphonomic feedbacks that act on these
habitats. This research will bridge important gaps between physical and
biological oceanography by identifying mechanisms by which benthic habitats
shape – and are themselves shaped by – the succession of invertebrate
communities. These insights will improve both (1) paleoecological
interpretations from the fossil record and (2) conservation strategies for
managing coastal biodiversity in a world of changing ocean conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.