* 2307231
* Unlocking the Potential of Zintl Compounds for Thermoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 577,318.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, the principal
investigator and her research group at the University of California Davis
synthesize and characterize new Zintl compounds. Zintl phases are compounds
composed of metallic elements but have the properties of a semiconductor. This
type of material has potentially excellent thermoelectric properties. Less
expensive thermoelectric materials could alter the world’s energy landscape by
converting waste heat into usable electricity and reducing our dependence on
fossil fuels. The energy conversion efficiency of a material requires low
electrical resistivity like a metal and low thermal conductivity as in an
insulator. The unique combination of composition and structure of Zintl phases
can give rise to exceptional thermoelectric properties that can be further
optimized by systematic substitution of individual elements. This project
develops new structures and optimizes properties toward high efficiency
thermoelectric materials. A new course for graduate students focused on
resiliency, mental health and well-being is developed and assessed during the
time of this award. This project also trains young scientists in structure
determination and property measurements along with thermoelectric design and
optimization. Graduate and undergraduate students’ scientific and social skills
are developed through workshops, symposiums, and individualized mentoring. PART
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY Efficient thermoelectric materials are required to impact
energy conversion technologies. This project, with support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
provides new Zintl phase compounds via flux and direct synthesis and
characterizes their properties with a goal of discovering new thermoelectric
materials. Compounds with promising properties are then further optimized for
their thermoelectric efficiency and provide new directions of research for the
scientific community. Goals include the the synthesis of new compounds that have
not yet been investigated and, e.g. morphological optimization of Zintl phases.
Two-dimensional (layered) and one-dimensional (chain) containing phases are
synthesized and their properties characterized. The properties of these new
phases will be enhanced with alio- and iso-valent substitution towards better
thermoelectric behavior. Graduate and undergraduate students learn a suite of
physical characterization techniques and how to correlate structure and phase
composition with electronic and thermal transport properties. In collaboration
with the UC Davis graduate division, a mental wellness and scientific resiliency
course is taught and assessed during the timeframe of this award. Graduate and
undergraduate students can develop their scientific and social skills through
workshops, symposiums, and mentorship. The research will be disseminated at
national meetings and findings published in peer-reviewed journals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.