* 2307987
* Fine Structure in Hamiltonian Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jason Mireles-James, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 299,717.00

Hamiltonian systems play an essential role in mathematical physics, where they
are used to model the behavior of a wide variety of physical systems ranging
from electrons in semiconductors to the motions of stars and planets in
galaxies. One major difficulty with these systems is that, since there is no
friction, there is nothing in the model to smooth out and isolate fine
structure. Instead, the evolution of a Hamiltonian system is organized by
geometric objects like equilibrium solutions, periodic orbits, and invariant
tori. This research project provides new insights into the fine structure of
Hamiltonian systems using a blend of computational and analytical tools. Indeed,
the project combines computational and analytical techniques in novel ways,
providing both new techniques for proving mathematical theorems about the
properties of the models, and new computational techniques for understanding
their practical behavior. These ideas are used to answer outstanding questions
in Celestial Mechanics, and to explore the behavior of gravitating systems of
particles at a finer resolution than ever before. Explicit applications of this
research include the design/discovery of new low energy transfer orbits for
space flights in the solar system.

This project introduces new analytical and computational methods for studying
phase space structure in nonlinear systems. Applications to Hamiltonian systems
are stressed, as in this case there are no attractors to organize the dynamics.
The project has two main parts. The first part is local and expands existing
high order techniques for computing hyperbolic invariant objects to encompass
the parabolic case. The second part is more global and develops computational
methods for growing invariant manifold atlases comprised of high order chart
maps for stable/unstable manifolds. An important application is the computation
of intersections between such objects, and efficient search strategies are
discussed. These intersections (or webs) play a critical role in organizing
Hamiltonian systems as they determine transport between different regions of
phase space and generate complicated recurrent dynamics. The project involves
graduate research activities and facilitates collaborations between researchers
in the areas of resurgence theory and computational dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.