* 2307013
* Block Copolymer Based Multicomponent Self-assembly of Porous Nanostructures From Non-equilibrium Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Ulrich Wiesner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2028
* USD 660,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project involves investigation of the spontaneous structure formation of
multicomponent polymer (soft matter) systems driven away from equilibrium by
external forces. The PI will specifically study the self-assembly of of porous
nanostructures using polymeric materials called block copolymers (BCP).
Understanding the underlying formation principles and controlling the properties
of multicomponent polymer systems driven away from equilibrium is an area of
major fundamental as well as technological interest. If successful, the project
will promote the progress of science by providing novel and scalable approaches
to overcome limitations of size-selective filtration in asymmetric
ultrafiltration membranes (which are important, e.g., for the biopharmaceutical
industry) or for component recovery in industrial effluents. It will also enable
access to soft-matter directed high-quality superconductors with novel form
factors derived from additive manufacturing, which could have implications in
areas including quantum information or energy technologies. The research program
is highly cross-disciplinary, ranging from synthesis and characterization across
non-equilibrium formation mechanisms of porous nanostructures to the study of
polymer-derived superconductors and their properties. It would thus provide an
intellectually highly stimulating educational environment for undergraduate and
graduate students to learn about the depth and breadth of polymer science and
engineering and its applications. The program will involve various components of
training and development of human resources, including the participation of
underrepresented groups, as well as industrial outreach.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project involves study of the synthesis, preparation, characterization,
formation mechanisms, and properties of block copolymer (BCP) based
multicomponent porous nanostructures obtained through self-assembly via non-
equilibrium formation processes. Two different scenarios will be investigated
employing multicomponent polymer systems: The first entails the formation of
asymmetric ultrafiltration membranes from two or more chemically distinct BCPs
exposed to non-solvent-induced phase separation. The second involves BCP self-
assembly-based and 3D-printed sol nanoparticle composites and their conversion
into superconductors with novel nanostructures and form factors. The broader aim
of the research program is to understand the underlying fundamental chemical,
physical, and kinetic formation principles enabling generation of materials with
hitherto unknown property profiles based on control over their nanostructures.
The research will include synthesis of all components, preparation of porous
nanostructured materials, and characterization of their structure and properties
using various scattering, microscopy, spectroscopy, and property measurement
techniques. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.