* 2307447
* Collaborative Research: The Emergence of Dusty Starbursts in Cosmic History
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Haojing Yan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,589.00

Recently, a sizable population of galaxies has been discovered in the early
universe (z > 6) that are forming stars at a furious rate, i.e., > 1,000 solar
masses per year. For comparison, large present-day spirals like the Milky Way
form 1-2 solar masses of stars each year. Just as surprising is the fact that
these objects are heavily obscured by immense amounts of cosmic dust, requiring
observations at very long wavelengths for detections. The very existence of
massive starburst galaxies and large amounts of dust at z > 6 pushes our current
theory of early star formation to the limit. This collaborative project will
conduct a comprehensive survey of a large sample of candidate dusty starbursts
(629 objects in total) using the 50-m Large Millimeter Telescope (LMT), now
operating at its full capacity, to determine accurate redshifts and positions
and define a statistically significant sample of z > 6 objects. Deep optical and
near-infrared follow-ups will identify optical counterparts and stellar
masses/populations. Together, these will place strong constraints on the star
formation and metal enrichment history of the early universe. This work will
support a postdoc and a graduate student, public outreach activities, and a
program to produce scientifically literate journalists.

The overall approach is to observe the "500 micron risers" sample of 629 dusty,
high-redshift galaxies using the LMT's Redshift Search Receiver. This wide-
bandwidth spectrograph is an ideal instrument to measure redshifts for such
objects. The team will combine institutional and open-time access to build a
spectroscopic sample of ∼50 objects, of which ∼27 objects should be bona fide
dusty starbursts at z > 6. In addition, the LMT/TolTEC instrument will soon
carry out public legacy surveys, which will provide deep, 1–2 mm images that
cover a significant portion of their fields. These public data will provide
millimeter photometry as well as positions accurate to ~1 arcsecond for ∼160 of
the objects, which will allow the team to pinpoint their optical to near-
infrared counterparts. In the end, they will have the largest spectroscopic
sample and the largest counterpart sample for dusty starbursts at z > 6, which
they will analyze in a statistical manner. This will help fill in a critical
piece that is still missing from the early cosmic star formation and metal
enrichment history.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.