* 2307525
* Mathematical Problems Modeling Nematic Liquid Crystals: from Macroscopic to Microscopic Theories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiang Xu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 207,638.00

Liquid crystals are a special type of soft matter widely used in contemporary
technologies including displays, thermometers, optical imaging, and recording,
as well as biological systems. The nematic phase is the simplest among all
liquid crystal phases. The word nematic comes from Greek, which means thread,
due to early experimental observation under microscopes of thread-like
discontinuities between neighboring liquid crystal molecules. Physicists have
formulated various models at different scales to describe nematic liquid
crystals. This project will conduct a rigorous mathematical study of the
equations arising from these models, which will provide insight into the
underlying nature of these materials and ultimately benefit applications. The
project will provide research training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students.

The project is targeted at nonlinear partial differential equations that range
from the macroscopic theory to the microscopic theory for nematic liquid
crystals. More specifically, the project considers analytic and numerical
studies of the physical parameters and their properties in the Beris-Edwards
system in macroscopic theory. The project also aims to derive global well-
posedness and the phase separation property of a gradient flow generated by a
free energy with a potential of singular type, which is considered to be in the
intermediate stage of continuum and kinetic theories. Further, the project will
explore a kinetic equation in microscopic theory and advance the understanding
of its long-time dynamics. The project will utilize and extend mathematical
tools from the theory of partial differential equations and calculus of
variations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.