* 2308601
* CAS:  Reprocessable Thermosets for High Performance Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2026
* USD 455,075.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polymer matrix composites are an important class of lightweight structural
materials used in applications relevant to sustainable energy production and
use, with examples including electric vehicles and wind turbines. Traditional
materials for these composites are inherently non-recyclable. One approach to
this problem is to take advantage of recent advances in materials chemistry that
enable the production of materials with strong chemical bonds that are able to
break and reform in a reversible manner. Polymeric materials with these bonds
can be repaired after fracture or completely recycled, a capability that has led
to the development of a large range of sustainable materials. These types of
materials have typically been used and assessed in the soft, rubbery state,
where the material stiffness is much too low for use as a structural material.
This project is designed to develop the background knowledge needed to produce
rigid, recyclable materials for structural applications. An important hypothesis
being tested as a part of the project is that the incorporation of reversible
bonds in a rigid material can also result in property enhancements that would
not be obtainable otherwise. Successful completion of the project will be an
important step toward the development of strong, lightweight materials that can
be repaired while still in service.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The proposed work is based on the synthesis of model epoxy networks with
aromatic disulfide bonds incorporated at various points within the network
structure. Different crosslinkers will be used to adjust the glass transition
temperature of the network, allowing independent control of the relaxation
dynamics associated with the glass transition and the dynamics associated with
disulfide exchange. Three interrelated activities will be pursued in order to
characterize these materials and develop a molecular-level understanding of the
deformation mechanisms. The first of these is a series of mechanical
measurements characterizing material deformation in the vicinity of a
propagating crack in the material. The second involves direct visualization of
the spatial distribution of thiyl radicals that form during cleavage of the
disulfide bonds, using Raman scattering and an array of colorimetric techniques.
Additionally a series of thin film experiments utilizing quartz crystal
resonators will be used to assess the high frequency rheological properties of
the polymers, along with their degradation kinetics and stability in different
environmental conditions. These resonators will also be used to develop methods
for environmental monitoring in a variety of contexts. Collectively, these
experiments will lead to the development of a general strategy for the
production of tough, lightweight, recyclable polymeric materials for structural
applications. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.