* 2308715
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Alabama LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,036,196.00

The overall goal of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program is to assist universities and colleges in diversifying the
nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by
increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
persons from LSAMP populations. LSAMP populations are defined as persons from
groups underrepresented in the STEM enterprise: Blacks and African-Americans,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders.

The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ALSAMP) consists
of nine diverse institutions, including doctoral granting institutions and five
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The institutions are: The
University of Alabama (Lead Institution); University of Alabama at Birmingham;
University of Alabama at Huntsville; University of South Alabama; Oakwood
University (HBCU); Miles College (HBCU); Talladega College (HBCU); Stillman
College (HBCU); and Alabama A&M University (HBCU). The overarching goal of the
2023-2028 ALSAMP program is to continuously improve strategies to
institutionalize and sustain evidence-based recruitment and retention practices
for student success in completing undergraduate and graduate degrees in STEM
disciplines, particularly scientific and technical areas of national priority.
Specifically, in support of developing a well-prepared 21st century workforce to
meet the challenge of the NSF Big Idea, "Harnessing the Data Revolution", the
Alabama LSAMP incorporates a required suite of hybrid computational programming
for all students. Evidence-based practices to be implemented include:
performance-based stipend support, first-year bridge programs, spring research
conference, summer research experiences, community college/transfer bridge, and
international research opportunities.

The research study investigates factors affecting the participation of LSAMP
populations in extra- and co-curricular career development (ECCD) activities.
With little research on this topic for this population of STEM students, the
study contributes to research on STEM programming for underrepresented groups,
as well as psychological research on motivation in educational settings. In
project year 5, a broadening participation research conference is proposed that
will involve participation from the STEM Pathways Research Alliances within the
LSAMP community for broad dissemination of the community's STEM educational
research activities. Dissemination of external evaluation and the research study
will also occur through the alliance websites, conference participation and
publication in STEM and professional association journals. ALSAMP activities
have the potential to promote widespread and sustained transformation of
undergraduate STEM education. The new computational component will broaden the
skillset of STEM majors to address the growing needs of computation as a
transdisciplinary skill. Research experiences, both domestic and abroad,
contribute to the development of a globally competitive workforce. Findings from
the research study and evaluation have the potential to improve LSAMP and other
programs that target students from underrepresented groups, contributing to the
larger goal of increasing the number of degrees earned in STEM programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.