* 2308670
* Collaborative Research: Energy Conversion Beyond the First Law of Thermodynamics in Non-Equilibrium Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Argall, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 256,012.00

This award supports a collaborative effort at West Virginia University and the
University of New Hampshire to study energy conversion in weakly collisional
plasmas. One of the most challenging problems in the study of plasmas - gases
hot enough that electrons come apart from the atoms - is understanding how
energy is converted between electromagnetic fields and the thermal energy of the
plasma, which is the energy associated with random motion of the electrically
charged particles. This is an important problem across many types of plasmas,
including plasmas in space and the very hot plasmas that are used in fusion
energy development. These plasmas, where collisions between particles are very
rare, are most often far from local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), which means
that one cannot even define a temperature in the traditional sense. This project
builds on a recent result quantifying energy conversion in non-LTE plasmas to
perform the first systematic study of the non-LTE energy conversion in weakly
collisional plasmas.

The project will employ state-of-the-art particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations and
satellite data from the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission. Parametric
simulations of two-dimensional magnetic reconnection and turbulence will be used
to understand the dependence of thermal energy conversion on ambient plasma
parameters. Secondary islands and flux ropes will be studied in two-dimensional
and three-dimensional magnetic reconnection since they are known to be sites of
particle acceleration and non-LTE dynamics. Finally, the theoretical formalism
will be generalized to account for energy in both random motion and bulk motion
and it will be used to study energy conversion in two-dimensional reconnection
and turbulence. The project will directly contribute to the study of energy
conversion in eruptive flares in the solar atmosphere, geomagnetic substorms
that produce aurora and space weather impacts, and the heating of the solar
wind; it will also set the stage for application in other areas of plasma
science, including high energy density and fusion plasmas. The collaborative
award is co-funded by the Plasma Physics program in the Division of Physics and
the Magnetospheric Physics program in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.