* 2308342
* ORCC: Do multi-species biofilms accelerate microbial evolution under extreme warming?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Steven Allison, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2026
* USD 479,882.00

To protect society from the hazards of climate change, how quickly climate
change will progress and how global regions will be affected needs to be
understood. Currently, predictions are hampered by incomplete knowledge about
the role of soils in climate change. Soils harbor more carbon than the
atmosphere and all global vegetation combined. As microbes decompose soil
carbon, they release CO2—a greenhouse gas—to the atmosphere. Globally, this
process produces 10 times as much CO2 each year than fossil fuel burning. How
microbes adapt to increasing temperatures is not well-understood and thus, their
contribution to the greenhouse effect as temperatures rise is not clear. Also,
microbes reproduce quickly, and it is not clear if they will evolve to produce
more or less CO2 as climate change progresses. Few studies have conducted
evolution experiments to address this question, and none have evolved microbes
in outdoor ecosystems within an intact microbial community. In this research
project, certain species of fungi and bacteria will be exposed to extreme
warming, either in isolation, or with the natural microbial community, to
determine whether microbes evolve better tools, such as biofilms, in a natural
microbial community, and whether adaptation results in maintenance or increase
in soil carbon decomposition rates under extreme warming, which would
potentially accelerate climate change. Broader impacts include training of
undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral scholars. The PIs will also develop a
middle school educational module that includes hands-on activities to learn
about microbes and climate change. Middle-school students and teachers from low-
income and underrepresented populations will be involved in this project.

In the real world, soil fungi and bacteria will not adapt to climate change in
isolation. In fact, fungi and bacteria often interact to form multi-species
biofilms. In this project, eco-evolutionary mechanisms of biofilm formation in
response to extreme warming will be examined and how this will impact large-
scale organic C decomposition will be studied. This research will thus provide a
deeper understanding of how soil microbes adapt to climate change, and, thus,
improve predictions under future climate scenarios. The PIs hypothesize that
fungi and bacteria will adapt to extreme warming more effectively if they
interact with one another. Specifically, extreme warming will select for biofilm
formation because extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) of biofilms can
buffer microbes from heat damage. In addition, adaptation to extreme warming
within multi-species biofilms will result in faster organic C decomposition
since EPS can improve the longevity and efficiency of organic C-degrading
enzymes in the environment. Thousands of generations of bacterial and fungal
strains will be exposed to extreme warming in the field while manipulating their
interactions with the whole microbial community and controlling their ability to
form multi-species biofilms. To focus on mechanisms underlying adaptation,
computer-based ecosystem modeling and lab studies with the same experimental
design as the field will be performed. In each case, growth rate, survivorship,
biofilm formation, and organic C decomposition under extreme warming will be
monitored. This project will also assess EPS production in soil samples from
NEON sites which represent many different terrestrial habitats with a wide range
of environmental conditions, thus broadening the generalizability of the
research.

This award was co-funded by Integrative Organismal Systems and the Division of
Environmental Biology in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.