* 2308017
* Conference: Working Across Scales in Complex Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 49,199.00

This award supports a workshop on “Working across scales in complex systems”,
which will bring together representatives of plasma physics and biological
physics communities for two-and-a-half days of intense scientific discussions on
the campus of Emory University in Atlanta, on April 12-14, 2023. The goal of the
workshop is to look for and explore similarities between the two fields towards
advancing both fields. If theoretical similarities between biological and plasma
physics can be identified, additional broader societal benefits may be immense,
ranging from advances in understanding of basic biological processes relevant to
human health to advances in fusion energy sciences, and hence impact on the
energy economy and mediation of climate change.

Physics often develops by finding unexpected connections among nominally
distinct fields. An investment of resources into searching for such connections
explicitly between plasma physics, biological physics, and other fields working
on multi-scale physical systems can potentially result in substantial
intellectual advances in these and adjacent fields. This will be the first
workshop of this kind, where the biological physics and plasma physics
communities will be able to talk to each other and explore possible connections.
The workshop will connect researchers with diverse backgrounds and career
stages. As such, it will contribute to building new professional networks,
advancing both the scientific fields and careers of junior researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.