* 2308217
* Interfacial problems in data science and PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Matthew Jacobs, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 11/30/2023
* USD 93,272.00

This project involves the development and analysis of mathematical models where
the structure of interfaces between different phases or classes is an essential
feature that arises in a range of applications. The frameworks specifically
addressed in this project are models for tumor growth and the robustness of
machine learning classification systems to malicious attackers, the latter also
known in the literature as adversarial attacks. In the case of tumor growth, the
key interface is the boundary separating the cancerous region and the healthy
cell region. Tracking and predicting the shape of this boundary has important
implications for disease treatment and prognosis. The key interfaces for robust
machine learning classification are the decision boundaries between different
classes. If a classifier has extremely irregular decision boundaries, then an
adversary can produce erroneous results by slightly perturbing the input data.
These attacks are particularly striking in computer vision, where pixel changes
that are imperceptible to human vision can fool well-trained models with high
confidence. This project will advance our knowledge in both of these
applications by studying the theoretical properties of these interfaces and by
developing new computational algorithms and software to simulate these
interfaces. This project will also involve the training of graduate students.

In the case of tumor growth, the project will focus on fluid mechanical models
for cell growth based on partial differential equations. On the theoretical
side, the well-posedness of these models and an understanding of how model
choice and parameter regimes affect the regularity of the tumor boundary will be
established. In addition, efficient numerical solvers will be developed, paying
particular attention to model instances that are too challenging for the current
theoretical understanding, including models where even the global-in-time
existence of weak solutions is unknown. In the case of data classification, a
better understanding of the regularizing effect that adversarial learning has on
class interfaces will be established, and these insights will be used to guide
parameter choices. Theoretical work that has connected adversarial learning to
barycenter problems with respect to optimal transport distances will also be
further developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.