* 2308862
* Extending the Teach of Gravitational-Wave Detectors through Low Latency Data Products, Unmodeled Searches, and Detector Characterization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Coughlin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 316,275.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Multi-
messenger gravitational-wave astronomy has arrived with the detection of the
coalescence of compact binary systems. With Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo and
KAGRA pushing towards design sensitivity, continued and new efforts to
characterize the detectors and subtract known physical effects from the data is
required. This work enables the possibility of detecting more compact binaries,
as well as discoveries of gravitational waves from other astrophysical sources
that may/may not be associated with electromagnetic signals. With the goal of
significantly increasing the science reach of the advanced detectors, this award
will enable the detection of yet-to-be-detected, unmodeled gravitational waves
and the development of software for low-latency data products. It will also
support an outreach program covering elementary through high school outreach
activities with a focus on gravitational waves within Minneapolis and St. Paul.

Along with the ongoing advances in instrumentation, the realization of
gravitational-wave astronomy depends critically on continuing advances in data
analysis capabilities, both for second and third generation instruments. This
award focuses on three areas: (i) techniques and searches for unmodeled
gravitational-wave transients on O4 and O5 data, (ii) software for low-latency
data products, including estimates of source properties such as inclination and
ejecta predictions and apply them to future detected events in O4 and O5, and
(iii) techniques to mitigate non-linear noise sources using auxiliary sensor
data to understand and remove contributions of linear and non-linear noise
sources in gravitational-wave strain to significantly improve their sensitivity.
The outreach activities funded by this award will help students understand what
LIGO is and how gravity works.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.