* 2308792
* RUI: Calculation of Higher Order Corrections to Positronium Energy Levels
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gregory Adkins, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Positronium is the bound system consisting of the electron and its antiparticle,
the positron. As such, it forms an “exotic atom”, similar in many ways to
traditional simple atoms such as hydrogen and helium, but different because of
its unique composition and because of its tendency to annihilate, transforming
into pure electromagnetic energy in the form of high-energy photons. Many
properties of positronium, such as energy levels and lifetimes, are accessible
to high-precision experiments. Positronium properties can also be calculated
theoretically to high precision using the methods of bound-state Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED) because strong and weak interaction effects are
negligible. Consequently, positronium is an ideal system for testing the limits
of QED bound state physics and for exploring the consequences of agreement or
disagreement between theory and experiment at this high level of precision. The
activities involved in calculating the positronium energy levels will be of
great educational value to the undergraduate students at Franklin & Marshall
College involved as collaborators in this work. The students will learn
theoretical methods and techniques of calculation more advanced than those
usually encountered at the undergraduate level. They will gain valuable
experience by doing the research, by preparing and giving presentations
describing their results, and by publishing their work as co-authors in research
journals. Positronium energy levels will be calculated to high precision using
the effective quantum field theory Non-Relativistic QED (NRQED). NRQED is
appropriate for this work because the energies and momenta typical of atomic
systems such as positronium are small compared to the electron rest energy.
Divergences will be dealt with using dimensional regularization. Energy levels
can be found as the positions of the poles of the electron-positron to electron-
positron four-point Green's function and their values will be calculated using
bound-state perturbation theory in NRQED. Recoil corrections, which are small
for atoms such as hydrogen, are large in positronium and will form a major focus
of this work. Calculations of recoil corrections will be performed using the
"integration by parts" identities and related methods that have recently been
tested for positronium at a lower order of approximation. Improved experimental
results and higher precision theory will combine to give bound-state QED one of
its most stringent tests to date.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.