* 2308741
* REU Site: REU Site on Security and Privacy for Mobile Sensing and the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Alfredo Perez, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 127,232.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award renews a REU site
focused on security for mobile sensing and the Internet of Things (IoT) at
Columbus State University. The project will provide 10 undergraduates per summer
the opportunity to work with faculty mentors in state-of-the-art research labs
on projects in the important area of security and privacy of mobile sensing and
IoT systems. Mobile computing and IoT systems and their associated sensing
capabilities and applications are pervasive in our society in areas such as home
automation, telecommunications, healthcare, public infrastructure, and national
defense. Security of these devices and the data that is collected through
related applications is an important concern for all citizens. This site will
give students an opportunity to explore and delve deeply into an area of
computing that is relevant and timely. The students will also participate in a
number of professional development activities and field trips that will prepare
them for future careers as computing professionals in the field of
cybersecurity, an area of critical need for the workforce of the future.

The intellectual merit of this project is the potential for the development of
new methods, algorithms, and tools to protect the privacy of users in mobile
sensing systems and IoT environments. The project is led by an outstanding group
of faculty mentors to guide undergraduates in explorations of problems related
to security and mobile sensing. The goals of this site are to: increase the
number of students from undergraduate institutions with limited access to
research opportunities who participate in high quality, faculty-mentored
research experiences; to increase the cybersecurity and computer science
workforce who protect the U. S. cyberspace through the retention and graduation
of the REU students; to develop participants’ skills to conduct research in
computer science and cybersecurity; and to implement best-practices during the
summer program and throughout the year to support the students’ research and
career goals. The site will particularly seek to recruit students from groups
under-represented in computing fields. The research projects developed by this
site will help improve mobile sensing and IoT systems by collecting and
analyzing data and developing new algorithms and protocols to secure these
systems in areas related to facial privacy, mobile malware, security and trust
in IoT systems, and secure and efficient sensor data storage in distributed
ledgers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.