* 2308724
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Urban Massachusetts LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Joseph Berger, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Urban Massachusetts LSAMP (UM-LSAMP) Alliance aims to examine the impact of
a geographically-distributed, digitally-connected mentoring network that is
designed to create a sustainable model for retaining and supporting
Underrepresented and Racially Minoritized (URM) students in STEM disciplines at
seven public institutions in Eastern Massachusetts: three University of
Massachusetts four-year universities (Boston, Dartmouth, and Lowell) and four
regional community colleges (Bristol, Bunker Hill, Middlesex, and Roxbury).
Through our unique Inclusive Multigenerational Mentoring Framework, the UM-LSAMP
Alliance will provide URM students with robust: 1) Research Mentorship
experiences that advance social change through STEM, 2) Career Enrichment
Mentorship through STEM internship opportunities and virtual mentorship with
LSAMP alumni STEM professionals, as well as 3) Transitional Mentorship and
Student Success Support to strengthen persistence into and through STEM degree
programs and careers.

By employing a rich participatory-based mixed-method longitudinal research
design, this project will advance the fundamental knowledge base in three
keyways. First, the research conducted under this project will enable rich
learning about how multigenerational mentorship influences STEM belonging,
identity development, and persistence among UM-LSAMP community college students.
Second, the results of the research studies will help clarify how mentored
research experiences, steeped in an equity ethic frame, promote URM students’
principled commitment for addressing racial inequities through STEM. Third, the
evaluation of the project activities will clarify how the Alliance activities
associated with the key mentorship experiences promote institutional-level
change and Alliance-level change. The UM-LSAMP project is expected to offer
transformative solutions for establishing effective models of mentoring that
advance URM students’ success in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.