* 2308833
* Gravitational Wave Data Analysis: Parameter Inference and Black Hole Ringdown
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Aaron Zimmerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 80,000.00

This research project is devoted to the analysis and modeling of gravitational
waves. These ripples in the fabric of space and time are produced when the
densest objects in the Universe -- such as black holes and neutron stars --
orbit and collide. The detection of gravitational waves by the NSF-funded LIGO
and European Virgo collaborations has opened up a new window on the Universe,
revealing previously invisible events like pairs of black holes merging.
Researchers supported by this award will participate in the analysis of
gravitational waves as members of the LIGO collaboration, helping to infer the
properties of the sources of these ripples. In addition to these collaboration
activities, which have far-reaching impacts on astrophysics, cosmology, and
nuclear physics, the research group will carry out searches for new physics
using gravitational-wave data. Detections of gravitational waves provide
information about spacetime at its most dynamic, allowing for strong-field tests
of relativity, as the possibility of detecting extremely compact objects which
are otherwise invisible to electromagnetic observations. This award will enable
both searches for gravitational waves from new, hypothetical compact stars, and
study how the final "ringdown" of merged black holes can be used to search for
new physics. These research activities will provide training for graduate
students in modeling and data analysis, skillsets which are in great demand and
of great benefit to society. In addition, members of the group will engage in
outreach activities in order to educate and inspire the public about this new
field of physics and astronomy.

In particular, this project focuses supporting the LIGO Scientific Collaboration
by performing Bayesian parameter estimation on detections made in the
collaboration's next observing campaign. The PI and other members of the group
will participate in the application of parameter estimation pipelines, carrying
out inferences on detections made in low latency and helping to plan and execute
comprehensive parameter analysis on longer timescales. These inferences are a
crucial first step in the use of gravitational waves for understanding the
populations of compact objects, inferring the nuclear equation of state from
observations of binary neutron stars, testing the theory of relativity, and
using gravitational waves to measure cosmic expansion. This project will also
involve the investigation of systematic errors in parameter estimation when
using cutting edge models, which exhibit complicated parameter degeneracies. The
team will also use methods borrowed from quantum mechanical perturbation theory
to predict how possible deviations from relativity are imprinted on the ringdown
spectrum of spinning black holes. These predictions can be used in the future
with Bayesian parameter estimation to constrain or measure the underlying
parameters of these models using ringdown signals from binary black hole
mergers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.