* 2308886
* Collaborative Research: Testing General Relativity with Gravitational-Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Bangalore Sathyaprakash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 119,642.00

A collaboration between research groups at the University of Mississippi and
Pennsylvania State University will use data from upcoming observations of LIGO
and other detectors around the world to subject Einstein’s theory of space, time
and gravity to new precision tests. Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity has
been a highly successful theory of physics whose prediction of the bending of
light was famously confirmed by Sir Arthur Eddington more than a hundred years
ago. That same theory predicted the existence of gravitational waves–a new kind
of radiation that is produced in extreme astronomical phenomena such as
colliding black holes. On September 14, 2015, NSF's Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) detected for the first-time gravitational
waves from two colliding black holes. Since then, almost 100 such events have
been observed. Gravitational waves from colliding black holes are the best
grounds for testing if Einstein’s theory is the correct description of spacetime
and gravity. Although Einstein’s theory has been remarkably successful in
explaining precision terrestrial experiments and astronomical observations,
there are hints that the theory is incomplete. Researchers at the University of
Mississippi and Penn State have found a way to combine data from multiple events
to increase the efficacy of the methods used. They will make use of
sophisticated statistical inference tools to ascertain that the results are
sound and are of high confidence, but at the same time make sure that noise
artifacts in the data and other unrelated physical effects are not
misinterpreted as a failure of the theory. The groups will train students in
standard scientific practices and advanced analysis techniques and provide them
with a platform to work with experts in gravitational wave astronomy globally.
The team will also organize Physics and Astrophysics at the 'eXtreme' workshops
to stimulate novel ideas via panel discussions and brainstorming sessions.

The improved sensitivities of LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA to detect gravitational
waves over the next three years will allow the detection of hundreds of
colliding neutron stars and black holes. These collisions will release vast
amounts of energy into gravitational waves and the detected signals carry the
signature of relativistic gravity in action in unprecedented detail and will
have the potential to falsify general relativity (GR). Due to the enormous
success of GR in explaining observational and experimental results, the prior
probability that the theory is correct is very high. Falsifying GR will require
robust statistical inference that accounts for missing physics in the waveform
models used in detection and measurement and mitigation of artifacts due to non-
stationary noise. For example, most of the current tests assume that binary
black holes are in quasi-circular orbits in vacuum, but this is not necessarily
true. The principal goal of the study is to strengthen the standard tests of GR
using singular value decomposition and to implement a new test utilizing the
multipole structure of the emitted waves. These refined tests could reveal GR
violations present in high-fidelity signals. It is vital, however, to have a
comprehensive list of systematic effects that could be misinterpreted as a GR
violation. The second principal goal is to assemble such a list, explore their
effect on the various tests of GR, and prepare the collaboration to account for
false alarms. This two-pronged approach reinforces the impact of the tests of GR
undertaken by the collaborations, while preparing the path to discovering new
physics should it show up in the data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.