* 2308225
* Graphs of Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Roberto De Leo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 292,896.00

The main goal of this project is to study graphs of general dynamical systems,
both analytically and numerically. The outcome of this work will represent an
important advance in the understanding of fundamental aspects of dynamical
systems. It will provide a unifying setting and a set of tools applicable, in
particular, to any dynamical system, from one-dimensional discrete-time systems,
such as the logistic maps, to infinite-dimensional continuous-time ones, such as
the Belousov–Zhabotinsky chemical reaction. This project also aims at the
creation of a group of graduate and undergraduate students at Howard University
working on the numerical analysis of the qualitative dynamics of the systems,
together with the lead investigator. Moreover, within this project, the
investigator will write a monograph on the logistic map, with help from
participating students. This monograph will finally collect the most important
results on the logistic map in a single place and will be aimed at applied
readers, emphasizing readability over formal elegance. In order to make it
available to the widest audience possible, the monograph will be released freely
in “open source” online format. The project will be fully developed and
undertaken at Howard University, a Historically Black Research University.

The main goals of this project are: 1. Investigating the graph of several
finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional dynamical systems, including but not
limited to the following: unimodal maps, multimodal maps, Lorenz map, forced
dumped pendulum, Newhouse maps, semilinear parabolic PDEs. 2. Investigating the
general properties of graphs themselves, including the types of possible
appearance/disappearance of nodes in parametric families, the conditions for the
graph to be connected, alternate definitions of nodes and edges. Moreover, this
project will include a comprehensive study of several concepts of recurrence,
such as chain-recurrence, strong chain-recurrence and Auslander’s generalized
recurrence, and developing a system of axioms that will work as a framework for
all kinds of recurrence and from which it will be possible to prove general
properties of graphs of dynamical systems. The numerical results will be
achieved by using refined versions of the codes developed and used to
numerically study the logistic map and the Lorenz system. New code will be
developed to study the infinite dimensional systems corresponding to the
semilinear parabolic PDEs mentioned in the previous point, coming from several
important models of chemical reaction-diffusion phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.