* 2308752
* Uncovering the Mystery of the Universe's Expansion Rate with Gravitational-Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Hsin-Yu Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 60,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational-wave cosmology. With the first
detection of gravitational-wave signals, ripples in the space-time, by NSF's
LIGO, a new window to the Universe has been opened. The observations of
gravitational-wave signals emitting from merging black holes and neutron stars
brought about enormous advances in astrophysics, nuclear physics, fundamental
physics, and cosmology. In particular, combining the gravitational-wave and
electromagnetic-wave observations of binary mergers enables the measurement of
the local Universe expansion rate. Under this award, the UT-Austin team will
develop data analysis tools to measure the Universe expansion rate with upcoming
gravitational-wave and electromagnetic-wave observations. The research
activities will provide theoretical and data analysis training for graduate
students. In addition, the award supports the development of websites and
workshops to encourage public engagement in gravitational-wave science.

The local Universe expansion rate, the Hubble constant, can be measured by a
wide range of methods. However, a perplexing tension between different Hubble
constant measurements has brought enormous efforts and resources into resolving
the tension over the last decade. No consensus has been reached so far. This is
where gravitational-wave observations can play a critical role. With the method
known as the "standard siren", gravitational-wave observations have great
potential to shed light on one of the biggest mysteries in modern cosmology.
Focusing on the systematic uncertainties of standard sirens, the UT-Austin team
will quantify the systematics from electromagnetic counterpart emissions and
develop techniques to mitigate them. The team will then prepare a standard siren
measurement pipeline that adopts the latest developments in the field and
publicly available data in order to measure the Hubble constant to great
precision and accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.