* 2308242
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 540,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
detection by LIGO/Virgo Scientific Collaboration of gravitational wave (GW)
events from binary black hole (BHBH) mergers, binary neutron star (NSNS) mergers
and several likely black hole-neutron star (BHNS) mergers opened a new window in
the Universe that can help us understand the physics of matter under the most
extreme conditions, something impossible by traditional means. The combined
detection of GW, electromagnetic (EM) as well as neutrino radiation promises to
resolve a number of long-standing astrophysical puzzles, such as the origin of
short gamma-ray bursts (sGRBs) and r-process elements, as well as the nature of
matter at supranuclear densities. Multimessenger astrophysics requires a
comprehensive understanding of the physics of compact objects in a variety of
configurations. The project will address several different problems whose common
feature is the behavior of matter under extreme conditions in a dynamical,
strongly gravitating regime and will involve General Relativity, relativistic
hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics, as well as EM and neutrino transport.
Most of these topics represent long-standing, fundamental problems in
theoretical physics requiring large-scale computation for a solution. Hence this
program involves a significant degree of large-scale simulations on
supercomputers, in addition to analytical modeling. Movies of the simulations
produced by the PIs will continue to be used as an undergraduate training
vehicle. The research and outreach activities supported by this grant help
promote the use of computers and visualization tools at all levels of education,
as well as public awareness of some the latest and most exciting developments in
gravitational physics and astrophysics. Young researchers trained in these areas
will acquire skills that are useful beyond the scope of astrophysics in a
plethora of applied domains, and hence they will be in great demand.

To understand the current and future observations and, in particular, the
interplay between strong gravity, EM, and the underlying microphysics, it is
crucial to compare them to predictions from theoretical modeling. The problems
to be tackled comprise both initial value and evolution computations and will
treat spacetimes containing black holes immersed in gaseous environments, as
well as spacetimes containing neutron stars with magnetic fields and both EM and
neutrino radiation. Some of the topics for investigation include the inspiral
and coalescence of compact binaries (BHBHs, NSNSs and BHNSs); the generation of
GWs from merging binaries and other promising astrophysical sources, and their
counterpart EM signals; gravitational collapse; the stability of magnetized
rotating, relativistic stars and the evolution and final fate of unstable stars;
gamma-ray burst sources; the formation and growth of supermassive black holes
(SMBHs) from the magnetorotational collapse of supermassive stars and other
scenarios; circumbinary disks around merging binary SMBHs in the cores of
galaxies and quasars; and the profiles and observable signatures of dark matter
around SMBHs in galaxy cores, including the Milky Way, and the dynamical
evolution of clusters containing dark matter, stars and SMBHs. The results have
important implications for astronomical observations, including those collected
by and/or planned for GW interferometers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.