* 2308460
* US-Israel Collab: Market Integration, Land Use, and Pathogen Transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Georgia Titcomb, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,721,026.00

The shift from subsistence agriculture to farming cash crops modifies landscapes
and lifestyles in ways that impact human health both positively and negatively,
including through exposure to infectious diseases. This project studies
infectious disease exposure in rural farmers transitioning to cash crops to
understand how market integration influences human movement patterns, with
implications for disease transmission within and between communities, and to
investigate how farming influences the movement and abundance of small mammals,
such as rats, that harbor infectious diseases that can spread to humans
(zoonoses). The interdisciplinary research team brings together experts from
ecology, evolutionary anthropology, sociology, mathematics, infectious diseases,
environmental sciences, and economics. The project supports several broader
impacts, which include student training in field ecology, social science, and
network science; developing a new Interdisciplinary Team Science Workshop; and
building international partnerships to enhance global health research. The
research team also develops methods to understand disease outbreaks and regional
transmission, identify how human land use affects mammals and their pathogens,
and provide critical public health information to rural communities. The
research investigates specific hypotheses for how market integration influences
pathogen transmission locally, the market factors that amplify infectious
disease risk regionally, and the specific agricultural activities that influence
transmission at different scales in human and animal hosts. A strength of the
research involves the integration of natural and social science approaches,
including collection of socioeconomic and demographic data, and assembling
ecological data on a wide array of zoonotic and human-specific infectious
diseases. The team applies new link prediction methods to compensate for missing
data, network methods from social sciences to identify epidemiological roles of
different individuals, and social-ecological network approaches to investigate
how human activities influence movement of small mammals and their pathogens.
These networks can assess how recent and future land use change influences
zoonotic disease transmission from small mammals into people and then within and
across communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.