* 2308400
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Quantifying the effects of ocean alkalinity enhancement on costal ecosystems and atmospheric carbon dioxide
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Zachary Quinlan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 314,324.00

Rapidly increasing investment over the past two years into carbon dioxide
removal technologies from the tech industry has accelerated the creation of
ocean alkalinity enhancement (OAE) companies which are already acting in natural
ecosystems. However, our understanding of olivine dissolution on atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) is still in its infancy. Moreover, no studies have
quantified the impact of olivine induced OAE on the benthic reef communities
which populate the OAE test sites. The goal of this proposal is to characterize
the effects of OAE on the functioning of the coral reef benthos and water
microbial community to design a framework for measurement, reporting and
verification. This proposal will evaluate the potential impacts on both the
environment and atmospheric CO2, through chemostat experiments, field surveys of
natural olivine beaches and biogeochemical modeling. Controlled chemostat
experiments will enable direct measurement of the olivine dissolution products
including secondary mineral precipitation and their effect on reef community
dynamics. The proposed research will contribute novel, fundamental knowledge to
understand: 1) quantification of the dissolution rate of olivine in an
ecologically relevant seawater system; 2) flux and rate of atmospheric CO2 in
response to olivine OAE; 4) impact on coral reef community function.

Although multiple studies have identified plausible off-target effects such as
the creation of toxic nickel as well as shifting the particle-associated
microbial community composition. Before more OAE companies are created and begin
impacting these vital reef ecosystems, these uncertainties and ecosystem impacts
must be quantified. This proposal aims to: 1) characterize the impact of OAE on
dominant reef benthic primary producers, their associated microbial communities,
and dissolved organic matter cycling; 2) quantify olivine dissolution rate in
reef ecosystems and the resultant drawdown of atmospheric CO2; 3) develop a
biogeochemical-hydrodynamic coupled model to predict the efficacy of olivine OAE
in open-ocean systems and quantify atmospheric CO2 removal on a regional scale;
4) develop new methodologies and criteria for measurement, verification and
reporting for OAE. This work has the potential to make transformative advances
in OAE and guide the scaling of this new industry to systems which are best
equipped to capture the most atmospheric CO2 without impacting other vital
ecosystems. This project addresses challenges addressed in the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine: Development of an empirical
framework for OAE, Assessment of the relationship between approach and
environmental impact development of robust measurement, reporting, and
verification strategies. Due to the immediate need of data and accurate models
for effective implementation of AOE, all data, field studies, and models will be
readily available through a github repository as soon as any data becomes
available, prior to publication.

This project is jointly funded by GEO/OCE Postdoctoral Fellowships Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.