* 2308273
* US-UK Collab: Integrating metaviromics with epidemiological dynamics: understanding virus transmission in the Anthropocene
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Barbara Han, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2028
* USD 487,210.00

This project will develop and test new methods for tracking RNA viruses in wild
rodent populations, which are important viral reservoirs worldwide because many
species live in close proximity to human populations and are highly responsive
to environmental change. Most emerging infectious diseases affecting humans,
including AIDS, influenza, and COVID-19, are caused by RNA viruses originating
from non-human animals. In recent years, these diseases have become more common
and widespread, a pattern frequently attributed to increasing environmental
change, notably the conversion of natural landscapes into agricultural and urban
environments. These changes have dramatically altered wild animal communities,
influencing how viruses circulate within these communities and simultaneously
increasing human exposure to new animal viruses. Seasonal variation and climate
change can also alter pathogen prevalence in wild animal populations and
influence disease risk. A critical barrier to controlling future viral outbreaks
is a lack of knowledge about how environmental change affects virus transmission
within wild animal populations and how, in turn, that affects human risk. This
project will investigate these gaps using established field studies in England
and Uganda that monitor wild rodent communities. Additionally, this project will
involve researchers in the United Kingdom and Uganda, and provide training for
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral scholars.

To tackle the practical challenges of studying viral transmission, researchers
will develop new tools to infer epidemiological dynamics and zoonotic risk from
increasingly accessible and low-cost host virome data. This flexible approach
will allow rapid discovery and monitoring of zoonotic viruses by enabling
epidemiological inferences from cross-sectional samples and guidance for
appropriate sampling strategies to interpret metaviromic data in new host
systems. Researchers will use a long-term capture-mark-recapture wild study in
Oxfordshire, UK, to determine how seasonal environmental change influences
rodent viral communities. Lastly, researchers will use field sites along land
cover gradient in Uganda to understand how physical environmental change
influences the risk of zoonotics in rodent communities. This fieldwork will
identify local and landscape drivers of zoonotic hazards and how humans change
behaviour to affect zoonotic risk across this gradient. Together, this research
will substantially improve our understanding of viral pathogens within key
reservoir hosts and identify important environmental drivers that increase
zoonotic risk.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.