* 2308877
* GOALI: Manufacturing Large, Diamond Single Crystals via High-Pressure, High-Temperature Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ilya Ponomarev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 442,800.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
supports research that contributes new knowledge related to diamond single
crystal manufacturing, promoting science and advancing national prosperity,
health, and security. Diamond single crystals have long been prized as gemstones
but have also shown great promise for new technical applications because of
their unique properties. While natural diamonds are formed from carbon in the
earthâ€™s crust at depths greater than 100 miles, these conditions can be mimicked
in the laboratory allowing synthetic diamond crystals of the highest quality to
be manufactured using the High-Pressure, High-Temperature growth process. This
grant supports fundamental research to improve this process so that single-
crystal diamonds can be manufactured in larger sizes, at ultra-high quality, and
for less cost, thus enabling application in optical elements for high-power
X-ray systems, as well as in devices for radiation detectors in nuclear reactors
and medical applications, power electronics, and quantum computing. Results from
this research will favorably impact economic competitiveness, and national
security. This research involves several disciplines including advanced
manufacturing, computational modeling, crystal growth, and materials science.
The multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden participation and positively
impacts engineering education.

Manufacturing processes employed to grow large, single crystals must achieve
atomic-level structural perfection while simultaneously maintaining yields that
are high enough to meet cost objectives. This project addresses the production
of single-crystal diamond via crystal growth in a High-Pressure, High-
Temperature system. This system has the capability to grow diamonds of the
highest crystalline quality. However, extreme pressure (5 GPa) and temperature
(1,500 K) make direct, in situ diagnostics of growth impossible and modeling a
vital tool for process improvement. This project develops and applies novel
computational models based on thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport to better
understand the fundamental mechanisms responsible for single-crystal diamond
growth in the High-Pressure, High-Temperature system. These models are validated
via growth experiments conducted by GOALI partner, Euclid Beamlabs, LLC, and
applied to improve manufacturing outcomes, such as large crystal size and
increased growth rate. An important goal is to avoid process conditions leading
to inclusions, which are micron-sized defects containing metallic solvent
trapped during growth. Multi-scale models describe steps of atomic height that
move across the facets of the growing diamond and predict when an equidistant
train of steps destabilizes to form bunches, triggering inclusion formation.
Understanding the onset of bunching thus allows innovative growth strategies,
such as time-dependent tilting of the system, to be assessed by modeling and
tested using experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.