* 2308879
* NSF-BSF: Mechanism of Cuticle Remodeling by Hypoxia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Pamela Padilla, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 495,029.00

The skin is a line of defense between an animal’s interior and the external
world, and the structure and function of the skin affects organismal survival.
This research investigates how skin structure and function change in response to
low oxygen conditions (hypoxia) and will elucidate the underlying biological
mechanisms involved. Plastic responses and adaptation to low oxygen are
important for understanding respiration and organ stability and function.
Moreover, since many animals live in habitats where oxygen levels fluctuate
(e.g., in water or underground burrows), this research will help understand how
animals survive in challenging ecological niches. This study will test the
hypothesis that environmental hypoxia impacts skin permeability and will
identify specific molecules and regulatory processes involved, in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. Like all animals, C. elegans is covered with skin, and
the outermost skin layer is called the cuticle. The cuticle layer is rich with
collagen proteins, which are common proteins in the animal kingdom but can be
difficult to study because of the many varieties. This project will expand the
understanding of collagen and other proteins that regulate collagen structure
and function, and the effects on skin structure and function. The researchers
will expand their community outreach activities by developing and disseminating
podcasts and educational videos that communicate scientific research results and
highlight the contributions of individuals from different backgrounds to
scientific studies; communications will be made available in four different
languages. This collaboration supported by the NSF-BSF program will provide a
fruitful platform for research exchanges between students and postdoctoral
fellows in the United States and Israel.

Skin is a multifunctional organ that serves as a barrier and a communication
interface between an animal’s interior and the external environment. A central
component of the skin is a three-dimensional network of biological molecules,
the extracellular matrix, which is composed of proteins, including many forms of
collagen. The objective is to understand how hypoxia affects the structure and
function of the skin and decipher the cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying these processes, using C. elegans as a model. Two hypotheses will be
tested: (1) the cuticle structure is remodeled and modified in response to
hypoxia; (2) Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1 (HIF-1) regulates cuticle structure in a
proline-hydroxylation-dependent manner, via post-translational modification. The
project will assess the impact hypoxia has on cuticle remodeling using genetic,
cellular, and physiological analyses; compare the protein composition of the
cuticle in animals exposed to hypoxia or normoxia using targeted proteomics
analysis; and determine the mechanism by which HIF-1 controls cuticle remodeling
in hypoxia using biochemical, imaging, and genetic approaches. The proposed
research could have a transformative impact on the understanding of the role
skin plays in adjusting and adapting to fluctuating environmental oxygen levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.