* 2308885
* Conference: AGN Winds on the Chesapeake
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Tracey Jane Turner, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 44,760.00

All massive galaxies are known to possess super massive black holes (SMBH) in
their gravitational centers. When fueled by in-falling gas, these SMBH systems
generate huge amounts of radiation across the electromagnetic spectrum and,
often, powerful radio jets, forming an active galactic nucleus (AGN). The
emitted radiation accelerates powerful AGN winds which interact with gas in the
host galaxy. This form of interaction, or AGN feedback, is thought to be a
crucial phase in the formation and evolution of galaxies. However, many aspects
of the physics of AGN winds remain unanswered. The way to make progress in
answering these critical questions is to bring AGN researchers together for an
open exchange of ideas. Therefore, the PIs are holding a dedicated conference,
â€œAGN Winds on the Chesapeake'' at the Tidewater Inn, Easton, MD, 11-16 June
2023. The PIs will actively encourage and fund the participation of younger
researchers, including post-docs and graduate students, with an emphasis on
women and under-represented groups. These young scientists will have the chance
to present their results on an equal footing with the most senior researchers in
the field.

The PIs aim to bring together more than 80 experts and young scientists with the
goal of imparting state-of-the-field knowledge to the next generation of AGN
researchers. This is of particular importance with the advent of new data from
the James Webb Space Telescope, and the imminent launch of a new X-ray
observatory, the X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission. Beyond these missions,
the next great observatories, such as LUVOIR and Lynx, will be launched after
2030. Therefore, it is the younger generation of AGN researchers who will be
making new advancements with these platforms. The proposed conference will be
focused on key astrophysical questions around AGN winds. Among these are: the
transfer of material and energy between the black hole and host galaxy; the
fundamental parameters of the accretion process fueling the black hole; and the
role of radio jets in entrained feedback. The presentations, which will be
invaluable for guiding future research, will be disseminated to the greater AGN
research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.