* 2308922
* Quantum Dynamics with Nuclear Quantum Effects: a Hhierarchical Methodology for Large Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sophya Garashchuk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 530,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Sophya Garashchuk of the University of
South Carolina will develop theoretical and computational methods incorporating
the quantum behavior of the nuclei within molecules and materials. This research
aims to gain in-depth understanding of the properties of molecular assemblies
and nanomaterials and their interactions with light, electric current and heat
through the first-principles modeling and theoretical analysis, spanning several
orders of magnitude in time and space. The developed methodology will be applied
to experimental systems, helping to elucidate the intrinsic mechanisms of
chemical reactivity and charge and energy transfer, and to predict the rates of
such processes. Modeling system properties and responses to external stimuli,
such as temperature, electric and magnetic fields, will guide experiment,
accelerating the development of new materials and molecular devices for wide-
range applications from fuel cells to catalysis, to quantum technologies.
Professor Garashchuk's research and educational activities will contribute to
the development of the emerging quantum information science and technology work
force. She will actively promote computational chemistry tools in education and
research among students and scientists at her university and at predominantly
undergraduate institutions in the state of South Carolina. Her research group
will participate in K-12 science demonstrations and science showcases
highlighting the role of chemistry in the forefront scientific advances and in
everyday technologies. These activities will broaden participation of the
underrepresented groups in research and communicate STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) achievements to the general public of South
Carolina, a state geographically underrepresented in the global research
enterprise.

The theoretical framework being developed under this award will include a
quantum mechanical description of light nuclei, such as protons, ubiquitous in
aqueous solutions and biological and nanodevice environments. Because of the
exponential scaling of the numerical cost, this rigorous treatment is feasible
for just a few nuclei, and it will be reserved for the chemically active light
nuclei. This level of description will be merged with the classical
representations of the larger molecular environment affecting the energy and
charge flow due to small amplitude nuclear motion and structural rearrangements.
This hierarchical approach will be based on the time-dependent Gaussian bases
tailored to an evolving wavefunction for the fully quantum nuclei, integrated
with a simplified quantum (e. g. thawed Gaussian) description of the heavy
nuclei, compatible with on-the-fly electronic structure evaluation, and will be
extended to electronically nonadiabatic processes. Garashchuk will also develop
nuclear-subspace factorized electron-nuclear dynamics based on probability
density continuity. This formalism will be used to target molecular dynamics
involving a large number of electronic states coupled through nuclear motion and
external fields, e.g. molecule/nanoparticle systems. In the area of education
and broader impacts, Garashchuk will train junior researchers in theoretical,
computational chemistry, and high-performance computing; she will facilitate use
of computational chemistry tools by experimental colleagues through formal
teaching and collaborative projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.