* 2308440
* Interplay Between Data and Partial Differential Equation Models Through the Lens of Kinetic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Qin Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 288,303.00

Systems composed of numerous interacting particles are ubiquitous in various
domains. For instance, the air we breathe consists of a multitude of molecules,
such as interacting nitrogen and oxygen, plasma fusion energy relies on large
quantities of interacting plasma particles, and semiconductors involve the flow
of interacting ions and electrons. The comprehensive study of these interacting
particle systems is encompassed by the universal mathematical framework known as
kinetic theory. This theory serves as the fundamental basis for understanding
and tackling engineering challenges in these fields. The primary focus of this
research project is to investigate kinetic theory through an integrated approach
that combines differential-equation analysis with data science techniques. By
doing so, the project aims not only to unravel the mathematical properties of
the equations involved but also to accurately determine parameter values by
integrating experimental data. In addition to advancing our understanding of
pure mathematics, this project holds significant societal benefits by providing
rigorous mathematical justifications for a specific set of experiments conducted
in national labs and the plasma fusion energy industry. As part of this
endeavor, early career researchers, including two graduate students and one
postdoc, will receive training, all of whom belong to underrepresented groups in
STEM fields, which will help to promote the diverse workforce.

The investigator will adopt two approaches. Firstly, data science tools, such as
Bayesian sampling and PDE-constrained optimization, will be utilized to infer
unknown parameters in kinetic equations. This falls naturally into the framework
of inverse problems, where the aim is to determine the possible dynamics of a
system by observing certain features in a non-intrusive manner. Secondly, the
investigator will explore the application of kinetic theory tools, particularly
mean-field theory and gradient flow analysis, to analyze machine learning
algorithms that involve the simulation of many-particle systems. Through these
combined efforts, the project not only aims to advance mathematical studies
driven by intellectual curiosity but also seeks to push the boundaries of
mathematics, computer science, and engineering for integrated scientific
progress through the lens of kinetic theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.