* 2308642
* Conservation of chromatin recruitment mechanisms in metazoan DNA replication licensing factors
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Matthew Parker, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 367,500.00

Life requires the faithful transmission of genetic information from parents to
offspring through replication of genomic DNA. All animals must replicate their
DNA, yet the proteins required for replication differ substantially between
animals. This project will investigate similarities and differences in DNA
replication across the animal kingdom by studying the process in evolutionarily
ancient and more modern animals. The studies will extend from sea sponge to
humans and should clarify how DNA replication is initiated and how evolution
might result in differences in replication proteins while still maintaining
their function. The project will also provide summer research opportunities to
community college students who would not otherwise have the opportunity to train
in an academic laboratory at an R1 institution. This broader impacts program is
specifically aimed at increasing minority participation in science and
encouraging student transition to four-year STEM degree and Ph.D. programs.

The first step in DNA replication is loading of the replicative helicase, Mcm2-7
onto chromatin. This licensing process requires three proteins: Orc1-6, Cdc6,
and Cdt1. Fly Orc1 possesses an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) that is
necessary and sufficient for chromatin recruitment in vivo and mediates DNA-
dependent phase separation in vitro. These activities are negatively regulated
by phosphorylation. Interestingly, while all metazoan Orc1 orthologs possess
IDRs, these regions are highly variable in length and lack linear sequence
similarity, raising questions about functional conservation. Orc1 IDR orthologs
do share similar amino acid composition, leading to the hypothesis that sequence
composition may define the functions of this IDR class. This hypothesis will be
tested by studies that investigate in vitro DNA binding and in vivo chromatin
recruitment activity of different Orc1 IDR orthologs. The outcomes are expected
to advance understanding of the conservation of replication licensing mechanisms
and will also broadly inform the study of intrinsically disordered proteins by
developing the concept of compositional homology, which may be applicable to
many IDR classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.