* 2308737
* Preferences, strategies, and policies for net zero carbon electricity products
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mahelet Fikru, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Preferences, strategies, and policies for net-zero carbon electricity products

A growing number of jurisdictions are improving legislative frameworks and
designing financial incentives to encourage multiple net-zero emission
technologies in order to reduce the environmental impact of electricity
generation. However, electricity generation remains a significant contributor to
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. For example, 60% of electricity is still
produced from burning fossil fuels. Carbon capture technologies have the
potential to enable a sustainable electricity system, by capturing large
quantities of carbon dioxide for permanent geological storage or utilization in
industrial processes. Even if this technology is fast improving, only a handful
of power generators have invested in carbon capture, utilization, and storage
(CCUS) at a commercial scale. This is due to uncertainties in investment rate of
return and other types of barriers (e.g., regulatory, institutional, public
opposition, etc.). Moreover, carbon capture is not a stand-alone solution to
achieving a net-zero electricity product. Producing net-zero electricity also
requires a substantial shift away from fossil to renewable energy sources to
produce carbon-free energy, in part due to consumer preferences for cleaner and
greener sources of electricity. Recent studies also suggest that the rising
competition from renewable energy technologies could create obstacles for the
large-scale deployment of CCUS technologies. The degree of strategic
relationship between investments in CCUS technologies versus renewable energy
technologies is poorly understood. It is not yet known what combinations of
these two technologies would help the nation achieve climate change goals cost-
effectively. Most importantly, while consumer preference for greener energy is
fairly understood, it is not well known to what extent energy consumers value
the net-zero attribute of electricity achieved via CCUS technologies rather than
through cleaner production. Moreover, policies designed to incentivize one
investment could potentially alter incentives in the other market.

This research advances our understanding of what factors are likely to have a
significant impact on investment decisions regarding the adoption of one or
multiple carbon mitigation technologies among power generators. This research
also provides insights into the public’s preference for CCUS over renewable
energy to achieve climate change goals in the energy industry. Policymakers will
benefit from understanding potential trade-offs or synergies resulting from
incentivizing multiple technologies at different levels. The research develops a
conceptual framework where net-zero electricity can be achieved through cleaner
production, CCUS, or a combination of both, and this product/service is
differentiated from a traditional electricity product. Under this framework, the
research team examines individual preferences for net-zero electricity products
and the means of achieving it; uses economic efficiency criteria to evaluate
alternative policy approaches that incentivize investments in multiple carbon
mitigation strategies; and studies the strategic behavior of power generators
when comparing the option to invest in cleaner production versus carbon capture
technologies. Research objectives are achieved by administering surveys and
developing economic models of optimization. Surveys are used to understand the
public’s preference for carbon mitigation technologies (carbon capture,
renewable production) and the means of achieving net-zero energy goals. The
economic model features power generators and their investment decisions given
market, technical, and policy parameters. The model predicts how generators are
expected to respond to changes in climate policies and changes in investment
costs. The research provides a theoretical foundation and an evidence-based
solution that can be used by power generators to make investment decisions that
are consistent with consumer preferences. The study also informs policymaking by
identifying approaches that are likely to be cost-effective in addressing
broader decarbonization and energy transition goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.