* 2308744
* AF:Small: Transformation of Mathematical Games: Quantum Inspiration
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Shanghua Teng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 192,731.00

This research project seeks to understand deep strategic reasoning in
mathematical board games. These games -- like their real-world counterparts:
Tic-Tac-Toe, Chess, GO -- usually have elegant and succinct rulesets. These
rulesets are often inspired by practical phenomena, and distill fundamental
mathematical structures from graph theory, logic, topology, etc. As a result,
research on them is highly interdisciplinary. Mathematical board games require
deep strategic reasoning (about long alternation down to the last level of their
game trees), making them more challenging in general than traditional
decision/optimization problems. Thus, mathematical board games are also deeply
connected with a wide range of computational complexity classes. This research
project will develop theory and algorithms for a new subarea of mathematical
board games where quantum-inspired principles based on superposition and
entanglement are incorporated into game rulesets. The quantum-inspired
transformation introduces intriguing strategic options and hence impacts the
outcome and complexity of these games. This research project also involves the
mentorship of PhD students. The recreational nature of mathematical games in
this project will also help engage students of all levels (including K-12) to
broaden their participation in mathematical and computational thinking.

The specific goals of this project are to characterize the impact of quantum-
inspired rules on a broad family of combinatorial games. At a high level, the
quantum-inspired transformation can be viewed as an operator on mathematical
games, introducing superpositions of “classical moves.” Mathematically, it
expands the strategic-decision space by creating a superposition of “entangled
classical game positions,” introducing “nondeterminism” into traditional games.
Philosophically, the new framework models real-world online decision phenomena
in which multiple future scenarios might still be achievable. However, the
decision in each step may expand possibilities while eliminating others. In
other words, the consequence of each decision is multifaceted. The impact of
this operator to the complexity of the games is highly nonmonotonic, which
provides a rich subject for complexity-theoretical characterization. In
addition, another goal of this research is to explore other forms of
nondeterminism in mathematical games and expand a matching-theory-based
algorithmic technique to these deep-logic strategic decision problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.