* 2308730
* CAREER: Privacy Preserving Security Analytics: When Security Meets Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yuan Hong, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 280,535.00

A fast-growing number of enterprises and organizations have outsourced their
security analytics tasks to external managed security service providers (MSSPs)
for security monitoring and threat detection. However, such cost-effective and
reliable security solutions currently request their service tenants to
continuously outsource their large-scale and disparate datasets. This project
tackles the privacy risks in such security analytics outsourcing services with
rigorous privacy guarantees.

This project aims to create a new paradigm of privacy preserving data analysis
to privately perform real-time anomaly detection on both structured and
unstructured data (e.g., network traffic, surveillance videos, system logs, and
emails). The main goal is to fundamentally advance differential privacy and
secure multiparty computation in this new context of privacy preserving security
analytics. To this end, we propose novel differential privacy mechanisms and
secure multiparty computation protocols, explore provable privacy guarantees
with theoretical studies, and deploy the privacy preserving techniques in
scalable real-time systems. After addressing the fundamental challenges for
mitigating privacy risks in a wide variety of data and applications while
ensuring high utility and efficiency, the expected research results can be
leveraged to many other online monitoring and analysis applications. This
project also integrates the research and education at intersections of privacy,
security and data analysis. It develops a comprehensive educational and outreach
program, including cybersecurity workforce training, educational materials
development and distribution, K-12 outreach, and research dissemination to
broader communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.