* 2308750
* Early-Stage Clinical Trials with Patient Choice
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amin Khademi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 361,459.00

This project investigates mathematical approaches for designing efficient
mechanisms for early-stage clinical trials. Early-stage clinical trials aim to
establish safe and therapeutic doses of an investigational drug for subsequent
clinical trial phases. Because little is known in advance about the toxicity
profile of investigational drugs, current approaches to early-stage trials
employ dose-escalation methods, in which consecutive groups of patients receive
increasing doses until dose-limiting toxicities are observed. This practice
often results in significant challenges in recruiting and retaining patients, as
many patients perceive the benefits of participation to be low. For example,
terminally ill patients who have exhausted all other options often volunteer for
early trials, in which the doses prescribed are low and nontherapeutic, whereas
relatively healthy patients may postpone their involvement to wait for more
information on dosing safety and efficacy. Overly conservative dose-escalation
methods often result in substantial trial delays and expense, with little gain
in patient safety. This project studies the effect on trial safety and efficacy
of allowing limited patient input based on individual patient risk preferences
to guide dosage decisions. The PIs aim to involve both undergraduate students
(through Clemson's Creative Inquiry learning program) and graduate students in
the research, through both coursework and research support.

The project introduces a new class of dynamic dose-selection games with learning
that integrate evolving patient preferences and beliefs about dose efficiency
and dose toxicity with optimal stopping rules to determine when evidence
converges on acceptable dosage to move to later trials. The research plan
employs a pseudo-market mechanism that addresses a novel exploration-and-
efficiency tradeoff created by delegating the centralized dose allocation
decision to self-interested agents (patients and their physicians), while the
central authority evaluates the results of study data. Methods are investigated
to resolve potential conflicts between allocation efficiency (maximizing current
participantsâ€™ utility) and exploration (maximizing the general population
utility) so as to maximize learning, explore the dose-range uniformly, and avoid
concentration within a small dosage range.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.