* 2308754
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Stress in Human Crowd Dynamics during Emergency Situations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jennifer MacCormack, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 421,500.00

This grant seeks to understand how stress spreads among people who are
evacuating from a space. Evacuating a space quickly and safely during an
emergency has life-saving consequences, but it is known that feeling stressed
impacts a person’s ability to exit a building quickly. Less understood is how
one’s own stress state can contagiously spread to others in a group, potentially
exacerbating group stress levels and efficient group movement. This award
supports experimental and mathematical research that addresses this complex
problem. Experiments with small and large groups will be performed in a
controlled space where people’s motion, stress physiology, e.g., heart rate, and
emotions will be carefully measured with the aim of determining stress contagion
effects on the group. Experimental data will then be examined with computer-
based methods to find patterns in how a person’s physiology and emotional state
influence their own evacuation behaviors, as well as the stress states and
evacuation behaviors of others in the group. These results will then be used to
create and test a model that predicts the behavior of an evacuating crowd in
high-stress scenarios. This model will offer insight into the complex factors
that govern how humans move together under stress, which can inform crowd
management strategies to ensure that people interact safely and efficiently with
both peers and their environments. Importantly, the mathematical model can be
used to test how people behave in scenarios that are unfeasible in laboratory
experiments, but which can occur during real emergencies. The project team
includes a diverse group of researchers from engineering, mathematics, and
psychology to address this challenge while training students and a post-doc as a
part of an interdisciplinary collaboration. Research results will be shared via
peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and informal public
science experiences at local science fairs.

Existing mathematical models, while able to qualitatively match the overall
motion of an evacuating crowd, they can only partially replicate an individual’s
movement, suggesting that they lack critical variables. This project will use
state-of-the-art facilities that track multiple people’s positions, with multi-
modal measures which index physiological and emotional states, to reconstruct an
individual’s stress state and its influence on others’ stress and movement
dynamics with high fidelity. Bridging insights across mathematics, engineering,
and psychology, this project will clarify the role of physiological and
emotional factors–specifically, stress states and contagion–in group dynamics
during emergency evacuation. First, multi-modal data from pedestrian experiments
will be collected. Information-theoretic analyses of experimental data will
quantify the flow of stress information within the evacuating crowd across
multiple dynamic features. This will allow dissection of causal influences
between stress state, both physiological and emotional, stress contagion, and
movement. These relationships will inform a novel agent-based model that
includes individuals’ stress features, calibrated to experiments. Model
predictions will be tested in further experiments with large crowds. This
validated model will provide an ethical proxy for evacuation experiments without
inducing undue high stress.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.