* 2308767
* Microwave Atom Chip Traps for Atom Interferometry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Seth Aubin, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 768,735.00

This interdisciplinary project will design, construct, and characterize atom
interferometers based on ultracold trapped atoms on a microwave atom chip. Atom
interferometers are the most sensitive force measuring devices ever constructed.
Notably, they are particularly well suited for precision measurements and
detection of electric and magnetic fields, gravity, and inertial forces, such as
accelerations and rotations. Applications of atom interferometers include
inertial navigation in a GPS-denied environment, remote sensing of underground
and underwater structures, measuring atom-surface forces, and searching for
deviations of the gravitational force from the inverse square law. While most
atom interferometers operate with freely propagating atoms, one of the main
scientific goals of this project is to develop and evaluate atom interferometers
based on atoms trapped on an atom chip device, ideal for building a compact,
fieldable sensor. Furthermore, the project will control these atoms using AC
Zeeman potentials (based on rapidly oscillating magnetic fields) a novel and
little explored quantum control mechanism for applying forces on atoms using
microwave fields generated in the vicinity of an atom chip. Graduate and
undergraduate student researchers will be trained in atom interferometry,
ultracold atom technologies, microwave engineering, and micro-fabrication
techniques, as well as in the broadly enabling sciences of atomic and optical
physics. This interdisciplinary project is a collaborative effort between
ultracold quantum physicists at William & Mary and microfabrication engineers at
Virginia Commonwealth University.

More specifically, this project will construct ultracold trapped atom
interferometers that are based on microwave AC Zeeman traps and potentials
generated by a microwave atom chip. The research uses an interdisciplinary
approach that combines materials science advances, microfabrication, and
microwave engineering to fundamentally enhance spin-specific quantum control of
ultracold atoms for trapping and interferometry. A major objective of this
project is the microfabrication of a microwave atom chip: The chip uses a novel
thin substrate of aluminum nitride, which has a large dielectric constant and
high thermal conductivity, for generating strong microwave near fields.
Furthermore, AC Zeeman potentials offer a transformational mechanism for spin-
specific manipulation of ultracold atoms, and a major thrust of the project is
to implement and study atom chip-based microwave AC Zeeman traps and evaluate
their suitability for spin-dependent atom interferometry. Notably, the project
will study the stability of trapped atomic spin states, the smoothness of the
trapping potential, the application of additional microwave and radio-frequency
dressing fields for sculpting complex potentials, and the viability of more
compact chip structures. Finally, the project will investigate the use of
microwave lattices for enhanced trapping and interferometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.