* 2308725
* CRCNS US-France Research Proposal: Neural computations of adaptive temporal integration in auditory cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Sam Norman-Haignere, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 10/31/2028
* USD 769,112.00

People are remarkably skilled at perceiving and understanding complex sounds
such as speech and music. Yet, the brain mechanisms that allow people to
perceive complex sounds remain poorly understood. A key challenge faced by the
brain is that sounds are organized across a vast range of timescales from
milliseconds to seconds and minutes. To derive information from sound, the brain
must have mechanisms for flexibly integrating information across these diverse
timescales. Understanding these mechanisms is critical to understanding how
people understand speech, perceive music, and navigate the world using sound. In
this project, researchers aim to use computational models to understand how
ferret cortex processes multiple types of sound at multiple timescales. The
researchers also plan to give lectures, conduct outreach, and mentor
undergraduates publicize the results and foster the unique skills needed for
this type of cutting-edge research.

The proposed project investigates possible mechanisms the brain might use to
flexibly integration information. A key question the researchers investigate is
whether the brain can change the time window it integrates information over
depending on the duration of sound “structures” such as words in speech. They
aim to test whether the brain can change its integration window over short and
long timescales, and whether this flexibility depends on the types of sounds
that one hears and their behavioral relevance. They intend to study these
questions using neural recordings from the auditory cortex, a new paradigm for
studying temporal integration in the brain, and computational models derived
from deep neural networks.

This project is funded jointly by the Cognitive Neuroscience Program in the
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Directorate and the Neural Systems
Cluster in the Biological Sciences Directorate. A companion project is being
funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.