* 2308352
* Collaborative Research: High Contrast Imaging at the Photon Noise Limit: On-Sky Validation of Speckle Reconstruction from WFS Telemetry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Richard Frazin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 238,354.00

Imaging extrasolar planets is challenging. Planets are typically one hundred
thousand to ten billion times fainter than their host stars. Taking pictures of
such planets requires nearly perfect control of light. Starlight is blocked
using optical devices called "coronagraphs". Ground-based telescopes must deal
with the additional problem of turbulence in the Earth's atmosphere. Turbulence
causes the stars to twinkle, and telescopes remove this twinkle using a
technique called "Adaptive Optics". Finally, image processing is performed to
find the exoplanet signal in the noise. Current instruments do not image the
faintest possible planets because they are limited by “speckles”, which are
created by imperfections in all of the above steps. However not all the
available information is currently used when analyzing such images. Nearly all
image processing methods use only the science images themselves. This creates
many biases and artifacts. This is especially true close to the star, where most
planets can be found. The goal of this project is to find more planets by using
all the combined information. Software will be written for two existing
instruments, which will be used by astronomers to analyze their images. This
software will be written to be easy to use and made freely available to
astronomers. Students will be involved at both participating institutions.

Direct imaging characterization of exoplanets has so far been limited to young,
hot, and massive planets orbiting relatively far from their stars. Such planets
are observable due to their intrinsic self-luminosity generated as they continue
to cool after formation. Many more planets are observable if the inner working
angle can be improved. Moreover, improving the sensitivity limit of high-
contrast imaging will enable the characterization of fainter, lower-mass
planets. The key to enabling more sensitive post-processing is to use the data
simultaneously recorded by the suite of wavefront sensors (WFSs) in a modern
high-contrast imaging system. These include the main high-order WFS as well as
coronagraph low-order and focal plane WFS. The investigators, with the
assistance of a post-doctoral researcher, will implement algorithms based on
existing proofs of concept, test and validate these algorithms with lab and on-
sky data, and deploy the software systems on the MagAO-X and SCExAO instruments.
These two extreme-AO coronagraphic instruments share a common software framework
and there is collaboration between the instrument teams. This system will be
deployed so that users can use it to reduce their data to achieve the highest
possible sensitivity at small separations. Making a telemetry-based post-
processing system available on current generation instruments will dramatically
improve their sensitivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.