* 2308846
* Generation of A High-Density, Axially Homogeneous Helicon Plasma for the AWAKE Wakefield Accelerator Project
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Oliver Schmitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This award supports a study of a novel method to accelerate particles to very
high energies using plasma as the accelerating medium. Acceleration of
elementary particles to high energies entails creating high electric fields in
which these particles can reach velocities close to the speed of light. In this
project, a plasma - an ionized gas of electrically charged particles - is used
to create very strong electric fields that can accelerate particles to such high
velocities. The technology to create this plasma with the right features is
unique and involves controlling the plasma column to make it very uniform for
several hundred meters. The project aims to develop this technology and provide
it for the design process for a new type of particle accelerator at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research, known as CERN. The award supports graduate
and undergraduate students, including collaborative student travel to the CERN
facility. The plasma generation for the planned particle accelerator entails
utilizing radio-frequency waves known as Whistler waves. This approach, called
helicon plasma generation, was developed several decades ago and is known to
create plasma with very high efficiency. In this project, the helicon plasma
source technology is qualified for application in wakefield particle
acceleration as a next-generation particle accelerator technology. Advanced,
laser-based spectroscopic methods to measure plasma density are established and
used together with state-of-the-art finite element modeling of the wave
propagation and measurements of these characteristics using a microwave
interferometer and magnetic probes. These efforts establish the basis for the
design of a plasma source prototype for the Advanced Proton Driven Plasma
Wakefield Acceleration Experiment (AWAKE) project at CERN. The axial plasma
density profile for the AWAKE project has to be homogeneous within 0.25%, an
unprecedented goal to reach with this plasma source. If successful, the plasma
source will reduce the length of next-generation linear accelerators by a factor
of 20-30, and hence may have a major impact on system complexity and cost for
future accelerator-based high energy particle physics studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.