* 2308299
* DISES: Restoring Indigenous Socio-Environmental Systems (RISES)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrea Brunelle, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,599,707.00

Indigenous practices influenced plant and animal distributions across the planet
for thousands of years. Research shows that biodiversity and ecosystem health
are often higher where Indigenous socio-environmental systems (SES) persist. Yet
in many locations around the world, including North America, these dynamics were
interrupted by colonial invasions. Centuries of intensive agriculture and
industrial activities have altered ecosystems and eroded traditional
relationships between Indigenous people and ecosystems. In this project a
multidisciplinary team develops a framework for Restoring Indigenous Socio-
Environmental Systems (RISES). This framework is applied to a restoration effort
on Tribal land. The restoration is led by the Northwestern Band of the Shoshone
Nation in the Bear River Basin. The team is quantifying long-term Indigenous SES
dynamics. They are modeling the drivers of SES change that are critical for
conservation goals. That information is being disseminated to land managers and
the public. In addition, the project trains many tribal youth, undergraduate,
and graduate students.

Uncovering past Indigenous SES dynamics is being accomplished through a
convergence of enduring traditional knowledge, community ecology, historical
ecology, archaeology, and paleoecology. Restoration of the dynamics takes place
with the collaboration and shared leadership of Indigenous communities. These
communities are typically left out of restoration projects to the detriment of
both social and environmental systems. This project develops a generalizable
convergence framework. That framework quantifies long-term socio-environmental
dynamics, evaluates the drivers of change in the system, and synthesizes
findings. It does so using statistical and process-based models that include
estimates of uncertainty to evaluate the potential efficacy of alternative
restoration scenarios under future climate regimes. Finally, it leverages the
findings to engage community members, Indigenous secondary and university
students, and land managers, all within a collaborative framework of shared
knowledge generation and problem solving. Drawing on long-standing and emerging
hypotheses across the natural and behavioral sciences, the project evaluates the
drivers of SES dynamics. These include the role of gradual vs. stochastic
processes on SES stability, resilience, and tipping points. They are being
integrated in a framework capable of forecasting with estimates of uncertainty
under future climate scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.