* 2308377
* New developments in inverse theory for differential equation networks: from trees to general graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sergei Avdonin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

This project intends to develop inverse theory for differential equation
networks, also called quantum graphs. Network-like structures play a fundamental
role in many problems of science and engineering. Classically, these models were
used to describe bridges, space structures, antennas, transmission-line posts,
steel-grid reinforcements and other typical objects of civil engineering. More
recently, these models are being used to model phenomena on a much smaller
scale, including hierarchical materials like ceramic or metallic foams,
percolation networks and carbon and graphene nano-tubes, and graphene ribbons.
While inverse theory of differential equation networks is important for all
aforementioned applications, it has not, however, been sufficiently developed.
This project will develop the inverse theory of general differential equation
networks, or, quantum graphs, with a focus on inverse spectral and dynamical
problems for the wave, heat, Schrodinger, Dirac and other differential equations
which are important for applications in physics and engineering. At least two
Ph.D. students will take an active part in the project, and a new graduate
course on this topic will be developed.

Inverse problems for quantum graphs have previously been studied almost
exclusively on trees, that is, graphs without cycles. This project will consider
quantum graphs with cycles, targeting more broadly applicable differential
equation networks. Along with unknown coefficients of the equations, the
topology of the graph and its geometrical parameters will be recovered. The
proposed approach to solving inverse problems for quantum graphs with cycles
will combine spectral and dynamical methods. It will use the boundary control
method in inverse theory, which exploits deep connections between
controllability and identifiability of dynamical systems and a recently
developed leaf-peeling method for solving inverse problems on trees. Extension
of these methods to differential equations on general graphs will require new
developments of the boundary control and leaf peeling methods as well as results
and methods of combinatorial graph theory, partial differential equations,
spectral analysis, and nonharmonic Fourier series. Controllability results for
the corresponding partial differential equations on general graphs with cycles
will be also obtained. Numerical algorithms for solving control and inverse
problems for general differential equation networks will be developed, and
extensive numerical experiments will be performed to validate their
effectiveness. This project is jointly funded by the Applied Mathematics Program
in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.