* 2308946
* ECLIPSE: Ultrafast Ionization, Heating, Thermalization and Constriction of High-Pressure Nanosecond Pulsed Discharge Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Peter Bruggeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 302,490.00

This award supports implementation of a novel measurement technique for
atmospheric pressure discharge plasmas. Atmospheric pressure plasma - a
partially ionized gas - has many potential applications, including the removal
of volatile organic compounds through gas cleaning, lean ignition of combustion
engines, and control of high-speed flows. The capability to extend and broaden
the potential of atmospheric pressure plasmas for addressing societal needs is
currently limited by our ability to generate these plasmas in a controlled and
reproducible manner. Better understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the
occurrence of instabilities in atmospheric pressure pulsed plasma discharges is
key to improving control of these processes. This project will perform state-of-
the-art laser diagnostics complemented with numerical simulations to investigate
the instabilities. This project will also support the development of hands-on
plasma experiments for upper elementary school students and implementation of a
networking and mentoring session for undergraduate students at the 2025
International Symposium on Plasma Chemistry.

This research project aims to investigate the mechanisms of the fast transition
from partially ionized atmospheric pressure discharges to fully ionized thermal
spark discharges on nanosecond time scales by developing a suite of ultrafast
optical diagnostics. The study will produce new insights in the plasma physics
of nanosecond repetitively pulsed discharges (NRPs) with quantitative analysis
of ultrafast ionization and thermalization. An important goal is to test
theoretical models proposing a role of strongly coupled phenomena in the
observed plasma heating. In addition, the large range of ionization degrees and
plasma temperatures encountered in NRPs will be leveraged to assess the
applicability of several optical diagnostics in the partially and fully ionized
plasma regimes. The outcomes of this study are expected to lead to new insights
on electron kinetics, heating and thermalization mechanisms responsible for the
occurrence of instabilities in atmospheric pressure plasmas. The project is
performed in collaboration with the Luxembourg Institute of Science & Technology
supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.