* 2308537
* Assembly, disassembly, and mechanics of porous colloidal vesicles
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical description Forming an enclosed edgeless capsule or vesicle from
thin soap-like membranes is a process of fundamental importance that permeates
fields as diverse as physics, biology, engineering, and materials science. For
example, as they infect a cell, biological viruses pass through and are
enveloped by a deformable cellular membrane. However, observing the formation of
closed capsules in conventional materials such as cellular membranes is highly
challenging. The reason is that such highly dynamical processes occur on very
fast time scales and nanometer length scales that are not easily visualized with
even the most powerful microscopes. Colloidal membranes provide a model
experimental system that shares many common characteristics with cellular
membranes, yet are about a thousand times larger and thus easier to study.
Combining the unique features of colloidal membranes with state-of-the-art
optical microscopy will allow for visualizing the process of vesicle formation
in real time with molecular-level resolution. Furthermore, using the same
technique will reveal how a closed colloidal vesicle falls apart through a
cascading process of repeating nucleation of transient pores and their
subsequent self-healing. Chemical crosslinking of colloidal vesicles provides a
unique opportunity to create a porous membrane that can be used for size-
selective filtration and targeted delivery of various nanosized cargoes. The
experimental efforts will be integrated with rigorous training and mentoring in
interdisciplinary biomaterial sciences to graduate and undergraduate students.
The project will also encourage underrepresented groups to pursue work in STEM-
related fields by providing them with research opportunities and will raise
general awareness of the importance of scientific research to broader
communities. Technical description Colloidal membranes are liquid-like
monolayers that spontaneously assemble from one-micron-long filamentous viruses
of uniform length. The continuum deformations of both colloidal monolayer and
lipid bilayers are described by the same class of continuum elastic models
proposed by Helfrich. Thus, colloidal membranes provide a unique opportunity to
elucidate the universal behaviors of all membrane-based materials. Ultra-fast
three-dimensional confocal microscopy and dielectric tensor tomography will
reveal the dynamical processes by which colloidal membranes undergo gravity-
assisted formation of elongated tethers and their subsequent fracture that leads
to the formation of closed colloidal vesicles. Furthermore, the same techniques
will visualize with molecular-level detail the kinetic pathways by which
transient pores nucleate in over-pressurized vesicles. Once nucleated the
measurements will quantify the hydrodynamic flows through the pore that leads to
their resealing. Below the lower critical size colloidal membranes become
unstable and undergo a dramatic topological transition into flat disk-like
structures. The porous structure of colloidal membranes and vesicles is
determined by the osmotic pressure and the ionic strength. Thus, it provides a
unique opportunity to create a powerful experimental platform for the stimuli-
dependent and size-selective delivery of nanosized cargoes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.