* 2308676
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing industrial hemp technologies (PA, NY)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Tom Trite, VYTAL PLANT SCIENCE RESEARCH
* Cooperative Agreement
* Florence Rabanal
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on the development
of a Pennsylvania plant-based ecosystem built upon genetic research,
bioengineering, domestic propagation, cultivation, and processing that will
support the manufacture and deployment of innovative bio-based products for
application in green building construction, packaging, foods, nutraceuticals,
textiles, renewable energy, and land remediation. Driven by increased global
demand for bio-renewable and recyclable products needed to reduce greenhouse
gases, eliminate plastic waste, increase food security, and improve soil health,
the success of this project will result in a new industrial hemp-based supply
chain inclusive of improved seed genetics, propagation labs, greenhouses,
commercial farms, industrial decortication facilities, and bio-based product
manufacturers. Historically the nation's most prolific grower of industrial hemp
until the mid-19th Century, Pennsylvania is well-positioned for this activity
due to its rich agricultural resources, world-class academic institutions,
investments in innovation, access to major markets, multiple manufacturing hubs,
strong industry, and advisory partnerships, and statewide workforce education
programs designed to spur economic development and job creation. Led by Vytal
Plant Science Research, a nonprofit biotechnology corporation, partners include
a broad state-wide consortium of academic, public, non-profit, and economic
development organizations, including Penn State University, Ben Franklin
Technology Partners, the PA Department of Agriculture, Luzerne County Community
College, DON (Disability Options Network) Processing, Team PA Foundation,
EPCAMR, and several private industries.

To meet this opportunity, the project team will work with key stakeholders to
develop a statewide strategic plan designed to coordinate research and
commercialization activities and align resources to address the primary gaps in
the ecosystem, namely existing regulatory impediments, inferior plant genetics,
limited farmer confidence in the market, public misconceptions of industrial
hemp, and lack of industrial processing facilities to support a sustainable
supply chain. This strategic planning process will develop recommended use-
inspired research, STEM workforce, and agriculture education programs, policy
amendments, communication strategies, and funding programs to incentivize the
development of crucial infrastructure inclusive of propagation labs and
greenhouses, commercial farms, and industrial decortication facilities, as well
as innovation resources to support biotechnology startups and investment. Long-
term goals are to realize an estimated $3.5 Billion market opportunity for the
Commonwealth, create at least 14,000 jobs throughout the entire supply chain,
and position Pennsylvania as a national leader of industrial hemp production and
manufacturer of plant-derivative bioproducts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.