* 2308646
* Phase equilibria experiments to constrain magma storage at Mt Churchill, Alaska; refining the magmatic source of the White River Ash eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2026
* USD 308,691.00

Volcanoes that produce explosive eruptions are very hazardous because they can
create widespread ash clouds that are risky for aviation and cause damaging ash
fall downwind. The White River ash (WRA) dacite tephra beds found in eastern
Alaska and western Canada resulted from three of the most explosive eruptions
(VEI 6) from a North American volcano, Mt Churchill, in the past ~2000 years.
Those eruptions harmed the indigenous Dene people living in the areas downwind
in present day Canada, resulting in a southward migration out of the impacted
area. The current global reach of air traffic and the increased human population
in downwind regions today mean that a similar-sized eruption from Mt Churchill
could potentially cause catastrophic economic and human impacts. Despite its
potential hazards, little is known about the source of its explosive, silicic
magmas. This study will help us better understand where the magmas that feed Mt
Churchillâ€™s eruptions are stored in the crust. Although this volcano does not
have a dedicated seismic monitoring network, knowledge of where the magmas live
beneath the volcano can help us better estimate what might happen if the volcano
becomes restless again in the future. Students will take part in this research
during two summer courses taught by the PI at UAF. These courses will involve
field trips to learn about the WRA deposits in eastern Alaska, collect samples,
and then students will learn how to conduct experiments in the lab. The support
from this grant will help cover student fees and field trip costs to encourage
broad participation of students from historically excluded groups to help
increase diversity in the geosciences. As a member of the Alaska Volcano
Observatory, the PI will work closely with AVO colleagues to incorporate the
results from this work into AVO operations and outreach efforts.

This study will use high pressure and temperature experiments to create a magma
plumbing system model for the WRA eruptions. The team will build on petrological
data from prior studies, which include mineralogy, temperature, and oxygen
fugacity estimates needed for the experiments. They will use plagioclase-hosted
melt inclusions to estimate entrapment pressures and volatile compositions by
micro-FTIR analyses of H2O and CO2 (if present) and electron microprobe analyses
of S and Cl. If reacted amphiboles are found, textural analysis will enable the
team to estimate magma ascent rates using prior experimental calibrations. The
petrology of the WRA tephra is well-suited for phase equilibria experiments, and
the relatively low temperature range constrained by prior work allows for
experimental methods that are suitable for student work and have a relatively
low failure rate. The experiments will contribute to a magma plumbing system
model for the WRA eruptions from Mt Churchill. These results will also be
provided to researchers maintaining thermodynamical models to help augment their
empirical datasets for increased accuracy applied to plagioclase and amphibole-
bearing dacite to rhyolite magmas.

This project is jointly funded by Petrology & Geochemistry and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.