* 2308653
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Capabilities of Heterogeneous Robot Teams through Mutually Beneficial Physical Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Laura Blumenschein, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2026
* USD 373,915.00

Urban Search and Rescue operations after a structure (e.g., a house or apartment
building) collapse face complex layouts with unknown hazards, from fires to
energized electrical wiring to the possibility of additional cave-ins. These
unknowns and safety concerns lead to a slow and considered search process, even
though time is one of the greatest predictors of success in rescue operations.
Identifying areas where furniture or debris create “void pockets” for survivors
and checking the safety of the structure for rescuers are some of the most
laborious and time consuming tasks. Groups of robots with different abilities
could reduce the areas to search and improve safety for human operators,
significantly helping search efforts in these environments. This award supports
research into the development of heterogeneous robot teams to aid in these
search and rescue operations. The researchers will create methods for robots of
different sizes, shapes, and abilities to physically work together in symbiotic
teams and help each other move around collapsed environments. Small tennis-ball-
sized robots that can fit through gaps will be delivered to important search
areas by plant-inspired growing robots, and the smaller robot will help the
larger growing robot steer, sense, and communicate. The lessons learned from
building and studying this symbiotic robot team will help future designs for
physically symbiotic robots and will serve as a starting point for developing
new search and rescue tools.

This research investigates the development of symbiotic heterogeneous robot
teams which use mutually beneficial physical interactions between team members
to share existing capabilities and build new ones. The researchers will leverage
two existing robot architectures, soft growing robots and microrobots, with
complementary capabilities in the area of navigation and exploration of
unstructured environments, and will study how physical interactions between
these robots may be designed to create new symbiotic capabilities. While prior
work has focused on how robots of differing capabilities can improve team
performance compared to homogeneous teams, little work has demonstrated how
heterogeneous robots may augment each other's capabilities when they function
together. This project directly investigates how these symbiotic behaviors may
be designed so that heterogeneous robot teams can be greater than the sum of
their parts, with a specific target of creating teams to search disaster
environments. In particular, the work will highlight how i) soft growing robots
can serve as tethers and structures to extend the reach of microrobots and ii)
how microrobots with different payloads can act as changeable actuation,
sensing, and communication modules for expanding a growing robot’s range of
motion and capabilities. The researchers will prototype and study a diverse
range of potential interaction styles while identifying and designing those
interactions that will best improve the ability of the team to move in simulated
unstructured areas. Overall, the research investigates interactions between
highly diverse soft and rigid robots, bridging the gaps between these fields to
explore how benefits from each can be leveraged to create more effective robotic
teams that can better move around the unstructured world. These results will
build towards robot teams which can improve safety and success of search and
rescue teams in collapsed buildings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.