* 2308662
* Conference: Fifth International Conference on Quantitative Ethnography (ICQE23)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Golnaz Arastoopour Irgens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This project was submitted in response to NSF 22-1 - Proposal & Award Policies &
Procedures Guide and was then directed to the Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 21-588. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. ECR supports projects that help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.

This international conference, to be held at the Monash University campus in
Melbourne, will build the capacity of NSF-supported communities to benefit from
the highly promising research methodology of quantitative ethnography (QE). This
training workshop for young scholars, embedded in conference, supports the goals
of the ECR program by developing a community of early career researchers to
carefully use quantitative ethnography in the conduct of basic STEM education
research. These scholars will be prepared to examine and empirically test new
theory consistent with the central goals of the ECR program. The funding will
support: a) attendance and training at an international conference on QE for
doctoral and early career researchers to be held in the U.S., b) a technical
immersion preconference workshop that several of participating researchers would
lead for these young scholars, and c) a broader slate of symposium speakers who
represent NSF supported disciplines that QE methods can benefit significantly.

The intellectual merit of the conference arises both from the appeal or promise
of QE across numerous fields. The proposed activities are organized around
broadening the impact of QE's intellectual merit across new disciplines. The
project maintains a consistent emphasis on furnishing next-generation
researchers with conceptual and software tools and methodology to address
important current and future questions across the spectrum of fields NSF
supports in social sciences, basic STEM education research, and the learning
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.