* 2308358
* DISES: Water and Community Resilience Through Spatial Integration of Ecohydrological Processes and Traditional Sociocultural Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Alexander Fernald, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,600,000.00

Traditional irrigation systems of northern New Mexico, also known as acequias,
embody integrated socio-environmental systems—they are at once physical surface
water delivery structures and community water management organizations. Because
acequias rely on diversions from rivers and streams, they are acutely vulnerable
to variable surface water availability. In region subject to periodic water
scarcity, acequias’ resilience has historically hinged on maintaining inherent
connectivities—between surface water and groundwater, between irrigated
landscapes and contributing watersheds, and among community members¬ with
different levels of involvement in water management. New seemingly existential
threats challenge acequias’ resilience. These include reduced snowmelt runoff
due to climate change, residential expansion into previously farmed and wild
lands, tourism and recreation development, reduced youth involvement in
agriculture, forest health impacted by drought and wildfire, and reduced
community involvement in water management. These challenges will require new
adaptations to maintain resilience of acequia-irrigated farmlands, their
associated communities, and contributing watersheds. Building on two decades of
partnership, this project is an innovative research collaboration between local
stakeholders and university researchers at the highest level of community
engagement where the direction of the study is community-led in problem
definition, identification of existing system drivers, and resilience scenario
development. This project will support a new set of community adaptations for
the 21st century; these could transform water and land management as well as the
legal and political webs of support for healthy and productive communities and
landscapes. New knowledge generated in this project will be disseminated through
formal and informal channels, including scientific, extension, and outreach
publications, content in university coursework, and community meetings and
workshops. The project will employ an innovative convergence research approach
that integrates biophysical and social sciences into Ecohydrologic and Social
(EHS) science. The research process includes: 1) data collection to characterize
ecohydrological processes and social fabric, 2) cellular automata-derived
integrated indices to model spatial integrations of water use and availability,
3) future scenarios based on climate, management, and social inputs, 4) outreach
to inform community members, decision makers, and other researchers, and 5)
community feedback to refine the research and accelerate the impact. Advances in
socioenvironmental system resilience will be achieved by going beyond
potentially separate sociohydrology and hydrosocial systems methods to craft a
fully integrated EHS approach. This research focuses on community prioritized
resilience of water, agriculture, communities, and ecosystems in three distinct
Water-User-Nourished Watershed (WUN Watershed) socio-environmental systems of
northern New Mexico over range of wet to dry baseline conditions. Lessons
learned from this project conducted in traditional agriculture systems of
northern New Mexico will provide critical understanding to guide adaptation to
social changes and climate change to have an impact on resilience of other
similar WUN Watershed socioenvironmental systems worldwide.

This project is jointly funded by the Dynamics of Integrated Socio-Environmental
Systems program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.