* 2308863
* SHF: Small: Cryogenic Hybrid Systems Integration Across Multiple Temperature Zones
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Selcuk Kose, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Cryogenic systems operating from room temperature to low Kelvin temperatures are
a natural path for stationary computing systems such as data centers for cloud
computing and quantum computers. These cryogenic hybrid systems will require a
mix of different technologies and functions operating at different temperatures.
Superconductive electronics can provide extremely high-speed operation while
consuming two to three orders of magnitude less power than semiconductor
devices. The most common form of superconductive logic is single flux quantum
(SFQ). Complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) devices provide massive
complexity and cryogenic operation with enhanced device characteristics.
However, CMOS dissipates considerable power and operates much slower than SFQ.
Hybrid systems integration of SFQ with CMOS can overcome unique challenges when
operating at cryogenic temperatures, significantly improving the performance
while lowering the energy. Large scale stationary computing infrastructures such
as cloud computing desperately needs significantly improved power efficiency
while quantum computers can use SFQ to communicate with the interface and
control circuitry. The involvement of students from underrepresented populations
will be actively pursued at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Design
projects will be developed for advanced undergraduate students to link the
learning process of undergraduate courses with active research projects by
providing opportunities for these students to gain practical design experience
in cryogenic electronics. Both investigators will continue promoting the
participation of diverse middle and high school students in engineering and the
sciences. This project will identify, characterize, and explore hybrid systems
integration of cryogenic electronics crossing multiple temperature boundaries.
The primary objective is to determine how best to place which function at what
temperature with which technology and application in cryogenic hybrid systems.
We will develop general purpose guidelines and design methodologies to support
the development of complete systems composed of diverse technologies and
applications operating across multiple temperature zones to satisfy extreme
energy and performance objectives for specific applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.