* 2308856
* Approximation of transport maps from local and non-local Monge-Ampere equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Brittany Froese Hamfeldt, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 379,703.00

Many important problems related to the design of optical systems, economics,
meteorology, and the optimal transportation of resources can be reduced to the
problem of solving a type of equation known as a Monge-Ampere equation. There
are currently no methods available for solving these equations in the most
interesting and challenging settings. In the simplest problems, existing methods
are prohibitively expensive and produce large errors that severely limit their
usefulness in modern applications. This project will introduce new mathematical
and computational techniques for solving general (non-local) Monge-Ampere type
equations, which will lead to the development of software that can efficiently
and accurately solve several current problems in optics, economics, and
meteorology. The project will include training of graduate students.

The goal of this project is to design, analyze, and implement convergent
numerical methods for solving a large class of local and non-local Monge-Ampere
equations. This project will introduce a new integral reformulation of the
Monge-Ampere operator, which will allow for the use of higher-order quadrature
schemes that preserve ellipticity at the discrete level and provably converge to
the correct weak solution. We will also reformulate relevant non-local terms in
a way that highlights the elliptic structure and can be approximated using a
discrete version of the Dirac delta function. We will introduce new error bounds
for these numerical methods, which will be fed into new wide-stencil
approximations of the solution gradient. The resulting methods will provably
approximate both the solution and corresponding transport map with superlinear
accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.