* 2308738
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Nutmeg State LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Steven Minkler, Southern Connecticut State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,251,482.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines: Blacks
and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students, highly qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM. The need for
cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United States to
remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its
citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that
underpin the knowledge-based economy.

The Nutmeg State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation will bring
together the four regional public comprehensive universities in Connecticut. The
alliance is led by Southern Connecticut State University (SCSU) and includes
partner institutions: Central Connecticut State University (CCSU), Eastern
Connecticut State University (ECSU), and Western Connecticut State University
(WCSU). The primary goal is to increase the number of STEM graduates from
underrepresented groups at each institution over the five-year period of the
grant. The Nutmeg State alliance will employ comprehensive gateway mathematics
and science course interventions to improve the early retention of students in
STEM majors. These interventions include first-year learning communities,
experiential learning, and summer bridge programs. Early research experiences
with faculty mentors followed by an internship will build student self-identity
as a scientist, computer scientist, or mathematician.

The results of these initiatives will be shared with our feeder community
colleges and high schools to better inform and prepare students from
underrepresented groups interested in STEM before they come to undergraduate
STEM programs. Finally, the alliance will enhance collaboration and strengthen
ties between the local industry and STEM researchers to further facilitate
institutionalization and sustainability of successful recruitment and retention
practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.