* 2308969
* Quantum Optics and Optomechanics: From Fundamental Tests To Quantum Tools of the Future
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Nergis Mavalvala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 878,148.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Quantum mechanics is the branch of physics used to explain the microscopic
atomic and subatomic scale world. Quantum behavior is inherently different than
the human experience of the macroscopic world. Hallmarks of quantum systems
include fundamental uncertainty and entanglement. These quantum phenomena can be
exploited to make more precise measurements of physical quantities. For example,
quantum engineering allows scientists to measure the distance between the
mirrors of a gravitational wave detector (GWD) with sub-attometer precision.
This project pertains to an ongoing experimental program to develop quantum
systems to probe fundamental quantum phenomena, as well as for applications to
precision quantum noise-limited measurement. The emphasis of the research group
is understanding and manipulating quantum noise in GWDs, which is important both
for improved performance of GWDs, and also for probing fundamental quantum
phenomena such as squeezing and entanglement on macroscopic scales. Diversity
underpins the scientific and personnel aspects of the proposed work. The
scientific diversity arises from the necessarily cross-disciplinary nature of
the proposed research: it combines the techniques and formalism of quantum
optics, optomechanics, and quantum measurement science with GWDs. The personnel
diversity is the outcome of deliberate recruitment of women and minority
students by the PI (herself a member of multiple minority groups), through her
own efforts as well as those of the outreach programs of the LIGO Laboratory and
MIT. Additionally, quantum science is popular with students (over a dozen Ph.D.
and undergraduate theses have derived from this research program), and generates
considerable enthusiasm with the public as well.

The proposed experimental program aims to study multiple manifestations of
quantum fluctuations and their effect on optical measurements and on motion of
macroscopic objects. This allows for testing fundamental tenets of quantum
mechanics, and also for making advances in quantum technologies for optical
sensing and precision force and position measurement. The group is carrying out
two experiments that exploit quantum fluctuations of light and mechanical
motion. One experiment explores quantum effects in optomechanical systems where
the radiation-pressure interaction between light and mechanical motion is
engineered to dominate. Cavity optomechanics experiments with mechanical
oscillators spanning nanogram- to kilogram-scales have featured prominently in
this research program, where the interaction between light and mechanical motion
is used to generate and manipulate quantum states. These experiments have
successfully demonstrated optical cooling and trapping techniques for
macroscopic mirrors, have enabled direct observation and evasion of quantum
radiation pressure (backaction) noise that is a major limiting noise source in
Advanced LIGO, and generation of broadband optomechanical squeezing as a
promising alternative method for generating squeezed states of light suitable
for future GW detectors. An important feature of this optomechanics platform is
that it is designed to achieve the quantum regime with macroscopic mechanical
oscillators that are not cryogenically pre-cooled. The immediate next goals are
to observe conditionally squeezed mechanical states on the path toward creating
quantum states of mirrors that are part of a room temperature optomechanics
platform. The other experiment advances squeezed light technology for precision
measurement. Specifically, the group is working on a compact squeezed light
source based on nonlinear optical materials that is to be used to study and
reduce quantum noise in linear optical amplification processes, and will be a
steppingstone to an eventual squeezer-on-a-chip.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.