* 2308693
* WoU-MMA: Enabling Multi-Messenger Astrophysics with Advanced LIGO: from Detector Characterization to Interpretation of Gravitational-Wave Signals
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marco Cavaglia, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 397,209.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Multi-
messenger astrophysics has established itself as a powerful new branch of
science eight years after the first direct detection of a gravitational wave
from an astrophysical source. Gravitational waves enable scientists to
investigate the origins of the universe's most enigmatic objects, test the
fundamental nature of gravity and matter in extreme conditions, and measure the
universe's expansion rate. Simultaneously, gravitational-wave astrophysics has a
significant impact on public perception of science and technology. The seemingly
impossible observations of colliding black holes and neutron stars made possible
by LIGO and its collaborators raise public awareness of US science and the
National Science Foundation's leadership role. In this context, Missouri S&T
researchers and students will continue to support LIGO's core mission and
gravitational-wave astrophysics through scientific operation contributions, the
development of improved analysis methods, and broader impact initiatives aimed
at attracting young people from all socioeconomic backgrounds and ethnicities to
science careers.

The increased sensitivity of the LIGO detectors will result in an abundance of
new observations. At the same time, this bounty of discoveries will create new
challenges that will require a collaborative effort from the entire scientific
community to resolve. During the course of this award, Missouri S&T researchers
and students will conduct LIGO multimessenger astrophysics searches, perform
detector characterization and calibration activities, assist with detector
operations on site, and maintain and improve current analysis algorithms for
online and offline gravitational-wave searches. Contributions to R&D will
include developing and deploying new machine learning-based methods to
characterize detector noise, accelerate the estimation of physical parameters
from searches, and improve the interpretation of gravitational-wave signals.
Missouri S&T's scientific operations will allow LIGO to operate effectively and
continue to deliver impactful science during observing runs. R&D activities will
improve LIGO's search pipelines and provide functional methods for extracting
physical information from the detectors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.