* 2308446
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Neural Estimation of Statistical Divergences: Theoretical Foundations and Applications to Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ziv Goldfeld, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

An abundance of data and recent advances in computation have dramatically
increased the reliability and performance of information processing systems. In
many applications, these systems provide approximate answers to statistical
questions about the distributions that generate the data. Estimators based on
neural networks have become the method of choice when dealing with large and
complicated datasets. Their popularity is due to their excellent performance in
practice and their computational efficiency. But knowledge of the reasons behind
their outstanding performance remains quite limited. The goal of this project is
to improve the understanding of why neural estimation works and to provide
formal performance guarantees that help guide practical applications in fields
such as wireless communications. In addition to technological developments, the
project features graduate student mentoring, undergraduate inclusion, outreach
to high school via a summer camp, international collaboration, and the
development of tutorial videos.

This project models questions about data using statistical divergences that
measure the discrepancy between probability distributions. While there are many
approaches to estimating statistical divergences from data, neural estimators
have now become the method of choice when dealing with large, high-dimensional
datasets. The project will develop a comprehensive statistical and computational
theory of neural estimation and apply it to novel applications to
communications. It has two main thrusts. The first targets a non-asymptotic
neural estimation theory that accounts for all known sources of error:
functional approximation, empirical estimation, and optimization. The second
will devise a flexible, efficiently computable, and provably accurate
methodology for neural capacity estimation and data-driven polar coding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.