* 2308817
* Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Sean Roberts, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials: an
NSF MRSEC brings together researchers from across science and engineering to
create materials with new atomic-scale structures and functionalities, and to
develop approaches for actively controlling and reconfiguring materials in real
time. These materials will enable the development of new and improved
technologies in areas such as sustainable energy, quantum information
processing, bioinspired systems, and semiconductors for telecommunications,
computing, and sensing. The Center consists of two Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs). IRG 1 focuses on the design and creation of soft materials, based
on nanoparticle and biopolymer networks, whose structure and functionality can
be actively controlled by the introduction of chemical fuels or other forms of
energy. These new, highly adaptive materials will have the potential to be used
in applications ranging from optical coatings for temperature control to
artificial cellular materials. IRG 2 addresses new properties and functions
enabled by the engineering of structure and symmetry in atomically thin and
molecular materials. Such materials will offer compelling opportunities to
develop new capabilities for electronics, photonics, and quantum devices and
systems. These research activities are closely integrated with initiatives in
education, outreach, and the promotion of diversity and inclusion. The Center
engages elementary school teachers in materials research to improve teacher
efficacy and student engagement with science at a formative age, and thereby
increase the number and diversity of students interested in science,
engineering, and related fields. A materials podcast, community college and
Hispanic-serving institution partnerships, and mentoring programs engage diverse
populations and foster broad participation and success in materials-related
education and careers.

Technical Description: IRG 1, Fuel-Driven Pluripotent Materials, focuses on
materials whose morphology and functionality can be actively controlled via the
introduction of chemical fuels or optical energy. Inspired by stem cells that
can differentiate to take on distinct structures and functions, IRG 1 will
design and synthesize materials whose polymorphic, highly non-equilibrium
structures are accessed by kinetically controlled fueling processes proceeding
along designed, out-of-equilibrium pathways. IRG 2, Engineered Functionality in
Atomically Thin Heterostructures, exploits solid-state, crystalline material
heterostructures created by stacking layers of atomically thin or molecular
materials with precisely controlled rotational alignments to realize new
properties and functionalities based on topology, correlations, and light-matter
coupling in materials. Shared facilities for optical characterization of
materials will serve MRSEC researchers and the broader materials community. The
Center’s research advances are expected to enable new adaptive materials with
optical, rheological, and contractile properties not found in nature for energy
efficiency, advanced manufacturing, and biotechnology, and transformative
discoveries in solid-state materials, electronics, and photonics that will
impact Industries of Tomorrow including quantum information science,
telecommunications, and future semiconductors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.