* 2308979
* MRSEC: UW Molecular Engineering Materials Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-technical abstract The University of Washington Molecular Engineering
Materials Center, an NSF MRSEC, executes fundamental materials research that
aims to push the frontiers of science and accelerate the emergence of future
advanced technologies. The Center's research targets development of nanoscale
materials that allow quantum interactions to be harnessed for use in new "spin-
photonic" technologies such as quantum sensing. Additionally, the research
addresses development of atomically thin and layered two-dimensional crystalline
materials whose quantum properties are ultra-sensitive to external strain
stimuli, to vastly expand the reach of quantum materials and thereby open new
territory for advancing quantum and energy technologies. This research will lead
to the discovery and development of new advanced materials, new experimental and
theoretical capabilities, and new fundamental knowledge in quantum materials. In
parallel, the Center helps prepare participating students and postdoctoral
researchers to become leading innovators in industry, national laboratories,
academia, and other sectors, while inspiring youth to engage in science and
engineering. The Center partners with international institutions, industry, and
national laboratories to advance its interdisciplinary research and training
objectives. Broader-impact activities include formative research experiences for
undergraduates and K-12 teachers, facilitating science participation in rural,
remote, and under-resourced school districts, engaging veterans and military
service members in research, and fostering a Pacific Northwest materials
research and education ecosystem. The Center offers open-access shared
facilities to support the campus and the broader research community.

Technical abstract The Center's research involves two synergistic
interdisciplinary research groups. The first aims to develop functional low-
dimensional materials that harness cross-coupling between photons and electron
spins -- spin-photonic nanostructures -- to enable future classical and quantum
information processing, sensing, and photonics technologies, such as spin-
photonic transduction, Faraday optical isolation, and quantum memory. The second
builds and studies elastic quantum matter -- materials with quantum properties
that are ultra-sensitive to elastic strain, offering opportunities from all-
mechanical control of magnetization and superconductivity to creation of phonon-
magnon circuitry, dynamical Josephson junction arrays, and dynamically
controlled catalysts. Both groups integrate materials innovations with theory
and computation, aided by a centralized Artificial Intelligence Core that
develops algorithms and methodologies tailored to assist solution of real
research problems. The Artificial Intelligence Core operates as part of the
Center's greater open-access shared user facilities. A competitive Seed program
expands upon the Center's core research goals by initiating new cutting-edge or
high-risk research projects, recruiting new and underrepresented participants,
and capitalizing on emerging strengths and opportunities. The Center's research
activities are complemented by its expansive broader-impact activities that
include research experiences for undergraduates, a NanoCamp for K-12 students,
and initiatives aimed at broadening participation and enhancing regional access
to materials research and education opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.