* 2308517
* Center: Track 4 Center for Engineering Equity Throughout the Student Collegiate Experience
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Amy Landis, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,199,988.00

Historically, women and people of color have shouldered a disproportionate
burden for leading equity efforts in STEM. Despite these efforts, there are
still many groups who are underrepresented in STEM. Nationwide, women make up
the majority of bachelor’s degrees awarded overall, at 57%, but only 38% of them
graduate with bachelor’s degrees in a STEM field. Students coming from
underrepresented groups receive bachelor’s degrees in STEM at lower rates: 15%
for both Hispanic students and Pacific Islanders, 14% for American Indian and
Alaska Natives and 12% for Black students. There are a number of underserved and
underrepresented groups that are often invisible to these statistics (e.g.,
persons with disabilities, veterans, persons who identify with the LGBTQ+
community, and low-income first-generation). The Center for Engineering Peer
Equity Throughout the Student Collegiate Experience at Colorado School of Mines
will establish a framework that trains a wide range of students as peer leaders
who promote equity in STEM. This center aligns with the NSF program mission
which states that there has been a growing recognition of the need to create and
support an inclusive and innovative engineering profession for the 21st Century.
Doing so requires an understanding of how engineers from all communities are
formed and how they can be supported to successfully obtain both the technical
and professional skills needed to solve complex, often critical, problems facing
today’s society. The Center will support students from a wide variety of diverse
backgrounds, well beyond the usual and visible categories based on gender, race,
and ethnicity, but also including veteran status, first generation students, and
differently abled students. Peer leaders will come from all areas of the student
experience, including athletics, fraternity and sorority life, housing, and
student clubs. The training program will cultivate a broad sense of shared
responsibility for fostering equity and will enroll the entire community as
advocates and allies in changing our STEM culture by integrating equity and
allyship into a peer-leadership program.

This Center will stand up infrastructure and demonstrate a successful STEM-wide
approach to peer education and allyship that changes culture and outcomes for
all students, and in particular, underrepresented students. A research and
assessment program will evaluate effective strategies for transformation of STEM
culture driven by student peer educators and leaders. Center research will
address the novel integration of funds of knowledge (FOK) in peer educator and
ally training and assess whether this approach helps engineering students in the
development of their professional engineering identity. Centering FOK helps
students traditionally underrepresented and underserved in STEM develop stronger
engineering identities. This is believed to be the first approach to develop a
formal ally training model for college students at the scale of an entire
campus. This Center will create reproducible models for these best practices and
evaluate their impact, reproducibility, validity, reliability, and
effectiveness. The outcomes would catalyze significant change in STEM culture; a
much-needed transformation for STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.