* 2308337
* Collaborative Research: Self-organization and transitions in anisotropic turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Edgar Knobloch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

The impact of rotation and thermal driving on stellar and planetary bodies is
clearly visible in far-field optical observations. Such observations reveal the
presence of differentially rotating fluid atmospheres with embedded features in
the form of large-scale eddies and jets that greatly influence the climate on
the celestial body. On Earth the impact of the high latitude jet stream on
weather and the destructive impact of hurricanes due to climate change is
evident. Within the Jovian atmosphere, the recent discovery by the Juno mission
of polar vortices illuminates the longevity of vortical structures. Theory,
experimentation, and numerical simulations strongly suggest that the generation
of large-scale jets and vortices is common in fluid turbulence within thin
layers like the Earth’s atmosphere and on rapidly rotating celestial bodies such
as Jupiter. Focusing on these paradigms, this project is dedicated to
elucidating the basic mechanism behind the formation of such large-scale
structures from small-scale turbulent fluctuations and its disruption via the
generation of isolated, weakly-interacting, mesoscale shielded vortices, and to
extending this understanding to more realistic models that introduce higher
level physics such as the effects of water vapor and internal heating via latent
heat release. This understanding will inform more detailed studies such as those
based on realistic Global Ocean and Atmospheric Circulation Models and offers
hope for understanding the conditions favoring the formation of both large-scale
structures and of the smaller-scale shielded vortices. The modeling strategy
taken provides a foundation upon which greater discipline-specific complexity
can be built. The project will support and train one graduate student and one
postdoctoral researcher in the physical understanding of energy transfer between
scales in systems of geophysical relevance, asymptotic and other modeling
techniques, as well as direct numerical simulations of rapidly rotating fluid
layers, appropriate for planetary-scale phenomena on and within the Earth.

The aim of this project is to classify different regimes of instability-driven
turbulence in two dimensions (2D) as a function of the energy input and
dissipation parameters, and to explore how these states evolve when three-
dimensional (3D) fluctuations become increasingly important as the height of the
turbulent layer increases. Particular emphasis will be placed on the recently
discovered regime of shielded mesoscale vortices whose generation may disrupt
the inverse energy cascade familiar from 2D turbulence with random stirring.
Properties of the resulting chiral mesoscale vortex gas will be studied as a
function of the layer height, as will the transition to a vortex crystal that
takes place at high vortex density in 2D. The Reynolds number will be varied
systematically to bridge the gap between these phenomena and related states in
bacterial suspensions at low Reynolds numbers. The possibility of an analogous
state in rapidly rotating 3D turbulence will be investigated in detail using a
new reformulation of the Navier-Stokes fluid equations, extending direct
numerical simulations to smaller Rossby numbers, together with a theoretical
analysis dissecting the amplitude-phase relationships between large-scale
structures and small-scale turbulence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.