* 2308433
* Resolving the Shortcomings in Modern NH3 Kinetics Models using Detailed Species Time Histories and Direct Rate Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Eric Petersen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2026
* USD 410,000.00

Because of its zero-carbon content and established production methods, ammonia
(NH3) has drawn much interest as a fuel for power generation and propulsion.
Many research studies worldwide have been conducted over the past few years in
an attempt to understand and predict its combustion chemistry. However, there
are wide discrepancies among current models that are used to predict the
combustion behavior of ammonia, and none can match the entire existing data set,
so progress has been incremental and sometimes inconsistent. This project will
resolve much of the current discrepancies and increase the reliability and
predictive capability of ammonia chemistry models. The PI and his team will
utilize state-of-the-art laser diagnostics and lab facilities to measure the
model parameters that are currently missing. Research into hydrogen-based fuel
sources such as ammonia will ultimately help to reduce the production of
greenhouse gases globally. This multidisciplinary research project will allow
graduate students from both mechanical engineering and physical chemistry
backgrounds to interact on a daily basis. Ongoing, complementary projects in the
PI’s lab and the Turbomachinery Laboratory’s undergraduate research program will
broaden the number of participants while giving undergraduate students exposure
to research using lasers for combustion chemistry.

Although many results have been generated in recent years on ammonia chemical
kinetics, most of the data have been for characterization of global reactivity,
namely ignition delay times and laminar flame speeds. However, improved insight
into the chemical kinetics of NH3 can be made by focusing on the measurement of
detailed species time histories in a shock tube. Such measurements can be
tailored for the validation of oxidation mechanisms and the direct measurement
of rate coefficients. This project will measure species time histories for
mechanism diagnosis and for making direct measurements of the rate constants of
key reactions in the NH3 oxidation mechanism. By using a shock tube to produce
the high-temperature conditions (1000 – 2500 K), laser absorption measurements
of NH2, NH3, H2O, and N2O will be performed, and the reaction rates of at least
2 important reactions will be measured with high accuracy. The successful
completion of the project will advance the fundamental understanding and
prediction of ammonia oxidation. By focusing on the detailed information that
concentration time histories of important species can provide, many of the
discrepancies that currently exist among NH3 chemical kinetics models can be
resolved. Direct measurements of the rate coefficients of individual, critical
reactions at combustion temperatures will further improve the accuracy of
detailed kinetics mechanisms for ammonia combustion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.