* 2308807
* Photocatalytic N2 reduction utilizing the upconverted hot electron
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,998.00

Ammonia (NH3) is among the most important molecules produced at an industrial
scale due to its critical role for agriculture and other chemical industries.
The well-known Haber-Bosch process currently used to manufacture NH3 requires
high pressure and operating temperatures leaving a very large carbon footprint
consuming over 1% of the total energy produced globally. The project explores a
photocatalytic alternative to the fossil fuel driven thermal Haber-Bosch
process, potentially achieving drastic reductions in the carbon footprint and
energy consumption. Although the photocatalytic approach derives energy from the
sun, the solar utilization efficiency at the current level of technology is too
low for commercial application. The project thus investigates a novel catalyst
design that potentially can boost the photocatalytic NH3 manufacturing
efficiency significantly beyond the current state-of-the-art. The project is
bolstered by educational and outreach activities targeting K-12 students,
teachers, and undergraduate students.

Photocatalytic and electrocatalytic approaches are being explored for the
conversion of N2 into NH3 to resolve the issues of the Harbor-Bosch process.
However, because of the high reduction potential of N2, its highly stable triple
bond, and weak surface adsorption affinity, the reduction of N2 to NH3 remains
one of the most challenging photocatalytic reactions. The project will develop a
new photocatalytic approach to convert N2 to NH3 by utilizing hot electrons that
are produced via an exciton-to-hot electron upconversion process in Mn-doped
semiconductor quantum dots (QDs). This allows for the use of visible light to
generate hot electrons that possess very high excess energy above the conduction
band and exhibit long-range transfer capability. These hot electrons have
recently been shown to enhance photocatalytic H2 production as well as CO2
reduction, and are expected to (i) be of sufficiently high reduction potential
for N2 to NH3 conversion and (ii) produce solvated electrons that can
additionally participate in N2 to NH3 conversion. Specifically, the research
will explore three different approaches with the goal of increasing the overall
quantum efficiency of N2 to NH3 reduction significantly beyond the current
state-of-the-art (~1%). The first approach aims at enhancing the kinetics of the
reduction of N2 and intermediate species by hot electrons and solvated
electrons. This will be accomplished by employing binary solvent systems that
greatly increase the concentration and stability of N2 and intermediate species.
The second approach uses QD/molecular catalyst hybrid systems in which the long-
range hot electron sensitization will be exploited to enable the use of
molecular N2 reduction catalysts without requiring covalent attachments to the
QDs. The third approach aims at enhancing the rate of hot electron generation
and the redox balance simultaneously by using indium tin oxide photonic crystals
imbedded with QD photocatalysts leading to dual functionality of enhancing light
absorption as well as hole transfer. In sum, the project aims to establish hot
electron-driven visible light photocatalytic N2 reduction as a new approach that
can bring much needed improvement in the photocatalytic N2 reduction efficiency.
Beyond the research focus, the project will integrate undergraduate education
with research via the Texas A&M Innovation [X] program designed to foster
interdisciplinary education through research activities solving real-world
problems. In addition, the investigators will continue to be involved in the
university-wide Chemistry Open House and nation-wide US Crystal Growing
Competition outreach activities that bring K-12 students, teachers and the
general public to lectures, tours and hands-on activities on STEM subjects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.