* 2308796
* RUI: Supporting LIGO Calibration, Detector Characterization, and Data Analysis in O4
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Madeline Wade, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 32,157.00

The fourth observing run (O4) for ground-based gravitational-wave detectors
LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA is scheduled to begin in the spring of 2023. O4 promises
to bring the largest network of ground-based gravitational-wave detectors and
the best detector sensitivity seen to date. This award supports the Kenyon
College LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) group, consisting of PI L. Wade and
co-PI M. Wade, and between four and six undergraduate research students, in
their research pursuits in the field of gravitational-wave physics. The Kenyon
College LSC group will contribute to the operation of the LIGO calibration
pipeline and implementation of a novel LIGO calibration monitor, the
construction of new machine learning algorithms for predicting the presence of
noise artifacts in gravitational-wave strain data using information from
detector auxiliary channels, and the development of more robust and
sophisticated ways of measuring the neutron-star equation of state. This award
also supports two established, impactful astronomy and physics research groups
that engage a diverse population of high school and undergraduate students: The
Kenyon College Radio and Optical Astronomy Research (ROAR) group and the Mount
Vernon High School (MVHS) astronomy club. ROAR is a no-barrier to entry research
group that targets recruitment at first- and second-year potential physics
majors at Kenyon College. Students in ROAR engage in discussions about current
astronomy and gravitational physics research topics, do independent
investigations into topics of interest, engage in hands-on astronomy and physics
related activities, and contribute to outreach efforts in physics and astronomy.
The MVHS astronomy club is run out of the local high school near Kenyon College
and regularly engages 10-20 high school students in hands-on activities and
research topics in astronomy and gravitational physics.

This award has three main research focusses: calibration, data quality, and
neutron-star equation of state (EOS) parameter estimation. This award will
contribute to the operation of the LIGO calibration pipeline used to produce the
final calibrated strain data, which is an effort lead by co-PI M. Wade,
development and implementation of a monitoring tool for the low-latency
calibrated data stream, and exploration of methods for producing a low-latency
calibration systematic error estimate. The second focus area in this award is
related to inferring the neutron star EOS from binary neutron star
gravitational-wave events. PI L. Wade proposes to improve the flexibility of the
parameterized models used to measure the neutron star EOS, develop inference
software to marginalize over parameters measured in other contexts, and build
software to allow the data to inform the number of parameters to use in the EOS
models. Additionally, PI L. Wade will contribute to EOS inference efforts on any
binary neutron star signals found in O4. The final set of research activities
involve exploring improvements to the low-latency data quality identification
system known as iDQ. iDQ uses machine learning algorithms (MLAs) to predict the
presence of loud transient noise events, known as glitches, in the strain data
using only auxiliary information. PI L. Wade and co-PI M. Wade propose to build
hierarchical MLAs that will account for the variability in different auxiliary
subsystems and the variability in glitch morphologies, aiming to improve the
efficiency with which glitches can be identified in low-latency data, thereby
improving the data quality information available to low-latency astrophysical
analyses. The final research focus area will be in searching for a newly
theorized signal known as a gravitational glint which is produced by perturbers
along the line-of-sight from a compact binary event to an observer. If no such
signals are found in archival LIGO/Virgo data then upper bounds could be set on
the density of perturbers in the universe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.