* 2308607
* Exploring the Impact of Global Undergraduate Experiences on Engineers' Career Pathways and Approaches to Engineering Work
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kirsten Davis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2026
* USD 388,611.00

In the increasingly globalized world, it is essential that engineering graduates
develop the knowledge and skills to be successful in this environment. This
project will work towards achieving that goal by exploring how global
experiences during the undergraduate years and beyond may connect to global
career outcomes. Several studies have explored the development of global
engineering competency and related skills within the context of undergraduate
engineering programs, but we have little information about the long-term impact
of global experiences and the career pathways that students follow after they
enter the engineering workforce. This project will advance our understanding of
the formation of engineers by providing insights on the impact and value of
global experiences for engineers by gathering data from engineering graduates at
various stages of their careers. Findings from this project will lead to
recommendations for the design of global programs for engineering students and
can provide motivation for continued investment in development, implementation,
and improvement of access to such programs. In addition, our research on how the
formation of engineers continues after graduation can inform professional
development support for practicing engineers to continue global learning
throughout their careers. Understanding how we can support global learning for
engineers both during and after the undergraduate years improves our ability to
develop a globally competitive and innovative workforce.

The purpose of this project is to explore the impact of global undergraduate
experiences on engineers’ career pathways and approaches to engineering work. We
will conduct a multiple-case study of three long-running global engineering
programs to address three research questions: 1) How do global career outcomes
compare between engineers who participated in global programs as undergraduate
students and those who did not? 2) What global experience, global self-concept,
and career choice variables are predictors of global career outcomes? 3) How do
global experiences during the undergraduate years and after entering the
workforce influence engineers’ approaches to engineering work and career
choices? To address RQ1 and RQ2, we will administer a survey about career
trajectories, career outcomes, and global experiences during and after college
to all the alumni of the three programs which will be the cases for this study.
Based on the survey response, we will identify a comparison group within each
case with similar composition of disciplines and industry sectors by recruiting
engineering alumni from the same university and administer the survey to this
group. To address RQ3, we will conduct interviews with participants from the
global programs and comparison groups to understand participants’ approaches to
engineering work, global career outcomes, and experiences they believe prepared
them to engage in a global work environment. Finally, we will make a cross-case
comparison by developing case summaries and holistically comparing the findings.
This project will contribute new insights about global career outcomes in
engineering, the nature of global engineering work, and the ways in which
engineers engage in lifelong global learning. Our results will lead to
recommendations for the design of global engineering programs for students and
global professional development opportunities for practicing engineers. The
project will be informed by both an academic advisory board and industrial
advisory board. The academic advisory board is comprised of researchers and
practitioners of global engineering programs, while the industrial advisory
board is comprised of individuals with 80+ years of combined engineering work
experience, including training and recruiting new engineers. Through our
industrial advisory board and dissemination plan, we plan to communicate our
results broadly in the industry setting to increase industry and university
collaborations related to the formation of global engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.