* 2308761
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Building Resilience into LEO Satellite Networks by Exploiting Network Layer Characteristics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tao Shu, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 99,999.00

Being a critical infrastructure of our society, the security of low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellite networks has a high stake. A satellite network may be subject to
excessive attacks launched by strongly motivated adversaries, some of whom are
state sponsored with potentially unlimited computing and intelligence resources
thus seriously challenging existing security measures, quite often under the
assumption that attackers are resource constrained. Assuming this updated threat
model, this project will explore new counter-measure defense approaches. The
novelties of proposed efforts are to take considerations of the intrinsic
resources possessed by a LEO satellite system at its network layer, such as rich
and dense satellite connectivity and high satellite mobility, to develop a suite
of physical-constrained, rather than computation-constrained, security methods
that can improve LEO satellite network’s resilience against attacks. The
project's broader significance and importance are to directly address the
security threats faced by LEO systems in order to protect the social and
economic benefits of this critical infrastructure.

This project will fundamentally advance the state of art LEO satellite network
security research from several aspects. In particular, by exploiting the global
spatial distribution of LEO satellites and their dense connectivity and high
mobility, this project will propose physical-constrained randomized multi-path-
routing-based secret key generation methods that are immune to resource-
unconstrained attacks. This project will also study cyberattacks on the
availability of the LEO networks by considering stealthy, intermittent, and
selective packet dropping attacks. A novel detection method will be developed to
accurately identify those stealthy packet droppers under harsh inter-satellite
communication environment caused by the high mobility. Evaluation of all
proposed methods will be performed on a scale-down snapshot-oriented static
testbed, complemented by computer simulations on satellite-orbiting-trace data
of real LEO systems such as Starlink and OneWeb.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.