* 2308194
* ORCC: Uniting long-term field experiments and modern genomics to prepare sustainable crops for the future
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sarah Elmendorf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,167,742.00

As climate warms globally, flowering time, animal migrations, insect emergence,
and other harbingers of spring occur earlier on average than in centuries past.
However, the genetic and environmental drivers behind these changes is not
always clear, nor are the consequences of shifts in timing. Analyzing decades of
sunflower field trials across dozens of sites, we will evaluate how particular
plant genotypes grow, flower, and set seed under varying field conditions, and
how the timing of their flowering interacts with environment to affect yield. We
will then use detailed genomic information to characterize the specific genes
underlying flowering time and performance under a diversity of climate
conditions. This research will facilitate breeding for improved climate
resilience critical for food security and for reducing environmental costs of
agricultural production.

Phenological shifts are the most well-documented organismal trait response to
climate change. However, the genetic underpinnings of these changes and their
adaptive significance are largely unknown outside of model systems. We aim to
quantify the importance of phenology to plant performance in sunflower
(Helianthus annuus L.) grown in diverse field environments including examining
the plasticity in timing of flowering associated with key climate variables;
identifying the genetic variation underlying flowering time and plasticity; and
incorporating that information into sunflower breeding programs. Flowering
timing (phenology) is regulated by a well-characterized network of genes that
respond to known environmental and developmental signals in controlled
conditions in sunflowers and other species. Our research builds on this
foundational work to investigate the genetics of climate adaptation and
translate functional genetic information into predictive models of plant
performance under heterogeneous field conditions. Using yield, timing, genomic,
and trait data for thousands of genotypes planted in dozens of field sites over
5 decades, we will evaluate hypotheses about how an entire network of genes
affects phenology and fitness across broad spatial and temporal scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.