* 2308334
* CDP: Site survey investigation for ICDP drilling in Pliocene lake at Butte Valley, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Maria Beatrice Magnani, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,834.00

The Pliocene Epoch (5.3 to 2.6 million years ago) shares many geological
similarities to our current time, as a period of sustained global warmth
characterized by CO2 concentrations and a continental configuration similar to
modern. For these reasons, the Pliocene is considered an appropriate analogue
for testing the capabilities of models used to predict climate and ecological
changes over the coming century. Modern long-term hydroclimatic simulations, for
example, forecast subtropical regions to become drier in response to increasing
CO2 levels. These regions, however, show wetter and warmer conditions with
global warming during the Pliocene, suggesting the presence of sources of
precipitation that are not included into current model projections. To account
for these sources and to understand the changes in atmospheric circulation that
cause them, we need to reconstruct the distribution and seasonality of wet
conditions across a wide range of latitudes and hydroclimatic changes during the
Pliocene. This reconstruction is possible across the western North American
continental margin, where a set of deep, permanent lake basins preserves the
record of Pliocene paleoclimate conditions locked in the sedimentary fill.
Unlocking this record requires drilling into these paleolacustrine lake basins,
retrieving and analyzing sediment cores. The PLIOWEST project (proposed to the
International Continental Scientific Drilling Program) plans to drill these lake
basins and to capture the changing hydroclimate gradients over time. To plan for
drilling, this award will fund a geophysical investigation necessary to
understand the characteristics of Butte Valley, California, one of the sites
selected for retrieving of lacustrine cores. The site is a dry lake basin just
east of the Cascade Range that persisted for 105 to 106 years during the
Pliocene, but subsequently dried during the Pleistocene. The basin has been
sculpted by the tectonic and volcanic processes that shaped the Pacific
northwest, and contains one of the longest and most complete archives of Earth
climate through the Pliocene and Pleistocene. The geophysical survey will image
the characteristics and geometry of the sedimentary sequences and guide the
selection of the drilling site. The lacustrine deposits and the valley infill
are not only relevant for past and current climate studies; they are also
critical aquifer and groundwater resources, particularly in a time of drought,
as the one California has been experiencing. The data acquired and the results
of this project will be relevant to watershed managers, agricultural planners
and stakeholders in western North America, including Native American tribal
communities.

The project will carry out a high-resolution geophysical site investigation
through collection and interpretation of seismic reflection data. Twenty
kilometers of 2D multichannel seismic reflection data will be acquired using a
100 kg trailer-mounted accelerated impact seismic source firing at 10 m
intervals on a 5 m receiver interval spread. These parameters have the advantage
of achieving both the high spatial and high temporal resolutions required for
defining the drilling site. The goals of the project are to image the
architecture of the basin and the geometry of the lacustrine deposits down to
depths greater than 500 m, to resolve unconformities, and to identify presence
of faults that may result in hiatuses in sedimentation and/or truncations of
sedimentary record. The geophysical investigation will also ensure the
identification of potential hazards to drilling and obstacles (e.g., basaltic
sills), that may interfere or prevent the retrieval of complete stratigraphic
succession. In addition, by illuminating the lacustrine basin infill, the survey
will provide the context for the interpretation of lithological and
stratigraphic information in cores retrieved during the drilling project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.