* 2308839
* Nonlocal Magneto-Curvature Instabilities and their Associated Nonlinear Transport in Astrophysical Disks
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Fatima Ebrahimi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 457,955.00

This award supports a study of the physics of rotating magnetized plasmas
observed in many astrophysical systems and laboratory experiments. New
observational discoveries about black holes and accretion disks increasingly
uncover that our universe is immersed in magnetized plasma, an ionized and
electrically conducting gas. One of the mysteries in the astrophysical rotating
systems has been the rate at which matter accretes from astrophysical disks onto
a central body, such as a black hole. The angular momentum redistribution in
these systems is observed to be far too rapid to be explained by known physical
mechanisms. The resolution may be in the interaction between the rotating plasma
and the magnetic field via the so-called Magneto-Rotational Instability (MRI).
This instability leads to stretching and folding of magnetic field lines that
connect the rotating plasma elements and contribute to the enhancement of
turbulent angular momentum transport. This project will explore the MRI
mechanism and associated magnetized plasma instabilities via three-dimensional
computer simulations, with potential implications for improved understanding of
both astrophysical and laboratory plasmas, including novel plasma confinement
concepts for fusion energy development.

This project will investigate key physical effects of global space and magnetic
curvature in a rotating magnetized plasma which have not previously been taken
into account. In particular, the subject of this study will be the onset and
sustainment of three-dimensional non-axisymmetric perturbations in
differentially rotating systems where exponentially growing axisymmetric MRI
modes could be a partial driver. The question to be addressed is whether in a
domain with spatial curvature global non-axisymmetric modes with real
frequencies can persist. Distinct global modes, which are Alfven-continuum-
driven modes due to global differential rotation and magnetic curvature, have
recently been discovered. These are so-called magneto-curvature instability
modes. Using both global simulations in a flow-driven media and analytical
calculations, this project will investigate (1) the onset of the magneto-
curvature global modes in magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and Hall MHD regimes; and
(2) the effect of these global modes on momentum transport, reconnection, and
dynamo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.