* 2308602
* Testing General Relativity principles with Neutron Stars, Black Holes, and Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Quentin Bailey, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Einstein's General Relativity and quantum physics are the currently accepted
theories describing physics across the universe. General Relativity is a
comprehensive description of observed gravitational phenomena on scales ranging
from micrometers to the size of the visible universe. Quantum physics describes,
to a high degree of precision, the molecular, atomic and subatomic regime.
Despite the success, unresolved questions remain in cosmology and quantum
gravity, and so physicists worldwide conjecture that the two theories are merged
in some unknown unified theory. Recent scientific literature reveals that
experiments and observation could possibly find violations in the foundations of
General Relativity theory. Such foundational principles include the notion of
spacetime symmetry. For example, local experiments should not favor any special
direction in space, according to General Relativity. However, models of quantum
gravity suggest that this principle may be broken in a miniscule but detectable
way. The work supported by this award involves theoretical calculations of
signals for spacetime symmetry breaking in experiments and observations. The
focus will be on using astrophysical phenomena like black holes and
gravitational waves. One of the important aspects of this award is financial
support for undergraduate research in theory. This has the impactful feature of
not only assisting the PI in the work, but also giving research experience to
students, thus contributing to their education and increasing the likelihood of
future STEM careers. Outreach opportunities by the PI and students are also
supported.

The work in this award on tests of the foundations of General Relativity will
use a broad test framework, based on effective field theory. Signals for
spacetime-symmetry violations, like local Lorentz violation and diffeomorphism
symmetry violation, will be calculated for black holes and gravitational waves.
Within the effective field theory framework, strong-field gravity solutions for
the spacetime metric for black holes, modified by generic spacetime-symmetry
violation, will be constructed, representing a new step forward in this area.
Modification to gravitational wave generation is to be studied, complementing
existing analysis on propagation effects. The work is closely tied to finding
specific observables that can be tested against experiments and observations.
Thus, the award supports theoretical work that will provide motivation and
additional areas in which to search for new physics beyond General Relativity,
in particular, in gravitational wave observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.