* 2308449
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Characterizing Poverty Point lithic networks during the Archaic Period in the Lower Mississippi River Valley through analytical chert sourcing
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Ryan Parish, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 22,544.00

This doctoral dissertation project uses chert provenance data to assess the
scale of trade, acquisition, and exchange between groups of people living in the
Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) during the Archaic period. The narrative of the
Poverty Point site, with its abundant, far-reaching, and diverse tool stone
acquisition network, has been characterized as enigmatic without fully testing
the longevity of this pattern from a temporal-cultural perspective. In the past,
identifying the origin of lithic artifacts relied on the subjective and often
inaccurate use of visual identification, but more analytical instrumentation
removes much of the uncertainty. In comparing raw material diversity among
southeastern Middle and Late Archaic sites, possible patterns of regional
cultural continuity or intransigence through time concerning the exchange of
cryptocrystalline exotics and the treatment of debitage will emerge. Utilizing
curated assemblages from sites of cultural significance minimizes the
detrimental effects of excavation on cultural resources but requires a
systematic approach to sampling to ensure comparability among archaeological
artifact assemblages.

Examining Archaic chert resource networks is interdisciplinary relying on the
fields of archaeology, geology, and mineralogy, as well as quantitative
analyses, representing a significant undertaking into the extensive, yet under-
researched, acquisition of chert resources by people at Poverty Point and
related cultural sites. The research contributes to the wider public audience,
engaging people with science and technology by producing information that will
be shared with visitors to the Poverty Point World Heritage Site and made
publicly available. This non-destructive research is a continuation of the first
analytical chert provenance study of the Archaic period in the LMV, providing a
template for other investigations of raw material procurement, mobility, and the
organization of technology. The research will contribute to a greater public
understanding of complex hunter-gatherers and provides data relevant to whether
the people who built Poverty Point utilized the same chert resource networks as
those who occupied the region during earlier cultural periods. This approach can
be applied to archaeological investigations in the LMV Archaic period
assemblages and wherever chert sources were employed in the past.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.