* 2308605
* The influence of biophysical coupling and cross-scale interactions on ecosystems of the Plum Island LTER
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 04/30/2027
* USD 995,883.00

Identifying the biological and environmental factors that govern the
geographical distribution of organisms is critical for understanding the
functioning of natural ecosystems and the myriad benefits that they provide to
society. For example, salt marsh ecosystems serve as critical transition zones
at the land-sea interface and provide key ecosystem services such as improving
water quality via removal of excess nutrients from terrestrial run-off and
mitigating coastal erosion via shoreline buffering. This project leverages a
combination of field surveys, lab experiments, and mathematical models to
predict how the geographical distribution of organisms responsible for these
critical ecosystem services is influenced by biological interactions (e.g.,
competition and predation) as well as environmental factors (e.g., temperature
and physical disturbance) that vary with oceanographic currents across a range
of New England salt marsh locations. The broader impacts of the project include
cross-training of graduate students in biology, statistics, mathematical
modeling, and computer programming. In addition, the results of this project
will be shared with the Plum Island Ecosystems Long Term Ecological Research
(LTER) Network and will be integrated into undergraduate courses in
biostatistics, mathematical modeling, and experimental design in order to
demonstrate the importance of quantitative and interdisciplinary STEM training
for addressing important questions in community and ecosystem ecology. Finally,
multiple interactive web modules will be created to enhance the dissemination of
the results of this research beyond traditional academic circles, including
Northeastern University’s K-12 outreach programs.

The overall aim of this project is to determine whether understanding and
predicting the dynamics of multi-trophic salt marsh ecosystems across multiple
scales hinges upon the integration of physical oceanographic processes and their
influence on the supply of allochthonous inputs. This project will be conducted
at NSF’s Plum Island LTER and consists of four objectives: (1) repeated surveys
of permanently established study plots across three nested spatial scales to
quantify the magnitude of allochthonous inputs and the community structure of
both marine and terrestrial food webs, allowing an assessment of whether the
spatiotemporal distributions of allochthonous inputs and food web architectures
are consistent with their putative physical oceanographic drivers; (2) a field
experiment that manipulates a gradient in the magnitude of detrital input as
well as top-down control by marine fish across three nested spatial scales,
enabling an assessment of whether observed survey patterns are driven by bottom-
up vs. top-down processes; (3) a fully factorial lab experiment to further
disentangle the role of the top-down control by marine fish vs. terrestrial
spiders on key ecosystem processes such as primary production, decomposition,
herbivory, and predation across a gradient of detrital inputs; and (4)
development of a field-parameterized, spatially-explicit mathematical model to
determine the independent and joint influences of bottom-up forcing and top-down
control on the salt marsh community structure across scales. By combining models
and field experiments in a biophysical-allochthonous input framework, this
project will leverage the mechanistic insights traditionally associated with
community ecology to reveal the joint influence of local and broad-scale
processes on the hierarchically organized dynamics of open ecological systems.
This project will help inform resource management for New England salt marshes
and promote public education by highlighting the importance of quantitative and
interdisciplinary STEM training for addressing important questions in biology.

This project is jointly funded by Biological Oceanography and the Ecosystems
Science Cluster.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.