* 2308011
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Understanding population-level genomic and evolutionary impacts of climate change in an anadromous fish species relying on natal homing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Pavel Dimens, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 412,592.00

Range shifts at the species level associated with climate change have been
observed and proposed in many taxa, where a species will typically move its
range towards favorable temperatures in the direction of the nearest pole.
However, genetic subdivision along a speciesâ€™ range is also commonly observed,
which may imply that subpopulations are on different evolutionary trajectories
due to things like natural selection and local adaptation. Despite observing
species range shifts in many taxa, we have yet to document climate-induced
poleward range shifting at this subpopulation level due to the difficulty in
doing so. This project aims to use time series genetic data within an anadromous
fish system to observe poleward range shifting at the subpopulation level for a
species. Anadromous fish are born in freshwater environments, live most of their
lives in a marine environment, and return to the same freshwater systems where
they were born to breed. The return to specific freshwater environments can be
leveraged as a self-sorting mechanism where we are able to sample the fish in
their natal rivers across two different points in time and assess if their genes
have migrated poleward in that time. The PI will broaden participation in
science by mentoring undergraduate and early-career graduate students and by
participating in outreach events at local nature centers associated with the
communities impacted by the collapse of American shad populations.

Genetic drift and selection are the two main factors governing allele
frequencies in populations and identifying temporal and spatial trends in each
provides insights into the evolutionary drivers of populations or species.
Spatial differentiation may suggest e.g., isolation by distance or local
adaptations along clines, however temporal differentiation may be driven by
e.g., cohort effects, drift, or changing selection pressures. I will use the
American shad study system to characterize discrete population-level latitudinal
range shifts identified by assessing spatiotemporal variation in neutral and
adaptive differentiation across river systems they return to for spawning. To
accomplish this, I will examine samples spanning 20 years using linked-read
whole genome sequencing to address the following question: Have individual
American shad populations shifted their distributions poleward? This question
can be decomposed into three specific inquiries: (Q1) Is straying to breed in
non-natal rivers stochastic or directional? (Q2) Have there been population-
level shifts in neutral differentiation spanning multiple generations? (Q3) Have
there been population-level shifts in adaptive differentiation spanning multiple
generations?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.