* 2308860
* NSF-BSF: Ultrafast Laser-Electron Heating for Tailoring the Emittance and Charge of High-Energy Proton Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Siegfried Glenzer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 689,717.00

This award supports a collaboration between Stanford University and Tel Aviv
University in Israel to study ion acceleration with high-intensity lasers. The
joint effort is motivated by the goal of developing ion beam cancer therapy
technology that could be placed in every hospital and would be able to remove
cancer cells everywhere in a human body while leaving the surrounding healthy
tissue unharmed. The novel concept promises a compact, meter-scale accelerator
with the potential to revolutionize the field of ion beam therapy by making it
widely accessible to patients. The project will test predictions of recent
simulation of the proposed accelerator concept at Tel Aviv’s laser facility by
producing large data sets with the goal to fully optimize the ion beam
properties needed for successful deployment. The potential benefits, including
improved cancer care, are expected to increase public interest and engagement in
science and technology while attracting new students into the fields of plasma
and accelerator science.

This project will build on a prior demonstration of a new proton acceleration
regime using high-repetition rate experiments at the high-intensity NEPTUN laser
at Tel Aviv University (TAU). The new proton acceleration regime is
characterized by the recirculation of electrons within the target. This project
will study and optimize this effect using the high repetition rate 10 Hz, 20 TW
laser at TAU and state-of-the-art simulations and modeling developed at
Stanford. Current theoretical predictions show critical dependence and close
correlation of the electron heating with the laser contrast and the ion beam
emittance. The combination of experimental and theoretical capabilities of this
project provides a unique opportunity to test these theoretical predictions.
Focusing on applications in plasma physics and accelerator physics, this study
will determine the dependence of the ion spatial and energy distribution on
laser intensity and pulse contrast using the NEPTUN laser’s unique picosecond
laser pulse-shaping capabilities. The goal of the project is to demonstrate
proton beam properties required for injection into a high-gradient linear proton
accelerator. The project is expected to provide a clear path towards the
development of a compact accelerator capable of reaching the urgently needed
250+ MeV regime for applications in medical therapies and imaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.