* 2308272
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Reconstructing CO2 Levels for the Late Cretaceous through Paleocene using Sedimentary Compositions of Molecular and Isotopic Proxies
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Kelsey Doiron, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2025
* USD 333,652.00

This project focuses on reconstruction of ancient atmospheric CO2 levels
providing crucial evidence about past ‘greenhouse’ conditions that is critical
to forecasting and modeling Earth’s future climate. This project investigates
organic molecules derived from ancient organisms that are preserved in ocean
sediments. The composition of these molecules records environmental information
that includes evidence of CO2 levels enabling estimation of its atmospheric
abundance through geological history. The study centers on examination of
molecules in sediment cores recovered from the Transkei Basin off South Africa's
coast that were collected during Expedition 392 of the International Ocean
Discovery Program (IODP) in 2022. The sediments were deposited from 79 to 61
million years ago, when CO2 levels were much higher than today but also rising,
so this time intervals provides an analog for Earth's future climate. Thus, the
project will advance our understanding of past CO2 levels and seek to refine and
expand the methods used for their determination. It also comprises initiatives
designed to broaden scientific participation. PI-Doiron will engage K-6 students
through collaboration with Centralia Elementary School District in Southern
California and partner with South African colleagues to create K-12 outreach
materials related to the findings from IODP Expedition 392. Doiron and her
mentors will also lead a workshop to discuss the range of molecular and isotopic
data that have proven useful for reconstructing past climates with the aim of
educating members of the scientific community interested in Earth's climate
history about these tools.

Specifically, this research project will assess the comparative utility of
different lipid biomarker classes as pCO2 proxies by examining the del13C values
of phytane, pristane, alkenones, and glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers
(GDGTs). Phytane is a phytoplankton-associated pCO2 proxy assumed primarily to
represent the phytol side chain of chlorophyll a, and thus records CO2
incorporated into biomass during photosynthesis. Yet, there are caveats
associated with the direct application of this proxy in the sedimentary record
because of the potential for phytane to derive from other sources and fulfill a
different biochemical function. Specifically, archaeal lipids (e.g., diphytanyl
ethers) can contribute to the phytane pool, and thereby compromise the phytane
pCO2 signal. This proposal seeks to examine the veracity of the phytane proxy by
obtaining multiple pCO2 records from other source-specific biomarkers in
immature sediments. It will assess and compare the following components: (i)
phytane, which is derived from breakdown of phytoplankton chlorophyll or from
archaeal diethers; (ii) C37 alkenones, that are source-specific lipids of
haptophyte algae; (iii) pristane, a breakdown product formed either from the
phytyl side chain of chlorophyll a or from tocopherols; and (iv) GDGTs, which
are membrane lipids in archaea. It will focus on Campanian to Paleocene
sediments from the Transkei Basin recovered from IODP Expedition 392. In
summary, this study can make a critical contribution toward enhancing the
application of different biomarker-based pCO2 proxies and generating evidence
for pCO2 concentrations during the Late Cretaceous through the Paleocene where
data are sparse yet directly relevant to future climate scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.