* 2308548
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the link between water ages and silicate weathering rates at the catchment scale
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Adrian Harpold, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 25,381.00

The interaction between water and minerals is a fundamental process that shapes
and records memories of landscapes, generates water quality and nutrients to
sustain ecosystems, and draws down atmospheric CO2 over longer timescales. In
watersheds, water is fed into the landscape through rain and snow where it
starts its journey along various paths in the subsurface. Along the path, water
encounters and exchanges with minerals, incorporating chemicals liberated from
the solids and transforming them into other forms in a process termed
weathering. Eventually the water with its unique chemical signature is flushed
from the system into nearby streams and groundwater springs. The conventional
wisdom is that the longer water spends in contact with the surrounding
subsurface, the more chemically evolved it becomes. Under this framework, the
amount of weathering observed in a catchment should be inextricably linked with
groundwater ages. Historically, this relationship has been difficult to fully
evaluate. This project will use modern geochemical tools in tandem with advanced
modeling approaches to advance our understanding of the relationship between
groundwater ages and weathering fluxes in a montane catchment, Sagehen Creek
Basin, located in the Central Sierra Nevada mountains in California. This
collaborative research effort will support two early career scientists, one PhD
student, a field technician, and provide opportunities for undergraduate
research. Researchers will collaborate with established Earth Science educators
to launch a suite of educational products and initiatives to engage the broader
public, high school students and instructors on hydrology and water quality
themes.

This research aims to better characterize the relationship between groundwater
ages and silicate weathering rates at the catchment-scale through a combined
hydrologic and geochemical approach. Silicate weathering reactions are uniquely
coupled to catchment hydrology due to slow reaction kinetics; thus, solute
generation is inherently dependent on the time fluids spend exposed to minerals.
The project will develop and leverage a new, comprehensive water age (CFC, SF6,
and 35S) and weathering (δ30Si, δ44Ca, and Ge/Si) tracer dataset to inform a
coupled 2D physical transport hydrologic and isotope-enabled, multicomponent
reactive transport model. The study will be conducted at Sagehen Creek Basin, a
snowmelt driven, igneous, montane watershed sensitive to climatic. Sagehen is a
widely studied site with several prior studies demonstrating a correlation
between measured weathering-derived solute fluxes and groundwater residence
times. This hybrid hydrological and geochemical approach will provide
unprecedented insight into the synergistic relationship between fluid transit
time and silicate weathering. The researchers plan to generate dynamic,
continually evolving transit time distributions for water in response to both
seasonal and event forcing, and through the incorporation of “fast”/shallow and
“slow”/deeper groundwater components. This research further provides an
opportunity to evaluate the utility of stable isotopes and trace element tracers
that are sensitive to distinct reaction pathways, and to quantify how the extent
of reactions can serve as “reaction clocks”. Findings will provide insight into
persistent questions in critical zone science related to watershed
hydrogeochemical response to climate change.

This research is co-funded by the Division of Earth Sciences Geobiology and Low-
Temperature Geochemistry Program and Hydrologic Sciences Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.