* 2308186
* Collaborative Research: GLOW: Basal magma ocean dynamos of early Earth, Venus, and the Moon
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joseph O'Rourke, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Keane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 82,961.00

The origin of the ancient magnetic fields of Earth and its nearest neighbors,
Venus and the Moon, is not well understood. The program will aim to understand
if a dynamo generated by a magma ocean could have sustained Earth’s early
magnetic field. The project will also determine for how long a dynamo may have
existed on Venus and if such a dynamo was responsible for the high intensity
magnetic field in the early history of the Moon. All modifications to the models
will be open source for the science community. The work will be aired on the
public service radio program EarthDate. Undergraduate students will join the
team to run dynamo simulation numerical models, develop skills in data analytics
and computational tools that will enhance professional development.

The origin of ancient magnetic fields in terrestrial planets and moons prior to
formation of the inner core is a long-standing question. Basal magma ocean
dynamos have been hypothesized as mechanisms to explain how the Earth was able
to maintain a magnetic field before the onset of inner core growth. This program
will investigate the degree and mechanisms of dynamic and magnetic coupling
between the lowermost liquid mantle and the iron-alloy core in the early Earth,
the Moon and Venus. The project will determine how stable stratification in the
basal magma ocean or core modulates magnetic field generation and attenuation,
as well as mixing between these reservoirs. The team will simulate dynamos with
different transport properties, such as electrical conductivity, thermal
diffusivity, and kinematic viscosity, in the basal magma ocean and the core.
These calculations will determine whether basal magma ocean dynamos can generate
magnetic fields that are consistent with observational constraints. A better
characterization of magnetic field generation in terrestrial planets and moons
will advance the understanding of basal magma ocean dynamos in exoplanets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.