* 2308190
* Liger: Initiating Fabrication of Next Generation Keck Imager and Spectrograph
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Shelley Wright, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 03/31/2024
* USD 799,842.00

The Liger instrument will allow astronomers to study solar systems around other
stars, other galaxies and the regions near black holes. This instrument is a
large complex unit. This project will allow the team developing this concept to
continue their design work and build an important component of that system that
operates at low temperature. In addition, the participants plan to expand a
portable planetarium outreach program, Cosmic Tours, to better support San Diego
County elementary and middle schools with curated shows that incorporate the
Next Generation Science Standards.

The Liger instrument envisaged for deployment at the Keck Observatory will
combine an adaptive optics-fed integral field spectrograph and imaging camera
that operate simultaneously in the near-infrared (0.81-2.45 μm). This project
will maintain Liger’s fabrication momentum and provide the necessary research
and development on a subsystem of the full instrument. Specifically, the plan is
to fabricate, integrate, and cryogenically characterize the imager detector
assembly that houses both the Teleydne Hawaii-2RG detector and pick-off mirrors
that direct light to each of the lenslet and slicer integral field spectrograph
components. A cryogenic chamber will be fabricated and integrated for alignment
of the Liger imager and for testing the detector assembly. In parallel, software
will be developed that uses the latest MACIE controllers with the Teledyne
Hawaii-2RG. This testing will be the main component of a graduate student’s
thesis work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.