* 2308013
* Collaborative Research: Electron Impact Ionization and Recombination Properties of Heavy elements in Kilonovae.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Phillip Stancil, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 114,917.00

Electron impact ionization (EII) and dielectronic recombination (DR) are key
processes that govern the ionization balance of astrophysical plasmas. This
research project will calculate accurate EII and DR cross sections for heavy
elements produced in neutron star mergers (NSMs). These calculations will allow
astronomers to accurately interpret the spectra of kilonovae, the transient
electromagnetic emission from material ejected by NSMs, thus advancing our
understanding of the production sites of the heaviest elements in the universe.
The project will train a graduate student in advanced atomic physics methods,
provide research opportunities to undergraduate students, and expose high school
students to astronomical research.

Using modern electronic structure codes, the investigators will calculate and
benchmark EII and DR cross sections for ions of important elements produced by
the rapid neutron capture process in NSMs. Extensive calculations will yield DR
rate coefficients for temperatures consistent with the thermal (low energy) and
non-thermal (high energy) electron components in kilonova ejecta. The EII cross
sections will allow the investigators to explore the contributions of other
ionization mechanisms that are missing from models of kilonova emission. This
project advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.