* 2308641
* ECLIPSE: Miniaturization of Ultra-High-Power Laser Systems with Plasma Grating Chirped Pulse Amplification
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Matthew Edwards, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This project explores the use of plasma elements in the construction of high-
power laser systems. Lasers are an important tool for both fundamental science
and commercial applications, but the light intensity delivered by the most
powerful systems is limited by damage to their glass and metal optics. Plasma
can withstand much higher light intensity than glass or other solid materials
without being damaged. Plasma could therefore enable the miniaturization of
ultra-high-power lasers, but taking advantage of this robustness in practical
devices has proven difficult. This project uses detailed measurements of the
optical properties of plasmas to improve the performance of plasma optics and
integrate them into the design of short-pulse laser systems. Specific objectives
are the improvement of plasma optic stability and the development of optics with
properties suitable for use in larger systems. The overall goal is to develop
laser architectures that integrate plasma components effectively, ultimately
enabling higher power in smaller laser system footprints. This project will
investigate the use of volumetric plasma transmission gratings in the design of
chirped-pulse-amplification femtosecond laser systems, with the goal of
developing architectures suitable for compact multi-petawatt lasers. Pump lasers
can be used to shape plasmas with wavelength-scale optical-quality variations in
density, allowing the creation of plasma transmission gratings and other
diffractive optics. This type of plasma optic is relatively resilient to plasma
density imperfections and further improvements in optical quality and stability
could enable the replacement of solid-state diffraction gratings with plasma
analogues, dramatically shrinking the size of the optics required for high-power
femtosecond systems. This project focuses on the scientific and practical issues
between demonstration of optical control with a plasma grating and the
development of terawatt-scale plasma-based pulse compression, including grating
stability, energy scaling, and the design of an optimal compressor architecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.