* 2308524
* RAPID: Exploring Impacts of Cascading Failure and Recovery Efforts of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure in Socially Vulnerable Puerto Rican Communities After Hurricane Fiona
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Diana Ramirez-Rios, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Hurricane Fiona severely impacted Southwestern Puerto Rico, provoking
landslides, unleashing flooding across the Island, and obliterating the power
grid. Such impacts are quite unusual for a Category 1 hurricane, raising
concerns about disaster-preparedness of the US Territory that faces a
multilayered socioeconomic crisis rooted in long-standing policy, migration, and
poor budget practices. While it is well-known that disasters and subsequent
recovery efforts exacerbate the socioeconomic disparities among marginalized
groups, there is a lack of understanding of how these groups are being impacted
by the cascading critical infrastructure (CI) failures and delays in the
restoration process. While the role of CI interdependencies has gained
importance for analyzing cascading failures, their linkage to restoration
activities after a hurricane and the compounding effect on community recovery
have not yet been extensively studied or systematically documented. This Grant
for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award supports the collection of time-
sensitive data to study the impacts of cascading hurricane-induced failures of
electric and transportation networks on socially vulnerable Puerto Rican
communities and to understand the relationships between CI restoration
activities and faster community recovery. The research findings will fill an
important data gap for the development of community-based multi-infrastructure
optimal recovery and reconstruction strategies.

This research will quantify the impacts of cascading failures of power grid and
transportation systems on socially vulnerable communities and capture the
dynamic relationships of CI restoration interdependencies with the community
recovery process. In addition to data collected from publicly available sources,
the research team will conduct interviews and focused-group surveys of the
emergency managers and infrastructure operators to understand the
multidimensional impacts on the hardest-hit Puerto Rican communities and
investigate how the restoration decisions are associated with the challenges and
resource constraints. The team will also conduct a focused-group survey of the
households from communities of high social vulnerability to document their
actual and perceived harms owing to hurricane-induced infrastructure failure and
the delayed community recovery. This project will generate valuable information
to better inform decision-makers to anticipate future disruptions in CI systems
and plan for efficient and equitable restoration strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.