* 2308688
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: The Tennessee Valley Tri-State LSAMP Alliance-Creating a Pathway of Success for General STEM Education
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Timmy James, University of North Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 09/30/2028
* USD 932,069.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: Blacks and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared students,
highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.
The need for cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United
States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy.

The Tennessee Valley Tri-State STEM Pathways Implementation-Only (SPIO)
Alliance, under the leadership of the University of North Alabama (UNA),
includes the University of Tennessee Martin (UTM), Mississippi University for
Women (MUW) and Northwest-Shoals Community College (NW-SCC). The institutions
are located in NSF's Established Programs to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) jurisdictions. Resulting from a 2020 LSAMP planning award, the
project's objective is designed to execute a pathway specifically devised to
improve general STEM education outcomes for students matriculating in
undergraduate studies. Activities include creating and implementing an annual
Summer Bridge Program for incoming Scholars focused on basic math preparation
and basic science skills, an annual Alliance-wide symposium, practical skills
development, peer tutoring, and social supports. Dedicated access to a cohort of
STEM Faculty mentors at each of our sites will promote and support student
engagement in research activities. In the long-term, the alliance has an
unprecedented opportunity to infuse regional and national job markets with
trained and diverse STEM professionals from rural backgrounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.