* 2308618
* Northern New Jersey Bridges to the Baccalaureate (NNJ-B2B)
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Maria Isaza, Passaic County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,499,363.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (Blacks and African-Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians and Native Pacific Islanders)
to successfully complete high quality degree programs in STEM.

The Northern New Jersey LSAMP Bridge to the Baccalaureate (NNJ-B2B) project
continues its partnership between four community colleges in the state, namely,
Passaic County Community College (PCCC), Bergen Community College, Hudson County
Community College (HCCC), and County College of Morris (UCM), to increase
transfer rates to four-year STEM degree programs for LSAMP student populations.
PCCC leads this three-year project. The institutions will partner through
articulations agreements with four-year institutions in the state including
Rutgers University-New Brunswick, Ramapo College of New Jersey, New Jersey City
University, Stockton University, Vaughn College of Aeronautics and Technology,
St. Elizabeth's College, among others in STEM fields such as cybersecurity and
chemical technology.

The goal is to increase the number of transfers during the project period.
NNJ-B2B institutions will leverage knowledge generated from prior NSF funded
projects to bring expertise to the design and implementation of a range of high
impact practices that will aide in achieving its transfer goal and transform its
recruitment and retention interventions and institutions. Students will benefit
from financial support, early undergraduate research experiences, STEM mentoring
and professional development in addition to social integration activities.
Leadership and governance activities of the alliance will continue emphasis on
improving articulation policies with additional four-year institutions. A
longitudinal study of students participating in the B2B project since 2014 is
proposed along with process evaluation. Project outcomes will be disseminated
locally and nationally through conferences and on-line STEM education journals.
Findings from this LSAMP B2B project will benefit educational institutions and
the STEM community nationally in broadening participation efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.