* 2308398
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Scaling up herbivore holobiont physiology from genes to populations across a temperate upwelling gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2026
* Nathan Spindel, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 02/28/2026
* USD 342,000.00

This project investigates the crucial role of herbivores in shaping temperate
nearshore subtidal reefs and kelp forests, and the potential impacts of climate
change on the balance between consumption by herbivores and growth by primary
producers. By utilizing an upwelling gradient spanning coastal California as a
natural laboratory, and controlled experiments, the study aims to deepen our
understanding of the complex interacting effects of temperature and oxygen
availability on herbivore physiology and performance. This research holds
significant implications for advancing the field of ocean sciences, promoting
the progress of science, and addressing the national interest. Herbivores, such
as the chosen model organism Mesocentrotus franciscanus, play a fundamental role
in maintaining the dynamics and productivity of marine ecosystems. The
ecological, economic, and cultural importance of M. franciscanus makes it an
ideal focal species for this investigation. Through in-situ observations,
laboratory experiments, and functional 'omics' analyses, the project seeks to
elucidate the physiological responses of M. franciscanus to temperature and
oxygen variations. By quantifying individual-level herbivore energetics,
population demographics, and community structure, the study will shed light on
the intricate mechanisms underlying the relationship between climate change and
herbivory in temperate ecosystems. These findings will not only advance our
scientific knowledge but also have broader implications for ecosystem
conservation and management strategies. Moreover, the project aligns with the
Division of Ocean Sciences mission by addressing fundamental issues related to
the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems. It supports education and
diversity through partnerships with middle and high schools, undergraduate
research opportunities, and public engagement initiatives. By engaging
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields and broadening participation in
scientific research, this project aims to inspire the next generation of
scientists and enhance the diversity of the STEM workforce. Ultimately, this
research serves the national interest by contributing to the progress of
science, promoting the welfare of coastal communities, and fostering a
sustainable approach to marine ecosystem management.

This project encompasses a comprehensive investigation into the effects of
temperature and oxygen availability on herbivory and its implications for
temperate nearshore subtidal reefs and kelp forests. The research will be
conducted along a temperate upwelling gradient in coastal California,
encompassing diverse environmental conditions representative of this region. The
study will combine in-situ observations, laboratory experiments, and functional
'omics' analyses to provide a multi-dimensional understanding of the effects of
temperature and oxygen availability on herbivore physiology, grazing rates, and
emergent population dynamics in kelp forests. The goals of the project include
quantifying individual-level herbivore energetics, population demographics, and
community structure in response to varying temperature and oxygen conditions. By
integrating physiological measurements, population modeling, and community-level
analyses, the project aims to unravel the underlying processes shaping the
performance of M. franciscanus and its ecological consequences within temperate
subtidal ecosystems. The functional 'omics' analyses will provide mechanistic
insight into the gene expression patterns of the whole organism "holobiont" and
the sea urchin microbiome, revealing the molecular mechanisms that drive
herbivore responses to changing environmental conditions. The outcomes of this
research will contribute new knowledge to the field by providing a comprehensive
understanding of the physiological constraints on herbivory in temperate
nearshore ecosystems. The project will enhance our understanding of the impacts
of climate change on marine ecosystems, contribute to ecological modeling
efforts, and inform conservation strategies for coastal regions. Furthermore, by
engaging with middle and high school students, undergraduate researchers, and
the general public through exhibits and outreach programs, this project will
foster science education, broaden participation in STEM, and raise awareness
about the importance of marine ecosystem conservation. The benefits of this
project extend beyond academia, benefiting society by supporting the sustainable
management of coastal resources and inspiring future generations to pursue
scientific careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.