* 2308845
* Understanding Quantum Gravity from Very Early Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Anzhong Wang, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 50,000.00

A theory of quantum gravity still remains elusive, despite enormous efforts in
the past century. Quantum gravity is needed not only for conceptual reasons but
also for the understanding of fundamental issues in physics, such as the big
bang and black hole singularities. Various candidates have been proposed, and
the research supported by this grant is devoted to loop quantum gravity. When
applying it to cosmology - the loop quantum cosmology, a coherent picture of
Planck scale physics has emerged: the big bang singularity is replaced by a
quantum bounce, purely due to quantum geometric effects. This research
investigates systematically this and related issues and shall combine studies in
challenging physics problems with advanced mathematical methods, which will
provide outstanding opportunities for students and collaborators across several
different areas of physics and applied mathematics. The theory, techniques and
methods to be developed will be used not only in the aforementioned fields, but
also in a wider range of fundamental issues in physics and applied mathematics.
Particular attention will be put to recruit and attract students from under-
represented groups in STEM fields and engineering.

Despite the various successes of Loop Quantum Cosmology (LQC), an important
issue is its connection to loop quantum gravity (LQG). The starting point of LQC
is first to reduce the Hamiltonian by imposing homogeneity and then to quantize
the classically reduced Hamiltonian by using the techniques of LQG. However, in
LQG the processes of symmetry reduction and quantization do not commute in
general, and it is important to understand how well the physics of the full LQG
is captured by LQC. In the past couple of years, modified loop quantum
cosmologies have been intensively studied, and the progress made so far is very
encouraging, but several fundamental questions still remain, due to the dramatic
change of the evolution of the universe in the pre-bounce phase. The research of
this award will be devoted to investigating systematically: (i) quantum
cosmological perturbations and initial conditions from the full theory of loop
quantum gravity; (ii) the evolutions of inhomogeneities, anisotropies and non-
Gaussianities; and (iii) resolutions of anomalies found in recent cosmological
observations, and observational signals of loop quantum gravity for current and
forthcoming observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.