* 2308228
* Fast Transients and Furious Spectroscopy: Revealing the High-Speed Sky with Argus Pathfinder
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nicholas Law, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 628,661.00

New sensor technologies and mass-produced optical systems will allow the Argus
Pathfinder project to push to far faster survey speeds than any telescope
before, which will enable new discoveries. For example, superflares are very
fast bursts of radiation from stars. Understanding superflare behavior is
crucial to the search for life beyond Earth, and it requires high-speed
observations and the ability to point multiple telescopes very rapidly to events
as they occur. Other mysterious fast events have been seen at other wavelengths,
and they have visible-light counterparts that can shed light on what they are.
These and other “transients” occur at random times and places in the sky. The
best way to catch them is to survey as much of the sky as possible, as quickly
as possible. Argus Pathfinder will make a “movie” of a very large patch of sky.
It will observe thousands of transients as they evolve, and rapidly alert other
ground- and space-based telescopes. The investigators will contribute to
developing and upgrading the Morehead Planetarium’s major time-domain astronomy
exhibit to improve the engagement and astronomical inspiration of the
approximately 150,000 schoolchildren who interact with the exhibit each year.

The 2.3GPix Argus Pathfinder array covers a stripe of the sky 92 degrees in
declination and 3.7 degrees in right ascension, with 1.4”/pixel sampling almost
reaching the atmospheric-seeing limit. The system tracks each stripe of the sky
for 15 minutes, and thus covers almost the entire Northern sky each night.
Pathfinder’s CMOS detectors are capable of reading out entire frames with only
millisecond-level overheads and have 1-electron-level readnoise, which comes
close to single-photon detection capabilities. Pathfinder’s large high-speed
detector array, wide passband, and very wide field of view combine to make the
system capable of reaching orders of magnitude beyond the closest comparable
searches for 1-second duration transients. In the 30s-cadence base survey,
Pathfinder will push eight magnitudes deeper than the best previous probes
capable of covering the entire sky, and it will cover a survey area at least
5,000 times larger than the deep, narrow minute-timescale probes attempted on
larger telescopes. These capabilities will enable a comprehensive
characterization of the high-speed sky – and detailed astrophysical measurements
of individual populations such as fast radio bursts and stellar superflares. For
the latter, Pathfinder will obtain time-resolved light curves and spectra to
model the flares’ all-important energetic particle releases and constrain their
habitability impacts. For the largest flares, the system will use the new rapid-
slew capabilities of the Swift satellite to obtain minute-timescale direct EUV
and X-ray flux measurements, and thus a direct measurement of potential
planetary habitability impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.