* 2308415
* Linear and Nonlinear Tides in Coalescing Binary Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hang Yu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 180,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Gravitational Physics program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Tidal
interactions, which result in the Moon always facing the Earth with the same
side, also impact the coalescence of binary neutron stars (BNSs), leaving a
noticeable imprint on the gravitational wave (GW) signal of the binary. The
discovery of the BNS event GW190817 by LIGO and Virgo has demonstrated the
immense scientific potential of studying tides in BNSs. This award will support
research into investigating tidal interactions in BNSs based on first-principle
theories and their implications for GW observations. It will also facilitate the
training of a graduate student in state-of-the-art analytical and computational
methods, contributing to the STEM workforce in the United States. In addition to
scientific research, outreach activities will be developed to engage women and
other underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.

To advance analytical models describing tidal interactions, nonlinear
hydrodynamical interactions, referred to as nonlinear tides, will be taken into
account. This will involve expanding the perturbed fluid motion into eigenmodes
and considering the nonlinear couplings among these modes. The evolution of the
modes will then be coupled with the GW-driven orbital decay. It has been
suggested that incorporating nonlinear tides may enhance the agreement between
analytical models and numerical relativity simulations based on tidal
calculations at the Newtonian order. The calculations will be extended to post-
Newtonian orders, resulting in readily applicable templates for GW data analysis
and comparison with numerical relativity. Additionally, the incorporation of
neutron star spins and binary eccentricities will be further explored. Certain
computational tools developed during this project will be made publicly
accessible online, fostering collaboration and facilitating scientific
advancements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.