* 2308574
* Creating an All-optical, Mechanobiology-guided, and Machine-learning-powered High-throughput Framework to Elucidate Neural Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Xin Tang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 05/31/2026
* USD 440,376.00

The ability to change cell membrane voltage is essential for neurons, nerve
cells that send messages across the body. Voltage changes serve to regulate the
behavior of the neuron and can be an indicator of health and disease. Like other
cells in the body, neurons sense their surroundings and adapt. Current methods
to study neurons often do not mimic the environments they encounter in the body
and cannot measure their behavior at a high enough speed. The goal of this
project is to create a new strategy that leverages advanced high-throughput
microscopy and machine learning to understand neural behavior at unprecedented
speeds, lower costs, and in environments that mimic those encountered in the
body. Through a range of educational activities at the University of Florida,
such as the Student Science Training Program (SSTP) at the Center for
Precollegiate Education and Training (CPET) and Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experience (CURE), this project will broaden participation of
historically underserved groups in STEM fields. Training and hands-on research
opportunities will be provided to all students to better prepare them for
successful future careers.

This project will develop and validate an experimental-computational framework
that enables optical interrogation of neuron membrane voltage dynamics in a
high-throughput, mechanobiology-guided, and non-invasive manner. The overarching
goal is that a framework can be created by integrating wide-area voltage
imaging, large tissue-mimicking hydrogel-based culture, patterned crosstalk-free
optogenetic stimulation, and machine-learning powered closed-loop control to
elucidate the membrane voltage dynamics of hundreds of neurons simultaneously,
filling technological gaps. The project will explore novel oblique light-sheet
illumination and crosstalk-free optogenetic stimulation approaches to enable
exploration of plasma membrane voltage dynamics in several hundreds of neurons
simultaneously. Scientific findings in this project are expected to provide a
new fundamental understanding of electrophysiology and mechanobiology of neurons
and inform development of new strategies to treat human diseases. The framework
is scalable and can be applied to investigate other cell types, such as
cardiomyocytes and muscle cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.