* 2308472
* Species interactions and seasonal transmission of fungal diseases in plant populations: experimental tests of historical contingency
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Corbin Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,452,563.00

The goal of this project is to understand how pathogen transmission can be
influenced both by interactions of pathogens within hosts and by the
environment. Across humans, non-human animals, and plants, many epidemics are
seasonal – that is, they are started or accelerated by shifts in the seasonal
environment. Prediction of future epidemics may be improved by a more precise
understanding of how shifts in the seasonal environment cause epidemics. A
challenge for understanding the causes of seasonal epidemics is that these
epidemics often involve ecological interactions such as competition among
multiple species of organisms. To address this challenge, this project will
conduct a series of experiments under field conditions on interactions between
multiple fungal pathogens infecting a shared plant host. To increase the
public’s involvement in science, the project scientists will partner with a
science museum to apply current methods for effective engagement of the public,
to integrate the project’s approaches and findings into K-12 educational
curricula, and to develop interactive exhibits for the public. This project will
use a model system to develop innovative approaches that can be applied in other
systems to understand the causes of seasonal epidemics, improve agricultural
practices, and improve our capacity to predict epidemics.

Recent theory predicts that the outcome of species interactions between
pathogens or parasites within a host individual can be influenced by the
community context in which they are embedded. As ecological communities assemble
over time, these context-dependent interactions create historical contingency.
To resolve the roles of species interactions and environmental conditions in
seasonal epidemics, this project will manipulate within-host interactions and
quantify disease transmission in the context of seasonally varying environmental
conditions. The project will leverage an experimentally tractable field system:
two fungal pathogens (Rhizoctonia solani and Colletotrichum cereale) that infect
leaves of the widespread and agriculturally important grass species tall fescue
(Lolium arundinaceum). Using this system, the researchers will conduct field
experiments that manipulate the history of disease transmission. The project
will employ an integrative approach that uses field experiments conducted at two
ecological levels – host individuals and populations – and bridges across those
levels with a dynamical model. In this integrative framework, the project will
investigate additional layers of biological complexity, including the seasonal
dynamics of parasite genetic lineages, and influences of the host microbiome on
disease transmission. Ultimately, this project will further our understanding of
when within-host species interactions, in concert with environmental conditions,
can govern seasonal shifts in disease transmission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.