* 2308844
* TDYNO: Fluctuation Dynamo, Heat Transport, and Ion Acceleration in Magnetized Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Petros Tzeferacos, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

This award supports a laboratory-based study of astrophysical plasma turbulence
using simulations and high power laser facilities. Magnetized plasma turbulence,
the stochastic twisting and tangling of magnetic fields in the turbulent matter
of galaxy clusters, is currently the best working hypothesis to account for
cosmic magnetic fields. Stochastic magnetic fields are theorized to be
responsible for regulating heat conduction in galaxy cluster cores; and
magnetized turbulence plays a key role in the transport and energization of
cosmic rays. The emergence of high-power lasers and high performance computing
have radically changed the way these processes can be studied, enabling new
opportunities to recreate and model astrophysically relevant magnetized plasmas
in the laboratory. The TDYNO (turbulent dynamo) collaboration, co-led by the
University of Rochester and the University of Oxford and supported by this
award, is studying the fundamental properties of magnetized turbulence and the
astrophysical processes it mediates through a combination of high-fidelity
numerical simulations with the FLASH code and laser-driven experiments at world-
class laser facilities.

This project builds on the recent achievements of the TDYNO collaboration and
enables the design, execution, and interpretation of novel laser-driven
laboratory astrophysics experiments at the Omega Laser Facility at the
Laboratory for Laser Energetics, the National Ignition Facility (NIF) at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy
Ion Research. The experiments exploit the mature and versatile TDYNO
experimental platform, which will be tailored through FLASH design simulations
to (1) answer fundamental questions pertinent to the onset and decay of
magnetized turbulence and turbulent dynamo (Omega), (2) measure and bracket how
heat is transported in strongly magnetized turbulent plasmas (NIF), and (3)
characterize the mechanisms behind the energization of ions in stochastic
magnetic fields (GSI). In doing so, the project contributes to the goals of
NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics"
program. The project supports research thrusts that are of broad interest to the
plasma physics and astrophysics communities and provides unique training
opportunities to several graduate students and postdoctoral scholars at the
University of Rochester and the University of Oxford.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.