* 2308360
* Collaborative Research: Developing optimally customized-mode-selective photonic lanterns to enable the characterization of hundreds of exoplanets on solar system.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Nemanja Jovanovic, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 586,081.00

There are currently more than 5,000 confirmed planets orbiting stars other than
our Sun. Being able to separate and analyze the colors of light from these
planets would provide a wealth of information, including for example allowing
for the measurement of composition and abundance of various molecules, to study
circulation (weather) patterns, and to indicate the presence of moons. The key
to being able to carry out such characterizations is the ability to isolate the
extremely faint planetary light from the bright glare of the star the planet
orbits around. Unfortunately, of the 5,000+ confirmed exoplanets, only about 1
in 100 have been characterized like this, and none of those are orbiting their
host stars within orbits the size of our solar system. This project aims at
advancing a key technology known as a “photonic lantern” for the purpose of
eliminating contaminating starlight so that an exoplanet (a planet orbiting
another star) can be isolated and characterized within the angular resolution
limit of the telescope. The investigators will look into unique designs of
photonic lanterns to maximize the effect of nulling (starlight suppression) and
stability in tandem with other technologies. This project supports training of
the next generation of instrument designers by providing unique opportunities
for students to work at cutting edge facilities on 8-m class telescopes.

The Vortex Fiber Nuller (VFN), recently commissioned within the KPIC instrument
on the Keck Telescope, is an example of an instrument incorporating new
technology. It utilizes a pupil-plane vortex mask followed by a focal-plane
single-mode fiber (SMF) to reject starlight and accept planet light with ~19%
transmission at 1 λ/D separation. If the SMF were replaced with a 6-port hybrid
mode-selective photonic lantern (PL), the total planet throughput would be
increased by ~2x, and its location and brightness constrained. Both are
impossible with the current SMF VFN approach. In addition, the PL enables focal-
plane wavefront sensing (WFS), eliminates non-common path and chromatic errors,
thus deepening and stabilizing the null. Utilizing a PL for nulling extends the
reach of VFN to allow hundreds of giant exoplanets to be directly characterized,
providing a robust sample in the study of planet formation. We propose to
develop novel hybrid and mode-selective PLs for optimal on-board WFS and nulling
with 8-10 m telescopes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.