* 2308692
* I-Corps:  Scalable Artificial Intelligence-Supported Flood Resilience Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Xiao Huang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a scalable, flood resilience software framework to provide fast,
accurate, and valid flood damage prediction under various flooding scenarios and
at multiple geographic scales. The services provided by the proposed
cyberinfrastructure platform may provide scalable, dynamic, intelligent,
building-level flood resilience assessment. The proposed technology
significantly reduces the workload of measuring house-level lowest floor
elevation and largely facilitates community-level flood damage assessment by
providing services of on-the-fly damage predictions with user-defined scenarios.
One benefit of the successful deployment of the proposed technology may be to
help communities quickly explore the spatial distribution of flood risks and
test how flood events with varying intensities affect individual houses as well
as the whole community. Such knowledge is expected to further benefit government
officials, first responders, and resource allocators. The knowledge will also
help promote flood awareness at the regional and national levels.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an Artificial Intelligence
(AI)-supported geospatial cyberinfrastructure platform for flood damage
prediction. Existing community-level flood resilience and adaptation are often
investigated in an unscalable manner, making the investigation workflow
community-specific with low transferability to other communities or to large
geographical scales. In comparison, the proposed technology achieves accurate,
fast, and low-cost flood resilience assessment by 1) deriving fine-grained,
building-level flood exposure using United States national building footprints
and cross-referenced floodplain products, 2) proposing a scalable workflow of
lowest floor elevation retrieval, taking advantage of street view images, 3)
developing a flood damage simulation paradigm incorporating building
characteristics and simulated flood intensity, and 4) designing an online portal
for scalable flood resilience assessment, with the capability of interactive
updates, flood scenario selection, location queries, and report generation. The
proposed AI-supported cyberinfrastructure and flood damage simulation framework
are expected to renovate and transform large-scale flood damage assessment and
flood situational awareness communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.