* 2308691
* Northwestern University Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Jonathan Rivnay, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The Northwestern University Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (NU-MRSEC) advances world-class materials research,
education, and outreach via active interdisciplinary collaborations within the
Center and with external partners in academia, industry, national laboratories,
and museums, both domestically and abroad. The intellectual merit of the NU-
MRSEC resides primarily within its interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) and
seed-funded projects that explore the frontiers of materials research. IRG-1
entitled “Bioprogrammable Materials via Cell-Free Synthetic Biology” develops
soft composite materials that incorporate biological machinery in a cell-free
platform, thus removing the nourishment and care demands of living tissue. In
this manner, the functionality of living biological systems are achieved in an
autonomous material with direct implications for sustainable agriculture, water
treatment, smart clothing, and wound healing. IRG-2 entitled “Orchestrated
Iontronics via Dynamic Hybrid Ionic/Electronic Conductors” designs materials
that concurrently conduct ions and electrons, behaving in a manner that mimics
biological neurons. These hybrid ionic/electronic conductors thus enable brain-
inspired computation that is accelerating advances in artificial intelligence,
robotics, and bioelectronics. By incorporating these research advances into
innovative pedagogy, the NU-MRSEC achieves broad impact through professional
development of graduate students and postdocs, research experiences for
undergraduates and teachers, and outreach to K-12 students and the general
public. These activities are enhanced by partnerships with Argonne National
Laboratory, Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago Museum of Science and Industry,
Chicago Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago Public Schools, and Chicago
City Colleges.

Technical Description: The Northwestern University Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (NU-MRSEC) integrates materials research, education, and
outreach through two interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) and with external
partners in academia, industry, national laboratories, and museums, both
domestically and abroad. IRG-1 entitled “Bioprogrammable Materials via Cell-Free
Synthetic Biology” develops soft active materials that incorporate biological
machinery into artificial cells that eliminate the need for, and constraints of,
living cells. These bioprogrammable materials possess autonomous properties such
as self-healing, on-demand cargo release, dynamic mechanical property
modulation, biomineralization, and shape-morphing. By achieving the adaptive
multi-functionality of biological systems in a cell-free synthetic material,
IRG-1 accelerates advances in sustainable agriculture, soft robotics, water
treatment, smart clothing, and wound healing. IRG-2 entitled “Orchestrated
Iontronics via Dynamic Hybrid Ionic/Electronic Conductors” designs materials
with mixed ionic and electronic transport phenomena that realize neuromorphic
functionality for efficiently implementing artificial intelligence. By
understanding and controlling the interplay between organic materials and
inorganic layered materials, IRG-2 achieves synergistic iontronic attributes
including multi-timescale synaptic potentiation and plasticity, non-linear
responses that emulate neuronal spiking, and stimuli-induced structure
modulation to provide sensory transduction, selectivity, and adaptation. The
research of the NU-MRSEC informs a comprehensive set of education and outreach
activities that are not only designed for specific cohorts (general public,
K-12, undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs) but also bridge programs that
shepherd students along the development pathway, thereby increasing the number
and diversity of participants at all levels. These efforts are augmented by
corporate partnerships and startup companies, extensive shared facilities, and
regular interactions with Argonne National Laboratory, Art Institute of Chicago,
Chicago Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago Field Museum of Natural History,
Chicago Public Schools, and Chicago City Colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.