* 2308575
* FMRG: Eco: CAS-Climate: Sustainable Manufacturing Using Living Organisms and Agriculturally Derived Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Future Manufacturing Research Grant in Ecomanufacturing will generate
knowledge that enables 3D printing-based methods to manufacture environmentally
friendly products using living organisms (algae, bacteria, and fungi) and
agriculturally derived materials (biomass and corn plastics). Different from
petroleum-based plastics, agriculturally derived materials are biodegradable and
abundant on this planet. However, they have been grossly undervalued and
misused. For example, biomass is generally considered solid waste that is
downcycled to fire fuel or fertilizer, or shipped to landfills. Inspired by
biological systems that involve living cells to bind and metabolize biomass, the
team proposes a new manufacturing method by harnessing living organisms to bind
agriculturally derived materials and 3D printing products using living-cell
bridged biocomposites. These products have broad applications in packaging,
furniture, construction, and even space habitats. The widespread use of the new
method will make many products and their manufacturing more environmentally
friendly, create domestic manufacturing-related jobs, and use more materials
readily available in the United States. Additionally, the project has an
integrated education and workforce development plan to train the future
workforce through a variety of activities, such as developing a new course and
textbook on Ecomanufacturing using living organisms, establishing a website
related to Ecomanufacturing, involving undergraduate students in research,
upskilling workforce through collaboration with 2-year colleges and industry,
and conducting both formative and summative evaluations on these activities.

The project aims to understand the science of 3D printing-based manufacturing
methods using living organisms and agriculturally derived materials. The central
hypothesis is that modulating interactions between living organisms and
agriculturally derived materials via advanced manufacturing processes will lead
to reliable manufacturing of products from sustainable biocomposites. Driven by
this hypothesis, the team will take experimental, theoretical, and computational
approaches to systematically study the effects of manufacturing processes on
printability, cell viability, physical properties, recyclability, degradability,
and full life-cycle analysis of the products manufactured using biocomposites.
The entire manufacturing lifecycle of the new 3D printing-based method will be
considered, including feedstock material production, service, and end-of-life,
as well as energy consumption, health and environmental impact, and cost
effectiveness. Convergence research will be performed by a team with expertise
in biology, engineering, and educational administration, with collaboration from
industry. This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, the Division of Materials
Research, the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, and the Division of
Undergraduate Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.