* 2308706
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads -Louis Stokes Alliance (WBHR-LSAMP )
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Elizabeth Ricks, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,200,001.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers
in STEM.

For the United States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps
into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The
Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads – Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (WBHR-LSAMP) has formed an alliance in response to the need for a
more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the District of Columbia, Maryland, and Virginia (DMV).
The institutions that make up the Alliance are diverse and include Howard
University, lead institution, Bowie State University, Hampton University, Morgan
State University, Norfolk State University, University of the District of
Columbia, Virginia State University, El Camino College, Howard Community
College, and Prince George’s Community College. Through this project, the
Alliance will implement activities to support student success by improving
retention, participation in undergraduate research, and the overall number of
historically underrepresented populations graduating with STEM degrees from the
ten Alliance institutions. Through this effort, researchers involved in this
project believe that the improved results will strengthen the STEM workforce in
the DMV and ultimately contribute to America's national security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.