* 2308675
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing additive manufacturing technologies (FL)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* John Christensen, APPLIED SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY ORGANIZATION OF AMERICA CORP
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Goetzel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,996.00

This Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on piloting the AM
(Additive Manufacturing) Forward partnership announced in May 2022. This project
coordinates support for small business suppliers adopting additive manufacturing
(AM). AM Forward Florida will drive innovation, economic development, community
investment, and job growth across Florida. AM Forward's sponsor companies
include Boeing, GE Aviation, Honeywell Aerospace, Lockheed Martin, Northrop
Grumman, Raytheon Technologies, and Siemens Energy. Each will play an important
role in this project, informing requirements and future demand for production
technology and materials. The project team will thus explore how best to
expedite the qualification of suppliers for industrial production (including
small manufacturer partners Sintavia, Keystone, and ACMT Aero). Also driving AM
adoption will be a new generation of engineers and technicians - a workforce
reflecting diverse experiences. Partners in this project include the nation's
leading minority-serving institutions, including Florida International
University, Florida A&M University and Florida State University College of
Engineering, University of Central Florida, and the University of Florida, the
state's flagship research university.

Over 18 months of performance, the proposing team will hold six workshops -
three participant workshops and three stakeholder workshops - across the state
to discern the best orientation of Florida's manufacturing innovation ecosystem.
The project will address current limitations in the state’s supplier base, with
the fifth lowest concentration of manufacturing jobs in the U.S. To reverse
this, the project will explore regionally-based AM, pursuing breakthroughs in
material formulations, integrated advanced robotics, and composite
manufacturing. A range of machine types, materials, and testing processes will
be explored to ensure effective AM deployment into Florida supply chains near
companies/end-users. Industrial additive manufacturing depends on data
management, topology, and analytics for design optimization, build preparation
and simulation, in situ monitoring, qualification, and testing. Data-driven
qualification approaches based on probabilistic modeling and machine learning
will underpin university research. These thrusts will focus on end-to-end
solutions, efficient design, automated quality methodologies, ensure
repeatability, and support scalability for large throughput. This NSF Engine
Development Award will enable the team to develop a full NSF Engine proposal,
making it much more informed, realistic, and attainable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.