* 2308393
* RUI: A New Paradigm for AGN Obscuration: Observational Constraints for Dynamic Torus Models
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Erin Hicks, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 153,355.00

This program will advance our understanding of the role supermassive black holes
play in the formation and evolution of galaxies. This will be achieved through a
comprehensive study of the regions surrounding supermassive black holes in a
large sample of nearby galaxies with actively growing black holes. The
observations will measure the distribution and motions of the molecular,
ionized, and coronal gas, as well as that of the stars, within vicinity of the
central black hole. This sample of galaxies will support a robust investigation
of the inflow of materials feeding the black hole growth and the influence this
activity has on the rest of the galaxy. The research will include substantial
involvement by at least six undergraduate students and will provide them an
authentic research experience working with state-of-the-art data in an
educational experience that will prepare them for advancement to graduate school
or workforce placement. A particular focus will be placed on recruiting
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented groups. The general
public and youth groups will also be engaged during planetarium shows, multiweek
courses held for an Anchorage lifelong learners program, and through hands-on
activities to be offered during established campus public events.

While it is acknowledged that supermassive black holes play a fundamental role
in the evolution of galaxies, the nature of the relationship between these black
holes and their host galaxies has yet to be established. Theoretical models
attempt to reproduce the observed black hole-host galaxy correlations, but due
to a lack of observational constraints these models must make broad assumptions
about the physical processes responsible. Only local active galactic nuclei
(AGN) offer adequate spatial resolution to investigate the circumnuclear regions
relevant to the time scales of the AGN lifetime. The distribution and kinematics
of the molecular, ionized, and coronal gas, as well as that of the stars will be
measured within the relevant central region (central 500pc) in a sample of 90
bona fide AGN with adaptive optics near-infrared integral-field spectroscopic
data available from Keck/OSIRIS and VLT/SINFONI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.