* 2308473
* CIF:Small:Learning Sparse Vector and Matrix Graphs from Time-Dependent Data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jitendra Tugnait, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Graphs are mathematical structures that are frequently used to express
dependencies or similarities among data variables. They can capture complex
structures inherent in seemingly irregular high-dimensional data, making them an
invaluable tool in signal processing, machine learning, and data science.
Applications of graphical models include classification and exploratory data
analysis in finance, social networks, environmental networks, gene regulatory
networks, and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). However, graphs are
not always explicitly available. Therefore, given data, learning the underlying
graph structure is central to applications in machine learning and signal
processing. In the literature, it is typically assumed that the temporal data
consists of multiple independent realizations of a random vector or matrix in
the choice of the objective function to be optimized as well as in algorithm
design and analysis. This assumption is often violated in practice. This project
explicitly considers time-dependent data, without requiring any detailed
parametric modeling to capture time dependencies. It is anticipated that better
models incorporating short- and long-memory time dependence will yield more
accurate graph topology, hence, significant improvements in data analysis and
learning tasks. The problem of differential graph estimation is also addressed
in this framework where, for example, in a bio-statistical application, one may
be interested in the differences in the graphical models of healthy and impaired
subjects, or models under different disease states, given gene-expression data
or fMRI signals.

In this project, three main research thrusts are considered: multivariate
dependent time-series graph learning under both short- and long-range
dependence, matrix-valued dependent time-series graph learning, and differential
graph learning. The focus in all three thrusts is on sparse graphs or sparse
differential graphs, under high-dimensional settings wherein the graph size is
greater than, or of the order of, the data sample size. Computationally
efficient and accurate, general approaches for estimation of undirected weighted
graphs from time-dependent multivariate as well as matrix-valued time series
will be investigated. Two classes of approaches will be considered: frequency-
domain approaches based on the discrete Fourier transform of data which yields
approximately independent data in the frequency domain, allowing a broad set of
analysis tools based on complex-valued signal processing to be exploited; and
time-domain approaches based on time-delay embedding, casting the problem as one
of multi-attribute graph estimation wherein a random vector, instead of a
scalar, is associated with each graph node. All aspects of the problem will be
considered: algorithm design and analysis, optimization under both convex and
non-convex regularizing functions for sparse parameter estimation, model
selection (choice of penalty parameters), analysis of theoretical properties
(such as consistency and model recovery), and application to real data using
publicly available data sets.

This project is jointly funded by the Communications & Information Foundations
(CIF) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.