* 2308770
* Enhancing the Discovery Potential of Merging Black Holes with Robust Extraction of Spin-Precession and Eccentricity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Katerina Chatziioannou, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 294,769.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Since
the first detection of gravitational waves from the coalescence of two black
holes in 2015, the nascent field of gravitational wave astrophysics is on an
accelerating trajectory with dozens more detections, including black hole,
neutron star, and mixed neutron star-black hole binaries. This spectacular
progress is driven by the improving sensitivity of the LIGO/Virgo detectors and
advances in analysis techniques. The fourth observing campaign will more than
quadruple the number of detections and offer a wealth of information about the
most powerful astronomical events. This wealth of information will answer key
questions about black holes, but also bring new challenges: such precise
measurements must be accompanied by a careful assessment of potential sources of
systematic errors. This award focuses on systematic uncertainties originating by
issues with the quality of data, known as glitches. The main goal is to provide
robust constraints on some of the most elusive properties of black holes in
binaries: their spins and the eccentricity of their orbit.

This project focuses on gravitational wave signal from black holes and neutron
stars that overlap with instrumental artifacts in the detectors, known as
glitches. Past experience indicates that the increased rate of detection
expected during the fourth observing run will result in more instances of such
overlaps that jeopardize astrophysical parameter estimation. Existing mitigation
techniques based on modeling and subtracting the glitch result in robust
inference of black hole masses and spins aligned with the orbit. The goal in
this award is to extend glitch-mitigation techniques to robustly measure more
subtle physical effects such as spins in the orbital plane (spin-precession) and
orbital eccentricity, effects that can provide invaluable information about the
astrophysical formation environment of compact binaries. This award tackles
eccentricity and spin-precession inference in the presence of data quality
issues along two fronts. The first relates to the observed signals where the
group will use traditional inference to study the phenomenology and
measurability of spin-precession and eccentricity from merger-dominated signals
in the next observing run and beyond. The second turns to the detector noise
where the group will construct a novel approach that is inspired by
astrophysical population inference: they use detector data to infer the
population properties of various glitch families and then obtain source
inference that marginalizes over data quality issues by using the glitch
population distributions as priors. This work increases the likelihood of a
measurement of eccentricity or spin-precession during the fourth observing run
that is robust against data quality issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.