* 2308389
* Deep Wave Probing and Imaging of Heavy Tailed Fabric
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Knut Solna, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2026
* USD 309,372.00

High resolution biomedical imaging is fundamentally important for early cancer
detection, monitoring of drug efficiency, computer assisted surgery, and
evaluating the health of tissue, organs and bones in general. New biomedical
imaging techniques can also be applied in other areas of imaging and monitoring,
such as remote sensing through the atmosphere and reflection seismology. This
project will support the development and analysis of new techniques for
biomedical imaging, integrating the work of specialists in applied mathematics,
physics and biomedical engineering, as well as practitioners in biomedical
imaging companies. Models for shear wave elasticity imaging will be developed
and analyzed, which provides novel, pertinent, non-invasive biomarkers for early
disease characterization and therapy follow-up. This technique also enables one
to decipher which structural component contributes to the global mechanical
tissue behavior, and this fundamental new understanding opens the gateway to
quantify the vascular organization of tissue at the 10-100Î¼m-scale via
clinically available imaging methods. Abnormal vascular fabric is a key
prognostic factor in cancer therapy, and its quantification for patient
stratification and response to therapy has significant potential. The project
provides research training opportunities for graduate students.

A main objective of the project is to further the theory that describes the
statistical structure of wave fields propagating through complex media, as well
as use the theory in the context of classical and new applications for waves in
random media. There is a focus on understanding waves in short- and long-range
random media as well as with fractional governing equations, which is in part
motivated by its relevance in tissue modeling. This media has a statistical
structure with only power law decay of correlations, with such structure
referred to as heavy tailed medium fabric. The analysis also exploits scale
separations and involves scaling limits for stochastic differential equations.
Novel techniques will be developed for differentiating between scattering
effects and attenuation, which is a classical challenge for wave propagation
while also having direct applications. In the context of biomedical imaging,
such differentiation is important for proper tissue classification. New theory
will also be developed for modeling waves with complex nonlinear contrast. A
better understanding of propagation and mode coupling along boundaries as well
as the transmission through and reflection from rough boundaries will be
established for waves in random media. The novel approaches for random waves
modeling developed in this project will also be of general interest in
stochastic analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.