* 2308861
* Magnetized Mergers of Black Holes and Neutron Stars with LES and Neutrino Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Steven Liebling, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 60,000.00

We have entered a very exciting time in high energy astrophysics with
observations accumulating very quickly from a range of observatories including
gravitational waves (GW) from the LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA collaboration, pulsar X-rays
from NICER, supermassive black hole images from the Event Horizon Telescope, and
fast radio burst observations from CHIME, and many others. This tremendous
success is spurring the development of future GW observatories, such as LISA,
the Einstein Telescope, and the Cosmic Explorer, in addition to new
electromagnetic telescopes. And it is in this context that numerical work helps
guide and extract the science. These efforts may help elucidate details about
the source of r-process elements and the conditions needed for a kilonova. These
studies of the magnetic structure with advanced Large Eddy Simulation (LES) and
with neutrino heating and cooling in binary mergers will help develop a better
understanding of the engine behind short gamma-ray bursts (sGRB). Training in
and development of numerical methods of the type provided through this award is
becoming more and more important in an increasing variety of fields.

This project seeks to push forward the multi-messenger science achieved by
studying binary neutron star and black hole--neutron star mergers: (i) continued
development of the open-source MHDUET code, a general relativistic,
magnetohydrodynamics(GRMHD) code, (ii) test the group's implementation of an M1
neutrino transport scheme with hot neutron stars and binary neutron star
mergers, and then progress to a hybrid scheme, and (iii) study the merger and
post-merger signals and outflows from binary neutron star mergers with magnetic
field with large eddy simulation techniques, realistic equations of state,
neutrino heating and cooling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.