* 2308818
* Spatial Coherence of Light in Collective Spontaneous Emission
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Deniz Yavuz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 141,858.00

The laser, which was invented in 1960, has revolutionized many scientific
disciplines and has had a large impact on society. For example, currently, all
long-distance communication, including data transfer over the internet, is done
using lasers carrying information through optical fibers (thin glass cables).
Many remarkable properties of the laser rely on the fact that it is spatially
coherent; that is the laser light is made up from a smooth and continuous
electromagnetic wave that moves in a predictable way. This property of the laser
clearly distinguishes it from other light sources such as lamps and light bulbs.
In this project, the research team will investigate a new approach to produce
light that has this remarkable coherence property, but instead relies on
operational principles that are distinctly different from a laser. The team will
use an ensemble of rubidium atoms that are cooled to temperatures that are as
low as ten microkelvin. With this ultracold ensemble, the team will investigate
the conditions under which the emitted light from the ensemble has this
coherence property. The experiments are small-scale table-top experiments, and
they will be led by a group of graduate and undergraduate students, who will be
trained at the frontiers of quantum science and learn experimental techniques
that are widely applicable in optics and quantum computing. The results of the
project will be disseminated through public outreach efforts such as Wisconsin
Science Festival and UW-Madison Science Expeditions.

The new approach for creating coherent light relies on a physical effect
referred to as collective spontaneous emission: when an ensemble of excited
atoms decay to their ground state collectively. When a quantum system is put
into an excited state, it will decay back to the ground state through a process
termed spontaneous emission. It is generally assumed that the spontaneous
emission from different individual emitters occurs as unrelated events and would
not be coherent; to produce coherent light one would need population inversion
and stimulated emission. However, the PI’s group has recently experimentally
demonstrated spatial coherence of light in collective spontaneous emission; that
is, emission between individual atoms at different locations in the ensemble
become correlated (phase-coherent) due to collective coupling of the atoms to
light. The PI’s group will investigate and further explore the implications of
this result in many interrelated areas of atomic, molecular, and optical
physics. More specifically, the PIs team will study: (1) the quantum mechanical
statistics of the emitted photons in collective spontaneous emission in the
large sample, strong excitation regime, (2) the spatio-temporal quantum dynamics
of the system in this same regime to gain insight into the spatial structures of
superradiant and subradiant modes, and (3) the superradiance-to-subradiance
transition, as well as subradiance-only collective decay.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.