* 2308829
* NSF-BSF: Multi-ion Transport, Rotation, and Turbulence in Hydrodynamic Compression of Z-pinch
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Nathaniel Fisch, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2027
* USD 100,000.00

This award supports a collaborative effort between Princeton University and the
Weizmann Institute of Science to study turbulence in a magnetized plasma - an
ionized gas permeated by magnetic fields - confined in a laboratory experiment
called a Z-pinch. Recent theoretical work has predicted new fundamental
phenomena in a multi-ion magnetized plasma, or partially ionized plasma, on
timescales characteristic of the turbulent plasma evolution. On these
timescales, the transport of heat and particles may vary among ion species, with
energy residing in the thermal motion of one ionic species or another, or in
electrons, or in the turbulent flows. The Weizmann Z-pinch experiment is
distinctively positioned to explore these theoretical predictions in the
laboratory and to distinguish their unusual features through precision
spectroscopic measurements. The Princeton-Weizmann collaboration aspires both to
validate the theoretical predictions and to understand any unexpected phenomena
uncovered. The fundamental understanding of a magnetized Z-pinch plasma could
underpin applications to x-ray generation and nuclear fusion energy development.

Precision spectroscopic measurements of a turbulent, imploding Z-pinch plasma at
the Weizmann Institute of Science uncovered fundamental, new, and curious plasma
effects. Inviscid on time and space scales of interest in ways that usual fluids
tend not to be, the Z-pinch plasma at Weizmann serves as a virtual laboratory
for unusual viscid and inviscid plasma dynamics. These dynamics, which include
the compression of plasma laden with turbulent kinetic energy, have led to the
prediction of the sudden viscous dissipation effect in compressing plasma.
Further important plasma effects have been predicted by the Princeton team in
magnetized multi-species plasma and partially magnetized plasma, including the
charge incompressibility heat pump effect and the partial ionization
deconfinement effect. These effects can be important: trace impurities can
quickly poison fusion reactions or quench radiation generation in an imploding
plasma -- and using too many trace impurities can surprisingly render invalid
inferences of plasma parameters. Thus, this project's objective is to
theoretically refine and experimentally validate the theoretical predictions of
charge state profiles in a turbulent Z-pinch plasma.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.