* 2308558
* Determining the Ice Phase, Nucleation Process, and Electromagnetic Interaction Properties of the Ice Grains in an Ice Dusty Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Bellan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 418,639.00

The award supports an experimental study of water ice grain formation in a
weakly ionized plasma environment. Plasma - a gas containing free electrons and
ions - can be weakly ionized so that the gas is almost all neutral atoms and
molecules with only one part in a million consisting of the electrically charged
particles. This experimental research program will study a weakly-ionized plasma
where the neutral gas is arranged to be extremely cold, such as -300F. When a
small amount of water vapor is injected into such plasma, it is found that tiny
grains of ice spontaneously form, become electrically charged, and are suspended
in the plasma. The ice grains range in size from nanometers to hundreds of
micrometers depending on experimental conditions. The new study will provide
information relevant to situations that occur in nature such as the
protoplanetary disk that existed in the early stage of solar system evolution,
the diffuse rings of Saturn, and terrestrial noctilucent clouds that can form at
50-mile altitudes in polar regions.

The project has two main goals. The first is to determine how the ice grain
infrared absorption spectrum varies with temperature. At the extremely cold
temperatures found in many astrophysical situations, ice can be in an amorphous
phase and so have a different infrared absorption spectrum from the crystalline
ice of ordinary experience. The second main goal is determining why and how ice
nucleates in a plasma. For terrestrial atmospheric conditions it is well
established that ice nucleation requires a core of non-ice solid material, such
as carbon or silicate, on which ice forms as a coating. However, laboratory
plasma experiments do not contain any non-ice material and preliminary evidence
is that the weakly-ionized plasma catalyzes ice nucleation. The investigation
will explore how the weakly-ionized plasma environment may enable ice nucleation
and will be guided by a theoretical prediction that high-energy plasma
electrons, a tiny minority of all free electrons, may play a key role in the
process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.