* 2308905
* Quantitative Measurements of Relativistic Electron Ejection from the Focus of Petawatt Lasers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This award supports development of techniques to measure the intensity of very
high power laser light. The development of high-powered lasers capable of
delivering extreme intensities into a small volume has placed the scientific
community at the threshold of a new era for experimental investigation.
Exploiting lasers to create matter out of vacuum or to shed light on dark matter
are just two examples of what may become possible over the next decade. A major
impediment inhibiting progress in such investigations, and constraining
advancement of laser technology, is a reliable way to measure the intensity of a
focused high-powered laser in real time at full power. This project is devoted
to developing methodologies to enable such measurements that are straightforward
to deploy and broadly applicable in laboratories across the country and around
the world. A host of studies ranging from generating novel light sources to
probing warm dense matter to developing laser-based medical applications will
also benefit greatly from this project. Together with the emphasis on
international engagement and a commitment to inclusion of underrepresented
individuals in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, this project
provides a much-needed capability while training a diverse cadre of students.

A major roadblock inhibiting progress towards realizing precision measurement at
the petawatt and multi-petawatt level is the seemingly simple, but extremely
difficult, task of assessing laser's focal volume directly at full power â€“ such
as measuring the intensity and visualizing distortions in the laser beam. This
project is devoted to developing an assessment procedure that is (i)
straightforward to implement without requiring a major experimental effort to
deploy, (ii) minimally intrusive, allowing the primary experiment to be
performed uninhibited, (iii) sensitive to beam characteristic changes that can
degrade the energy in the focus from shot to shot, and (iv) single-shot capable.
A promising mechanism for enabling such measurements is the well-known process
of ponderomotive scattering. Electrons born in the focus of a petawatt-class
laser are accelerated and ejected. Because the energy and angular distribution
depend intimately on the intensity distribution in the focus, this project aims
to measure the ejected energies and image the angular distributions of the
electron trajectories. Such measurements coupled with numerical simulations will
enable determination of the peak intensity and the non-ideality of the focal
spot. The project includes direct engagement with high-power laser facilities
worldwide, including the Laboratory for Laser Energetics (LLE) at the University
of Rochester and the Central Laser Facility (CLF) in the United Kingdom.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.