* 2308782
* Conference: Trisections Workshop: Connections with Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Laura Starkston, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for the conference “Trisections Workshop:
Connections with Symplectic Topology” that will take place at the University of
California, Davis, during June 26-30, 2023. The conference will focus on
developing connections between trisection theory, an emerging area of research
in four-manifold topology, and the study of the topology and geometry of
symplectic four-manifolds. It will catalyze research developments by bringing
together mathematicians of all career stages – including established experts,
early-career researchers, and students – and will have a number of features that
are designed to actively engage the participants. First, there will be pre-
workshop, virtual, introductory mini-courses given by experts in the field and
designed to preview and motivate the central topics of the workshop. Second,
there will be both plenary talks and shorter, lightning-style talks aimed at
highlighting recent developments by a wide range of researchers during the
morning sessions. Third, the workshop will feature afternoon working-group
sessions in which participants will collaborate on open problems relating to the
theory of trisections and symplectic topology and geometry of four-manifolds.

Symplectic geometry originally arose from Hamiltonian mechanics but has since
developed into a rich field of its own with applications to several areas of
mathematics, such as complex geometry, algebraic geometry, exotic smooth
structures on four-manifolds, singularity theory, dynamics, and mirror symmetry.
Despite decades of development and many seminal advances, seemingly basic
problems – such as the symplectic isotopy problem – remain wide open. Trisection
theory provides new combinatorial methods to study symplectic manifolds and
offers a new perspective to shed light on difficult open problems. This provides
a starting point for many new directions and applications and a rich opportunity
for making advances through the synergy of these two fields. In the ten years
since its introduction, trisection theory has developed to touch nearly every
facet of four-manifold topology – from comparing smooth structures and
introducing new invariants to representing knotted surfaces and describing
surgery operations. The workshop will build on recent successes of the theory
highlighting the interplay between the symplectic and complex geometry of four-
manifolds and the combinatorial features of trisections. These include: a
characterization of symplectic surfaces in the complex projective plane as those
admitting transverse shadow diagrams; a proof of the existence of trisections on
symplectic four-manifolds that are compatible with the ambient symplectic
structure; and an established correspondence between certain complex curves in
the complex projective plane and hexagonal lattices on the torus that yields a
combinatorial approach to the symplectic isotopy problem. The conference website
is at: https://sites.google.com/view/tw2023/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.