* 2308341
* A Framework Leveraging Asymmetry for Synchronization Stability in Networks of Coupled Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Adilson Motter, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The function of numerous natural and engineered systems depends on the stable
synchronization of networks of coupled dynamical entities. An outstanding case
is that of power-grid networks, which rely on synchronization among power
generators to operate. In the mathematical modeling of such systems, the
networks are usually represented by the dynamical entities that define the nodes
and the network structure that defines the interactions among nodes. Because
contemporary research in network science emphasizes the role of interactions in
giving rise to emergent behavior, existing studies have focused mainly on the
optimization of the network structure for given nodes. Recent research has
shown, however, that in many situations it is more desirable to optimize the
node parameters, and this is a problem for which adequate methods do not
currently exist. This project will develop and apply mathematical and
computational methods to improve synchronization stability of relevance to the
U.S. power-grid network by optimizing node parameters. Successful completion of
the planned research is expected to lead to design and operation principles that
can improve power-grid stability. The project will also provide
interdisciplinary research training to one graduate student and several
undergraduate students.

The project builds on the recent observation that explicit symmetry breaking
can often be used to stabilize synchronization states in network systems.
Implementation of this idea requires solving a high-dimensional non-convex
optimization problem that cannot be satisfactorily addressed by existing linear
methods. The project will develop and apply a rigorous nonlinear method tailored
to address this class of optimization problems in power-grid networks. The
project consists of four parts: 1) the development of a nonlinear, second-order
theory, 2) the development of an iterative numerical algorithm implementing the
theory, 3) the application of the resulting methods to the U.S. power-grid
network, and 4) the application of the methods to study conditions under which
explicit symmetry breaking can benefit stability. The expected outcomes will
lead to new opportunities for the stabilization of desired synchronous states
and an improved understanding of the factors that contribute to stability. The
project is interdisciplinary and will provide research training to one Ph.D.
student and three summer undergraduate students, including students
underrepresented in STEM, thereby advancing workforce development while
promoting inclusion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.