* 2308148
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OCE-PRF: Influence of Environmentally-Induced Changes on the Transport and Fate of Microplastics at a Regional Scale
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Laura Sunberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 346,823.00

Plastic in the ocean breaks down into small pieces known as microplastics due to
weathering by environmental conditions. Microplastics are increasingly pervasive
and harm the ecological health of coastal areas, so it is important to
understand where they are and how they are transported by coastal flows. As
microplastics are exposed to varying environmental conditions (e.g., light,
oxygen, and sediment abrasion), they fragment into smaller pieces and facilitate
the growth of organic matter. These transformations affect how easily
microplastics remain suspended in the water column. Yet, it is not known how
these transformations impact microplastic transport at regional scales. This
project will investigate when, where, and how much microplastics are exposed to
conditions that lead to changes in their density, size, and shape. Additionally,
this project will quantify how exposures to varying environmental conditions
impact the dispersion and fate of microplastics at a regional scale. The
increased understanding of microplastic transport that will result from this
project will be useful for informing policy decisions and cleanup efforts. Over
the course of the project, the PI will also engage in outreach to local schools
and mentoring of university students.

The objective of this project is to better understand how microplastic
transformations impact their transport on regional scales. First, the PI will
use Lagrangian tracers representing microplastics and existing model output to
quantify the exposure of microplastics to conditions that cause weathering or
biofouling. Specifically, use of output from an existing hydrodynamic-sediment
transport-biogeochemical model for the northern Gulf of Mexico will be used to
estimate microplastic exposure to light, sediment abrasion, and other
environmental conditions. Second, microplastics will be added to the numerical
model described above as a sediment class, and new model runs will be used to
analyze how environmentally produced changes in microplastic properties impact
their dispersal and fate. To represent microplastic transport, their settling
velocities and critical shear stresses for erosion will be parameterized as a
function of their exposure to different environmental conditions. For both parts
of the project, sensitivity tests will be performed to evaluate the uncertainty
of model results. Overall, this approach will allow us to better understand how
microplastic transport on regional scales is influenced by particle
transformations due to environmental conditions, which is important for future
microplastic management efforts and therefore for preserving coastal ecosystems
that provide food, recreation, and tourism for society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.