* 2308751
* STTR Phase II:  VaxMAP a single dose multivalent vaccine to produce durable and cross-reactive immunity against various coronaviruses
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Stephanie Deshayes, Tempo Therapeutics
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will address the unmet need for more effective
vaccines that can be rapidly deployed to decrease the lag time between pathogen
emergence and vaccine development, minimizing socioeconomic effects such as
those seen in the COVID-19 pandemic. This new vaccine technology has the
potential to drastically improve the lives of US citizens during future
outbreaks of new pathogens. Further, this new technology has the potential to
have positive impacts by providing high value US products for the whole world
and generating US jobs both in research fields and manufacturing of
biotechnology products. Successful completion of this STTR phase II project will
position the company with a technology that has potential multiple partnership
opportunities including biotechnology and pharmaceutical businesses developing
antigens for vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. By developing this new vaccine
platform technology, the company will be able to gain access to a significant
segment of the global vaccine market estimated at $61 billion in 2021 and
projected to grow to $125 billion by 2028.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will enable the
company to pursue the development of a new vaccine platform with robust and
long-lasting vaccination responses against emergent pathogens. Although
effective COVID-19 vaccines are now available to fight the global pandemic that
started in 2019, they are facing significant limitations including diminished
efficacy against new spreading variants, requirements for multiple doses, and
challenging distribution pathways due to cold chain issues. The research
objectives are to determine the optimal dose of the vaccine in a murine
immunization model, understand the durability of its immune response, assess the
vaccine's protective immunity against different SARS-CoV-2 variants, evaluate
the vaccine shelf-life stability and develop a regulatory plan. Based on the
successful preliminary data, it is anticipated that the new product will
generate protective immunity against multiple variants of SARS-CoV-2 by
providing a long-lasting immune response that will result in longer-lasting
protection against infection when compared to current vaccines. Furthermore, the
shelf-life and storage conditions of the new vaccine platform are anticipated to
facilitate distribution and stockpiling, as no drastic cold chain logistics are
expected.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.