* 2308021
* WoU-MMA: Multi-messenger Signatures of Ion Acceleration in Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kohta Murase, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 678,343.00

The supermassive black holes at the center of galaxies are extreme astrophysical
machines that control the evolution of their environments. They are sources of
high-velocity winds and relativistic jets, and they are associated with the
highest-energy particles in the Universe. They emit electromagnetic radiation
from radio to gamma-ray, and they have been associated recently with the
production of very-high-energy astrophysical neutrinos. The origin of these
particles is a multidisciplinary field, with relevance to astrophysics, space
physics, and laboratory plasmas. Connecting multi-messenger astrophysics with
space and plasma communities amplifies the message that plasma physics is
crucial for understanding the Universe. The project will train graduate students
in astroplasmaphysics and provide new concepts and discoveries to the broader
public. Multi-messenger observatories have provided the first clues of high-
energy ion acceleration in active galactic nuclei (AGNs). The goal of this
project is to unravel the physical processes that are responsible for the
acceleration of ions in AGN outflows. The PIs will use a semi-analytical
formalism, validated by kinetic plasma simulations, to model acceleration at AGN
wind shocks and relativistic magneto-hydrodynamic simulations with tracked test-
particles to calculate the spectrum of UHECRs and neutrinos expected from AGN
jets. They will address the following questions: (1) How are ions accelerated in
AGN winds, and what is their multi-messenger signature? (2) What are the diffuse
and source ultra-high-energy cosmic ray and neutrino spectra produced by AGN
jets? (3) Is there an interplay between winds and jets in producing energetic
cosmic rays and neutrinos? This award advances the goals of the Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.