* 2308200
* Data driven inversion methods and image reconstruction for nonlinear media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Shari Moskow, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

This project involves the development of new methods for determining internal
material parameters from external measurements, with a focus on radar
applications, medical imaging, and optical design. In the new algorithms, a key
innovation lies in using the data itself to generate a compact model for wave
propagation, resulting in highly efficient image reconstruction. The
applicability of these algorithms will be expanded to handle large and noisy
data sets, complex media, and scenarios where sources and receivers are not
collocated—a significant limitation in existing reduced model approaches.
Furthermore, novel methodologies will be developed for the reconstruction of
materials exhibiting nonlinear wave propagation characteristics. By reducing
computational costs, the methods developed in this project will enable improved
imaging in large-scale situations. Several students will be trained over the
course of this research, and plans to promote diversity and inclusion in
research are integrated into student recruitment.

This research will overcome challenges to image reconstruction by improving some
of the most promising direct methods for inversion. This includes (i) expanding
data driven reduced order model imaging methods to very general classes of data
sets, models with nonlocal operators and transmission problems, while at the
same time establishing a rigorous foundation, (ii) developing novel inversion
methods for coefficient determination when the underlying forward model is
nonlinear and (iii) imaging general linear and nonlinear anisotropy in the
hybrid method Magnetoacoustic Tomography with Magnetic Induction. The novel
reduced order model approaches will be developed to handle large and noisy data
sets, problems in which source and receiver are not collocated, and imaging
problems with dispersion. The inverse Born series will be adapted to handle
inversion where the forward problem is nonlinear, and its application will rely
on the description of the forward series and will involve a convergence
analysis. The well-posedness of the system of transport equations for
Magnetoacoustic Tomography with Magnetic Induction imaging of general anisotropy
will be established using carefully defined inflow boundary conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.