* 2308113
* CDS&amp;E: WoU-MMA: The Treasure Map
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Curtis McCully, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 820,304.00

This project focuses on the Treasure Map, a web service for coordinating,
visualizing, and facilitating searches for the astronomical sources that can
lead to gravitational wave events. When a gravitational wave telescope, such as
LIGO/Virgo, sends an alert, it is immediately displayed on the Treasure Map,
allowing scientists to observe the source with other telescopes at a variety of
wavelengths. The scientists can also add information about their own
observations, so that the astronomical community knows what follow-up
observations are being made. This project addresses the Windows on the Universe
Big Idea “Criterion for Coordination: Hardware, software, or other
infrastructure to coordinate observations involving more than one messenger.”  A
mechanism to better coordinate observations across the electromagnetic spectrum
is critical to the discovery of the next counterpart to one of these significant
events.  With this project, the authors will transition the Treasure Map from a
beta version to a more robust, modular, well-documented community resource, as
well as add additional functionality. Treasure Map is free, open-sourced, and
web-based, and the project will result in new tools for classroom activities as
well.

The Treasure Map is a web service for coordinating, visualizing, and
facilitating searches for the electromagnetic counterpart to gravitational wave
events. Users see localization probability contours projected on a visualization
showing the entire celestial sphere consisting of a base layer displaying the
user’s survey of choice spanning X-rays to infrared wavelengths. Observers may
submit their planned or completed telescope pointings using an Application
Program Interface (API), and these are shown on the visualization. A probability
calculator also shows the fraction of the localization probability searched over
time, broken down by instrument and bandpass. The authors will transition the
Treasure Map from a beta version to a more robust, modular, well-documented
community resource, and add functionality: galaxy catalog annotation,
electromagnetic counterpart information, support for neutrino localizations, TOM
Toolkit support, next generation GCN circular support, next generation Kafka
messaging support with Hopskotch, and broker support. The Treasure Map will
lower the barrier for contribution to gravitational wave science and increase
inclusion: anyone can follow the search in real time. This project will provide
new tools for classrooms, such as an activity to the SpaceBook, building on
LCO’s Global Sky Program to increase community engagement with multimessenger
astronomy. This project addresses the Windows on the Universe Big Idea
“Criterion for Coordination: Hardware, software, or other infrastructure to
coordinate observations involving more than one messenger.” 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.