* 2308142
* NSF Engines Development Award: Advancing space technologies (CO)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Dawn Conley, CATALYST CAMPUS FOR TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2025
* USD 941,375.00

This NSF Regional Innovation Engines Development Award is focused on igniting
technological innovation and workforce development to foster technology
commercialization and technology transfer in space systems, space
infrastructure, and space cybersecurity for the space economy. Based in Colorado
Springs, this development award for the Resilient Space Infrastructures,
Systems, and Economy (RISE) project has core partners in the Colorado Springs
Chamber & EDC, Exponential Impact, National Cybersecurity Center, Pikes Peak
State College, Space Foundation, Space Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(ISAC), U.S. Air Force Academy (USAFA), and University of Colorado, Colorado
Springs. Spanning private, public, and nonprofit sectors, each partner
organization brings unique capabilities to inform and grow the vast space
ecosystem in Southern Colorado. Through this development award, relationships
among core partners will be formalized, and anticipated partner growth will
expand beyond the Pikes Peak region further into Southern Colorado to include
Pueblo, Trinidad, and Cañon City and possibly into surrounding states.

The RISE project will be propelled by and organized across three key pillars: 1)
Technological Innovation, 2) Commercialization Acceleration, and 3) Community,
Policy, and Workforce Building. The Technological Innovation pillar will act as
the research and development arm of RISE. During the Type-1 period, this pillar
will organize two workshops to leverage nationwide expertise to develop further
specific goals of the pillar, which include the creation of a full stack of
space resilience capabilities, creating, maintaining, and running a digital twin
of space infrastructures and systems; space resilience standardization and
management; and space resilience certification. The Commercialization
Acceleration pillar will focus development activities on market research,
exploring regional gaps and industry needs, and testing potential innovation
pathways to support the development of a strategic plan and building blocks for
the type-2 proposal. To ensure the scope and strategic plan are aligned with the
market needs and regional culture, the pillar will run emerging tech workshops,
focus groups, and human capital support projects. The Workforce Development
pillar will leverage existing ties to the local, state, and national
policymakers to develop a framework of existing policies and advance channels to
create influence on policy decisions in later phases. Community and policy work
through this pillar seeks to directly benefit the research and startups emerging
from the engine and support existing space companies in the region. With a
leadership team comprising representatives from each pillar, development
activities will be synchronized across pillars leading to the development of a
full NSF Engines proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.