* 2308174
* CDS&amp;E: Detection, Instance Segmentation, and Classification for Astronomical Surveys with Deep Learning (DeepDISC)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 488,760.00

The next generation of wide-field deep astronomical surveys will deliver
unprecedented amounts of images of the sky through the 2020s and beyond. As both
the sensitivity and depth increase, larger numbers of blended (overlapping)
sources will occur. Blending would result in biased measurements, contaminating
key astronomical inferences. Having efficient deblending techniques is thus a
high priority for the future of astronomical research. However, an efficient and
robust method to detect, deblend, and classify sources is still lacking for
massive surveys. In this project, scientists at the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign will develop a versatile deep learning framework for image
deblending and source detection. This work will make it easy to efficiently
process wide-deep survey images and will accurately identify blended sources
with the lowest possible latency to maximize science returns. Moreover, this
work will provide robust uncertainties of detection inferences, which are
critical for enabling precision cosmology. The proposed work has broad
implications for a wide range of subjects, including detecting transients and
solar system objects to probing the nature of dark matter and dark energy. As
part of this project, the PI will also develop and teach a dedicated summer
outreach program to engage young girls in STEM.

This research program will leverage the rapidly developing field of computer
vision to build a new deep learning platform for astronomical object detection,
instance segmentation, classification, and beyond. It will adapt the latest
open-source algorithms in computer vision for object detection and segmentation.
The approach is interdisciplinary, combining state-of-the-art astronomical
survey data with the latest deep learning tools. The new platform will be
trained and validated using a hybrid of real data and realistic simulations that
are built by combining traditional image simulations with generative models. It
will be fully featured to enable higher-level downstream science applications
such as photometric redshift estimation and galaxy morphology inferences. All
codes generated will be open source to enable broad community usage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.