* 2308280
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Galilean satellite (sub)surfaces from radio observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Katherine de Kleer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Keane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 403,358.00

The four Galilean moons of Jupiter – Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto –
together provide a laboratory for studying what effect internal vs. external
factors have on the surfaces we see today on Solar System moons. This project
will characterize the surfaces of the four Galilean satellites using
observations from telescopes operating at radio wavelengths. Observing all
targets in the same way allows for a direct comparison between them. This shows
how the unique characteristics of each moon, such as Ganymede’s magnetic field
or Io’s high internal heating, affect its surface. The program will also develop
workshops to train students in effective public communication and the creation
of outreach content. This training will enable the students to showcase their
own PhD topics at public science events. This project will characterize the
thermophysical surface properties of the four Galilean satellites and how they
vary across these satellites’ surfaces, constraining hemisphere-scale variations
and identifying and interpreting localized thermal anomalies. The galilean moons
present a range of internal heat flows, from the powerful tidal heating and
volcanism of Io through the cratered, inactive surface of Callisto, and
correspondingly hold records of different time periods in their surface
features. The project will make use of multi-wavelength datasets (microns to
centimeters, with an emphasis on recent ALMA and VLA data) in order to provide
views of the surface at a range of depths down to half a meter. By applying
sophisticated thermophysical models to spatially resolved data, the project can
isolate specific latitudes, longitudes, and geological terrains and investigate
how material properties (and potentially heat flow) correlate with surface
location and terrain type. The resultant 3D (latitude, longitude, depth) maps of
temperature and density will aid in the interpretation of the processes at work
on these moons both locally and globally. The results of this study are timely
because early JWST data, as well as upcoming data from the NASA Europa Clipper
and ESA JUICE missions, will provide views of the galilean satellite surfaces at
complementary thermal wavelengths.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.