* 2308639
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Control of Nonlinear Oscillatory Networks for the Design of Novel Cortical Stimulation Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Fabio Pasqualetti, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

It is estimated that 1.2 percent of Americans have active epilepsy, and the
annual cost for treating these cases is estimated at $12.5 billion. While brain
stimulation is routinely used in clinical practice, stimulation signals and
parameters are often applied and tuned empirically, and can be substantially
improved by a quantitative model of the brain network dynamics. Indeed, human
brain function function arises from complex dynamics between intricate and time-
varying interconnection of dynamically rich neural components, and multiple
neurological disorders are linked to disruptions of these network mechanisms.
This project will develop new theories and tools to predict the onset and
spreading of epileptic seizures and to inform the use of novel electrical brain
stimulation strategies to treat neurological disorders. By constructing
mathematical models that incorporate epileptic data and dynamical analysis, this
work aims at uncovering the phenomena that underlie epileptic events and linking
them to features of the anatomy of the brain. The intended outcome will be a
novel theoretical basis to analyze and optimize practical noninvasive
stimulation of brain networks. This project will also pursue educational
initiatives at the graduate and undergraduate levels that will contribute to the
growth of a large and diverse STEM workforce, outreach activities to engage the
local community, and dissemination activities to promote multi-disciplinary
approaches to problems in neuroscience.

The project will develop novel methods to analyze the spreading of oscillations
in complex networks and derive control mechanisms to regulate the spatiotemporal
evolution of network dynamics, such as neurological oscillations. In particular,
the research will aim to (i) characterize a novel set of dynamical biomarkers
that explain qualitative changes in neurological recordings during epileptic
events -- these biomarkers provide a quantitative link between the structure and
parameters of nonlinear, networked, neural mass models and the features of
epileptic recordings; (ii) reveal the structural properties that allow healthy,
localized neural oscillations to cascade into brain-wide pathological seizures,
and (iii) develop spatiotemporal control strategies to regulate the spreading of
oscillatory dynamics over networks, which will provide a solid theoretical basis
to analyze and optimize practical noninvasive brain stimulation. In addition to
contributing to the fields of network control and dynamical systems, this
project will also contribute to the integration of these disciplines with
computational neuroscience and promote the translation of control-theoretic
tools towards the design of novel, targeted, non-invasive, and highly effective
treatments for neurological disorders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.