* 2308821
* RUI: Studies in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Thomas Baumgarte, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 270,013.00

Einstein’s theory of general relativity describes all gravitational interactions
in the universe, ranging from the force that pulls a falling apple to the Earth,
to the expansion of the Universe itself. In particular, this theory describes
black holes and neutron stars — so-called "compact objects" that have extremely
strong gravitational fields. The goal of this award is to study what happens
when such an object collides with a larger star: would such a collision be
observable, would the remnant of the collision form a new type of star, or would
it collapse to form another black hole, possibly in an unusual mass range?
Answers to these questions will help shed light on the abundance of compact
objects, including very small black holes that may have formed in the early
Universe and that may contribute to its dark-matter content, and will help
understand recent observations by the LIGO gravitational wave detectors of black
holes with unusual masses. Finding these answers requires the tools of numerical
relativity, i.e. computer programs that can find solutions to Einstein’s
equations of general relativity numerically. Undergraduate students will
participate in these activities, providing them with a “hands-on” research
experience, and generating a research-enriched learning environment at Bowdoin
College.

The scientific goals of these research efforts include the development and
implementation of numerical algorithms for the solution of Einstein's equations
of general relativity, as well as their application in the numerical modeling of
relativistic objects, in particular neutron stars and black holes. In the next
funding period these activities will focus on so-called "Thorne-Zytkow-like-
Objects", i.e. larger "host" stars that harbor smaller compact objects as
"parasites". Examples include neutron stars that harbor small black holes,
possibly of primordial origin, white dwarfs that harbor neutron stars, and main
sequence stars that harbor black holes or neutron stars. Specific research
activities will explore processes by which these objects may form, including
capture and/or binary merger, and will determine whether or not they are
dynamically stable, whether their co-evolution and ultimate collapse results in
observable gravitational-wave or electromagnetic signals, and whether these
scenarios provide viable evolutionary pathways to black holes outside the mass
ranges resulting from standard stellar evolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.