* 2308707
* Sustainability in Vapor-phase Nitrogen of a World-class Frozen Biorepository at the Museum of Southwestern Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hannah Marx, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,018.00

The Museum of Southwestern Biology’s (MSB) Division of Genomic Resources (DGR)
is a world-class, biorepository at the University of New Mexico (UNM) for
cryogenic biological materials. Founded in 1979, DGR is the largest natural
history collection of frozen mammal tissues worldwide and has significant frozen
tissue collections of birds, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and parasite tissues,
including critical samples from endangered species and threatened ecosystems.
The DGR collection archives cryogenically preserved samples of animal tissues,
whole organisms such as embryos and parasites, and purified DNA and RNA. The
archive has more 700,000 frozen tissue samples from more than 300,000 vouchered
specimens and is growing at 3-4 percent annually. DGR is global in scope and
provides critical infrastructure for studies of genomics, climate change,
molecular evolution, conservation biology, zoonotic disease, emerging pathogens,
contaminants, and stable isotope ecology. Annually, about 50 loans of 2,000
specimens generate about 58 peer-reviewed publications and more than 2,800
citations. At UNM, MSB is a leader in research productivity, undergraduate and
graduate student training, and public service, especially activities related to
biodiversity discovery, emerging zoonotic pathogens, and science-based
management of our dwindling natural resources. This project will upgrade DGR’s
capacity for high-quality tissue storage in vapor-phase nitrogen. Following best
practices in cryopreservation, it will substantially enhance this state-of-the-
art scientific infrastructure to serve the global biodiversity science
community.

This project will ensure the long-term preservation, growth, and sustainability
of the Division of Genomic Resources (DGR) in the Museum of Southwestern Biology
(MSB). This project more than doubles DGR’s vapor-phase nitrogen storage
capacity – the gold standard for frozen tissue storage – by adding six nitrogen
cryotanks and a second cryohead generator to double liquid nitrogen generating
capacity in the facility. This major upgrade will transfer the entire collection
from tenuous ultralow freezers to secure vapor-phase nitrogen storage at -196°C.
The improvements will also accommodate more than 5 years of growth,
substantially reduce electrical consumption, and dramatically increase safe
holding time of the frozen collection to 21 days vs. 2 hours if a freezer fails
in case of catastrophic emergencies. Finally, MSB’s track record of community
outreach, student training, and involvement of under-represented minorities in
biodiversity science demonstrates a sincere and long-term commitment to museum-
based science education. This project will recruit, support, and train a diverse
population of UNM students by immersing them in best practices in museum
sciences as they learn how museum collections contribute to important societal
questions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.