* 2308985
* Collaborative Research: Identifying and Evaluating Sites for Cosmic Explorer
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 904,704.00

A century after Einstein predicted gravitational waves, the NSF Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), followed by the Virgo
Observatory, ignited the era of gravitational-wave astronomy with the first
direct observations of gravitational waves from merging black holes and the
observation of a binary neutron star merger, prompting subsequent observations
in every band of the electromagnetic spectrum—a watershed event in the history
of astronomy. Cosmic Explorer (CE), a concept for a next-generation
gravitational-wave observatory in the United States, will push the reach of
gravitational-wave astronomy to the edge of the observable universe, by using
proven LIGO technology in a facility ten times larger than each LIGO
observatory. CE will enable transformative discoveries across physics,
astronomy, and cosmology, by observing black holes and neutron stars across
cosmic time, probing the nature of the most extreme matter in the universe, and
exploring questions in the nature of gravity and fundamental physics. This award
supports research to identify and evaluate potential sites for CE, each
necessarily substantially larger than LIGO’s sites. CE will do this while
working in mutually beneficial, culturally supported partnerships with
Indigenous and other local communities.

This award supports the identification and evaluation of the most promising
locations for CE observatories while developing protocols and best practices for
large-scale projects to be in partnership with local and Indigenous communities.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and public data will be used to identify
and vet locations and then establish partnerships through the Indigenous
Partnership Program (IPP). At locations that are physically viable and where
community permission is granted, an initial assessment will be conducted; this
and continued community consultation will inform a down-selection of locations
for in-depth reference assessment. CE has knowledge of and access to LIGO
Hanford Observatory (LHO), where there are established protocols for partnering
with local and Indigenous communities. The (broader) Department of Energy (DOE)
Hanford area, on which LHO is located, will be the first location where the
entire assessment process — from start to a thorough reference assessment — may
be implemented. The combined location search and evaluation will constitute a
prototype for the full approach, which can be used to continuously add promising
CE locations in Phase 2 of conceptual design. These activities will implement an
integrated, respectful framework for location evaluation, community
consultation, and combined data- and community-driven understandings of
facilities construction priorities. CE will enhance US scientific
infrastructure, ensuring the US continues its leading role in gravitational-wave
science while connecting science with society, especially in the context of
Indigenous communities. These activities will create innovative, culturally
supported pathways into STEM, support retention of members of historically
excluded groups, prioritize the interests of Indigenous and local communities,
and empower future leaders of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.