* 2308043
* The Tierras Observatory: An Ultra-precise Time-series Photometer to Characterize Nearby Low-mass Stars and Their Terrestrial Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* David Charbonneau, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2026
* USD 537,856.00

A team led by Harvard University will perform a three-year survey of nearby
small stars in pursuit of additional planets that are too small or too cool to
be found by previous space- or ground-based programs. The team will also monitor
known planets with long orbital periods to search for moons or systems of rings.
The team will undertake a long term campaign to determine the rotation periods
of low-mass stars (with 10-30% the mass of the Sun) in a volume complete sample.
The project will provide training opportunities for students and fellows and
will also enable research by scientists who do not have access to large research
telescopes. The team will provide engagement materials and grow viewership of
their YouTube channel. Middle and high school students from the US-Mexico border
towns of Rio Rico and Nogales, AZ, will visit the telescope and engage in
activities to learn about the search for planets and the design of telescopes.

Although the study of exoplanets has seen dramatic advances in the past decade,
the analogs of many of the denizens of our own Solar system remain beyond the
grasp of our current observatories. Most of the known terrestrial exoplanets are
significantly larger than the Earth, and, with a few notable exceptions, it
remains an open question whether Mars and Mercury-sized worlds are a
commonplace. No analogs of the Galilean satellites, or our Moon, or
circumplanetary rings has yet been discovered to orbit an exoplanet. Time-series
photometry is a path to significant progress on these questions. The Tierras
Observatory is a refurbished 1.3-m ultra-precise fully-automated photometer
located at the F.L. Whipple Observatory atop Mount Hopkins, Arizona. Tierras is
designed to regularly achieve a photometric precision of 250 parts-per-million
on a time scale of both 10 minutes and across an observing season. The
observatory is now operating in science mode and regularly achieving its design
photometric precision. Tierras is ready to undertake a three-year survey to
detect temperate terrestrial planets as small as Mercury and search for exo-
satellites. Additionally, by measuring the undetected rotation periods of low-
mass stars, Tierras will also elucidate the irradiation environment of their
attendant exoplanets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.