* 2308711
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Oxidation Processes for the Control of Iodinated Disinfection Byproducts in Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tao Ye, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 262,158.00

Chemical oxidants such as chlorine are widely utilized as disinfectants to
inactivate waterborne pathogens in conventional water treatment processes.
However, chlorine can react with various background constituents in drinking
water sources (e.g., natural organic matter, bromide, and iodide) to form
undesirable and toxic disinfection byproducts (DBPs). Currently, the US EPA
regulates the maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) of 11 DBPs in drinking water
including 4 trihalomethanes (THMs), 5 haloacetic acids (HAAs), bromate (BrO-3),
and chlorite (ClO2-). Unregulated iodinated DBPs (I-DBPs) are receiving
increased attention as they are significantly more toxic than the regulated DBPs
and can damage cells and DNA. I-DBPs are formed when chemical oxidants such as
chlorine react with iodine and iodinated compounds (e.g., iodinated X-ray
contrast media) during the disinfection of drinking water sources. Thus, the
oxidation and conversion of iodine and iodinated compounds (ICs) to iodate
(IO3–), a nontoxic source of iodine nutritional trace element, has emerged as a
promising unit process to control and mitigate the formation of I-DBPs in water
treatment systems. However, the ability of current water treatment processes to
efficiently convert iodine and ICs to iodate suffer from several challenges
including the concurrent oxidation of bromide to bromate and toxic brominated
DBPs, and the incomplete transformation of iodine/ICs to iodate which can also
lead to the formation of I-DBPs and other regulated DBPs in the final product
water. The goal of this collaborative project is to explore the development of
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) and integrated treatment trains that can
efficiently oxidize and convert iodine and ICs to iodate while minimizing and
preventing the formation of toxic I-DBPs and regulated DBPs in the product
drinking water. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of new fundamental knowledge that could guide the design
and deployment of more effective water treatment processes and systems for
mitigating and eliminating and the formation of I-DBPs during water
disinfection. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student and one
undergraduate at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology and one
graduate student at South Dakota State University. Iodinated disinfection
byproducts (I-DBPs) formed in drinking water treatment are highly toxic at low
concentrations and have been found to be cytotoxic and genotoxic. Iodide (I–)
and iodinated X-ray contrast media (ICM) are the two most common iodine sources
that can react with disinfectants (e.g., chlorine and chloramines) to produce
I-DBPs during drinking water treatment. The oxidation and conversion of iodine
and iodinated compounds such as ICM to iodate (IO3–), a nontoxic source of
iodine nutritional trace element, has emerged as promising unit process to
control and mitigate the formation of I-DBPs in water treatment systems. The
overarching goal of this project is to advance the fundamental science and
engineering knowledge required to control emerging I-DBPs and regulated DBPs in
drinking water treatment through careful selection and optimization of advanced
oxidation processes (AOPs) and integration of the AOPs with conventional
processes. The core guiding hypothesis of the proposed research is that the
successful control of emerging I-DBPs and regulated DBPs in drinking water
treatment systems would require the efficient oxidation and conversion of iodine
species and iodinated compounds to iodate, the careful management of bromide
formation, and the partial (decent) removal of NOM (Natural Organic Matter), a
DBP precursor, prior to disinfection. The specific objectives of the research
are to 1) to investigate the utilization of AOPs, including ferrate (Fe[VI]),
ozone (O3), UV photolysis, and UV photolysis with O3, to optimize the oxidation
of iodine and ICM to iodate; 2) investigate the integration of AOPs with
conventional processes, including chlorination, and activated carbon sorption,
to minimize the formation of both I-DBPs and regulated DBPs; and 3) develop
analytical methods for measurement of iodine species and I-DBPs to unravel and
quantify the transformation pathways of iodine and ICM to I-DBPs and total
organic iodine. The successful completion of this project has the potential to
advance the fundamental understanding of the reactivity and transformations of
inorganic and organic iodine species/compounds by AOPs to guide the design and
development of iodine source-specific treatment processes for effective
mitigation of both I-DBPs and regulated DBPs in water treatment systems. To
implement the education and training goals of this project, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) propose to leverage existing programs at the South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology (SDSMT) and South Dakota State University to
recruit and mentor female students to work on the project. In addition, the PIs
plan to interact and collaborate with drinking water treatment professionals to
address water quality challenges in South Dakota, engage in local community
outreach events, and collaborate with the SDSMT Ivanhoe International Center to
engage and mentor international students from the African continent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.