* 2308283
* Collaborative Research: Designs and Theory for Interval Contractors and Reference Governors with Aerospace Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Laurent Burlion, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 230,000.00

This project will produce mathematical methods for the control of important
classes of dynamical systems that are used in aerospace engineering. The
controls will be modeled as forcing functions, which represent the admissible
forces that can be applied to the dynamics. The focus will be on producing
formulas for controls that ensure that desirable prescribed control objectives
are met for dynamical systems that contain significant input or state
constraints. Input constraints are restrictions on forces that can be applied to
the systems, such as maximum allowable thrusts for an aerial vehicle. State
constraints are restrictions on the allowable states of the systems, which can
arise from obstacle avoidance requirements or the need to keep the pitch or roll
of an aerial vehicle in safe ranges. The research is amenable to significant
engineering applications with either incomplete information about the systems'
states or surroundings, or where there are time deadlines or latencies when
achieving prescribed control goals. Latencies in mathematical models are
important for modeling the delayed effects of applying forces to dynamical
systems. The potential applications include using aerospace engineering methods
for national defense, for search and rescue, or for drones that can deliver
medical supplies in developing countries that may not yet have well equipped
runways. The methods will be tested in numerical simulations, using mathematical
models of quadrotors and fixed wing aircraft, and then in real time in an
aerospace engineering lab and outdoors using flying platforms. In addition to
generating fundamental knowledge that can enhance the performance of aerospace
systems in national defense or other significant domains, the project will train
PhD students at the interface of aerospace engineering and mathematics. This
will help increase the population of US applied mathematicians who can
collaborate with engineers and who can use state-of-the-art mathematical
techniques to help solve important societal problems.

The project will pursue three research strategies. One strategy will develop
interval contractors, which are iterative techniques for estimating solutions of
uncertain dynamical systems under incomplete information about the current state
of the dynamics, focusing on how uncertainty in state and input measurements
affect the contraction of the intervals and deriving conditions under which the
intervals contract to small enough tubes around unknown time-varying functions
in finite time. This strategy will build on the investigators' preliminary
results that illustrate significant improvement in tracking in aerospace models
that is achievable when interval contractors are used in conjunction with state
augmentation methods and convexity arguments to transform polynomial state
constraints into more easily handled linear constraints. A second strategy will
develop finite time extremum seeking methods, which identify extrema of
uncertain functions using sampled or delayed measurements and where the
identification process uses interval contractors, and which are therefore a
significant departure from standard optimization methods where the objective
function is assumed to be known. A third strategy will be robust reference
governors, which are add-on schemes for control systems that prevent input or
state violations while maintaining the performance of controls that were
designed in the absence of input or state constraints. This strategy will focus
on using interval contractors to ensure finite time convergence, under unknown
delays in continuous and discrete time and perturbed sampled measurements that
can model the effects of image processing. The project would prove theorems that
provide sufficient conditions for the methods to satisfy prescribed convergence
properties with a view towards findings rates of convergence, which is a
significant departure from research in the engineering community that was mainly
experimental. The applications will include propellant slosh mitigation,
automatic safe landing, and source seeking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.