* 2308486
* Correlating the Gravitational Wave and Electromagnetic Sky Maps
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 60,000.00

Recent detections of gravitational waves (GWs) from the mergers of binary black
hole (BBH), binary neutron star (BNS), and black hole-neutron star (BHNS)
systems have initiated the fields of GW and multi-messenger astrophysics. Nearly
100 such systems have been observed to date. Advanced GW detectors are expected
to further improve their sensitivities, and to conduct extended observing runs
in the next 3-5 years. One of the primary targets of these upcoming runs is the
detection of the stochastic gravitational-wave background (SGWB) that arises by
summing up GWs from all merging BBH, BNS, and BHNS systems in the universe. This
project will promote the study of the SGWB into a new probe of the formation of
structure in the universe. It will do so by correlating the SGWB measurements
with electromagnetic (EM) observations, such as observations of the galaxy
distribution on the sky or gravitational weak lensing. The project will enable
strong participation of both undergraduate and graduate students in high-
visibility studies in this emerging field, and it will promote participation of
women and underrepresented minorities through a series of research and outreach
activities and initiatives at the University of Minnesota and more broadly.

The project will develop two formalisms to measure correlations of SGWB
anisotropy with EM tracers of the large scale structure in the universe. One
formalism will build on the existing cross-correlation techniques to measure
anisotropy in the GW energy density. The other will leverage existing parameter
estimation pipelines for compact binary mergers, hence dramatically (~1000x)
increasing the sensitivity to the SGWB due to such mergers. The two formalisms
will be applied to the data acquired in the upcoming fourth and fifth observing
runs of Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo detectors. They will also take
advantage of the upcoming Euclid survey that will revolutionize the
understanding of the galaxy distribution on the largest scales. Combining these
premier data sets, of both GW and EM flavors, with the state-of-the-art analysis
pipelines will result in orders-of-magnitude more sensitive SGWB-EM correlation
measurements, with a potential to detect such correlations for the first time
and start constraining astrophysical and cosmological models. The project will
bring together GW astrophysicists and traditional astronomers, and will serve to
strengthen the connections between the two communities. Students participating
in the project will have unique opportunities to closely work with experts in
both GW and traditional astronomy communities, and to play leading roles in
defining the emerging new astrophysics and cosmology probes. The project will
also bring together experts across the world, specifically from Europe, India,
and the United States, hence strengthening the ties across the international
scientific community. As the team includes 50% women, a strong effort will be
made to promote involvement of women in astrophysics by connecting with
appropriate groups and organizations at the University of Minnesota and
participating in their activities, meetings, and visits to local schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.