* 2308532
* Collaborative Research: Track 4: Developing Equity-Minded Engineering Practitioners (DEEP)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Oscar Barton, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF Track 4 Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) project aims to
catalyze a culture change in the education of the next generation of engineers.
The Developing Equity-Minded Engineering Practitioners (DEEP) Center will engage
reflective and proactive practitioners toward creating cultural, structural, and
pedagogical changes across the engineering discipline and beyond. The strategy
for systemic change is to educate, equip, engage, and empower instructional
faculty, with effective research-based practices for inclusive, equitable, and
transparent learning. The DEEP Center will create a central, visible hub for
professional development, organizational learning, and collaboration through
communities of practice across the educational ecosystem of faculty and
instructors. The DEEP Center will positively impact the retention and success of
students, particularly those from racial and ethnic backgrounds that are
historically underrepresented in engineering. DEEP focuses on fixing the system
rather than fixing the student. In so doing, DEEP will strengthen the future
U.S. Engineering workforce with the knowledge, beliefs, and practices of
inclusive excellence so that they can research, develop, and innovate the best
solutions for 21st century global challenges.

The DEEP Center will be led by the Institute for Inclusion, Diversity, Equity,
and Access (IDEA) in the Grainger College of Engineering at the University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) in collaboration with Mitchell School of
Engineering at Morgan State University (MSU). The goal of this center is to
develop faculty change agents at UIUC and MSU who will foster equitable and
inclusive teaching and learning environments for students The project objectives
are to: (1) co-develop, co- pilot, and collect a repository of diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) instructional examples for faculty to adapt and
infuse in their own curricula; (2) collaborate in equity-minded communities of
practice; (3) implement an effective analytical framework for assessing and
integrating inclusive STEM teaching and learning, and (4) articulate, evaluate,
and share a model for collaboration between Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and predominantly
white institutions (PWIs) around increasing the infusion of DEI into
undergraduate engineering education that includes faculty exchange and co-
teaching of courses. The guiding research questions are focused on understanding
the impact of the DEEP model (peer-facilitated professional development and
equity-minded communities of practice) to lead to changes in the knowledge,
attitude, behaviors, and effectiveness (KABE) of teaching personnel. The
evaluation will use a mixed methods approach to gain a comprehensive, in-depth
understanding of the project. Appropriate evaluation instruments will be used to
assess changes in DEEP participants’ KABE in fostering equitable and inclusive
engineering learning environments. Data collection activities will include a
review of instructor and course evaluation system data from participating
teaching personnel, interviews with teaching personnel, focus groups with
students to gauge experiences and impacts, observations of in-person
professional development and teaching personnel classes, and surveys assessing
perceived quality of DEEP implementation and outcomes. Project outcomes will
include the creation of a repository of DEI lesson examples to be shared
publicly, a guidebook on forming an HBCU/MSI-PWI partnership and sharing lessons
learned, workshops for colleagues at UIUC and MSU, and virtual webinars to the
broader engineering education community. Because of our focus on systemic
change, we plan to share project outcomes with engineering administration,
institutional leadership at MSU and UIUC, and nationally. The success of this
project will bridge the gaps between top-down policy reforms requiring DEI
contributions and bottom-up faculty efforts across multiple institutions to
develop and execute equitable and inclusive teaching practices.

This project is co-funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to strengthen STEM
undergraduate education and research at HBCUs. This project is also co-funded by
NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (INCLUDES)
Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate collaborative infrastructure
building to advance and sustain systemic change to broaden participation in STEM
at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.