* 2308405
* BPE Track 3: Kindred Harbor Collective: Harvesting Black Consciousness in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Brooke Coley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2028
* USD 800,000.00

Broadening participation in engineering education necessitates broadening the
ways we theorize about knowledge and establish understanding. For engineering to
reflect the diverse and true intellectual capacity of the nationâ€™s population,
the field must make space for interdisciplinary, critical, culturally relevant,
and socially just research. Mentorship has been found to be transformative
contributing to the greater equity, access, and inclusion in engineering,
enabling students to see themselves as researchers as they find their place in
the field while supporting the realization of their next stage in professional
development. This Broadening Participation in Engineering Track 3 inclusive
mentoring hub will create a community of scholars equipped with education and
tools to mitigate racialized oppression in engineering education environments.
We will address this purpose through a five-phase participatory action research
design that is focused on building Black scholars in engineering education
through the application of Black intellectualism as scholarship and solidarity
anchored in an Afrocentric value system. Black undergraduate, graduate,
postdocs, and early career faculty will cultivate a critical community focused
on the development of new approaches, new ideas, and new solutions to racism in
engineering education. Three institutions spanning diverse institutional
profiles, one Historically White College/University, one Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI), and one Historically Black College/University (HBCU), will
enable us to simultaneously consider how the mentorship is received as well as
how it varies across institutional context. Our proposed program is evidence-
based, multigenerational, identity-affirming, fosters career-stage appropriate
independence, and encourages self-reflection with embedded mechanisms for mentor
accountability. The most fundamental aspect of our approach to broadening
participation will be revolutionizing engineering education research through
foregrounding Black systems of understanding in the construction of knowledge.
Through mentorship, we will expand our individual knowledge and that of our
scholarly community.

Through our varied institutional homes, we will come together to be a continuous
and long-establishing positive professional and psychosocial support system
where students gain real time guidance and care while also learning to be
empowered in Blackness in scholarship and identity. Much scholarship to date has
focused on supposed deficits of Black students and faculty, and their
persistence. Black students and faculty need tools to dismantle the
intersectional structures and systems of oppression that undergird engineering
education. Black intellectualism centers the social organization of the Black
community as a unit of analysis for deconstructing mechanisms of racism,
offering both critiques and correctives. This frame of reference enhances
understanding of Black/Afrocentric norms and values while simultaneously
enabling a more dignified and democratic approach to inquiry within a discipline
inhibited by ideals of White supremacy. This work is guided by the following
research questions:

RQ1. What is the impact of utilizing Black Consciousness as an epistemological
lens in engineering education scholarship? RQ2. What aspects of mentoring
(career support, psychosocial support, and/or identity sharing mentoring) are
related to Black academics' development of research-related skills, academic and
professional development, and level of independence in research? RQ3. How
effective are arts-based educational activities, specifically podcasts, as modes
for cultivating a community of scholars?

Through this mentorship hub we will, through the pollination resulting from
mentees as change agents, significantly influence the culture of mentorship in
engineering education. We will create a supportive network for Black engineering
academics across a range of levels, and longitudinally. We anticipate increased
engagement of scholars rooted in Black intellectualism in the academic
community, shaping talent to advance this nascent research agenda in engineering
education research. In sharing our findings with centers for research on
teaching and learning, this work stands to impact the way faculty development is
designed for Black academics, and specifically, for those interested in
Afrocentric engineering research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.