* 2308859
* Collaborative Research: ECLIPSE: Exploring Non-Oxidative Reaction Pathways of Atmospheric Pressure Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Arthur Dogariu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 137,625.00

This award supports a collaborative project between North Carolina State
University, Clarkson University, and Texas A&M University to explore chemical
reaction pathways in low temperature plasmas. The field of low temperature
plasmas (LTPs) encompasses applications ranging from microelectronics
fabrication and human implants to lasers and solar cell manufacturing. The
success of the development of these technologies relies on the reactions of
plasma-generated ions and free radicals. While extensive work has been conducted
to identify and quantify reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, the generation
mechanisms and subsequent reactions of non-oxidative species such as ions and
metastable atoms produced by the plasma are largely unknown. These species have
been proposed to be deployed for a range of unique plasmochemical
transformations, including the removal of toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) known as ''forever chemicals'' from water using multiphase
gas-liquid plasma reactors. This project aims to accelerate the development and
scale up of plasma reactors to degrade and destroy PFAS, and is supported under
the ECosystem for Leading Innovation in Plasma Science and Engineering (ECLIPSE)
and Critical Aspects of Sustainability (CAS): Innovative Solutions to
Sustainable Chemistry (CAS-SC) programs.

The project seeks to elucidate non-oxidative chemical reaction mechanisms and
pathways of photons, metastables, radicals, and charged particles generated by
atmospheric pressure plasmas in contact with liquid water. The central approach
for achieving these objectives involves measuring removal rates of four
nonoxidizable fluorinated compounds in three gas-liquid plasma reactors of well-
defined hydrodynamics and correlating them to the fluxes delivered from two
different atmospheric pressure plasma jet devices. The central hypothesis of
this effort is that solvated electrons and hydrogen radicals are the key species
involved in non-oxidative chemical transformations. The mechanisms underlying
the degradation of short-chain PFAS are of particular interest, as these
compounds have proven to be extremely challenging to treat. This project
involves students at all levels, from K-12 to graduate, including those from
under-served communities. Major activities include development of a portable
plasma-water demonstration setup for high school students, organization of a
Chemical Engineering Workshop at a local children’s museum, participation in
plasma summer schools, and utilizing social media platforms to create a series
of exciting and engaging technical videos to encourage public interest in
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.