* 2308645
* Aqueous Aerosol Chemistry: Elucidating the Mechanisms Causing Mismatch between Field and Laboratory Chemical Composition of Biomass Burning Organic Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Allen Goldstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2026
* USD 799,556.00

This project will investigate emissions from biomass burning and the resulting
chemical mechanisms and processes that lead to the formation of secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) in the atmosphere. New laboratory simulations will be
performed, and the results will be compared with data from several recent field
campaigns that measured emissions from wildfires to identify the gaps that have
been observed between laboratory and field speciated organic aerosol. This
effort is expected to broaden the knowledge of primary and secondary chemicals
in the atmosphere from biomass burning and enable improvements in modeling their
effects on air quality and climate.

In this project, the PIs plan to: (1) conduct laboratory oxidation experiments
of selected phenolic compounds under varying humidity and oxidizing conditions
and obtain samples of the resulting SOA; (2) analyze the laboratory samples to
provide molecular-level speciation of semi-volatile organic species; (3)
elucidate and quantify novel tracers reflective of isolated biomass-burning
related SOA formation mechanisms and processes (gas, particle, or aqueous
phases, photolysis) and connect these with ambient observations for use in model
development; and (4) update the open-access University of California, Berkeley,
Goldstein Library of Organic Biogenic and Environmental Spectra (UCB-GLOBES)
database with observed compounds for community use. The simulations are designed
to bridge the gap observed between laboratory and field speciated organic
aerosol.

The project includes support for a postdoctoral scholar and several
undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.