* 2308890
* Conference: International conference on Malliavin calculus and related topics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Frederi Viens, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 44,340.00

The International Conference on Malliavin Calculus and Related Topics (ICMC)
will be held June 12-16, 2023, at Luxembourg University in Beval, Luxembourg.
The Malliavin calculus of variations is a field of mathematical research at the
boundary of probability theory, functional analysis and differential geometry.
ICMC will bring together mathematicians specializing in the Malliavin calculus
and related areas. There will be 20 invited talks by world-class senior
researchers, and also talks by junior researchers and a poster session. Funds
from the National Science Foundation will support the travel of early-career
participants based in the US, who will use this conference as a valuable
training and networking opportunity, resulting in potentially major impact on
their careers. Conversely, by bringing together leading and emerging scholars in
the field, the conference is expected to have an impact on the strength and
reach of stochastic analysis, a field of mathematics that is both established
and rapidly developing.

While Paul Malliavin originally created his calculus at the beginning of the
1970s to study the regularity of solutions of stochastic differential equations,
the range of its applications has grown to cover topics as diverse as
mathematical physics, stochastic differential geometry, stochastic calculus,
density and concentration estimates, rough paths and regularity structures,
probabilistic approximations, mathematical finance, and mathematical statistics,
to name but a few. Our topics for this conference will mirror this exceptional
mathematical diversity of topics, to include stochastic geometry (Gaussian and
related processes in hypoelliptic and fractal geometries), stochastic equations
driven by Gaussian processes (densities and numerical schemes for equations
driven by fractional Brownian motions), stochastic partial differential
equations (intermittency and other physical properties), rough paths and
regularity structures (KPZ equations, Yang-Mills measures), Malliavin calculus
connected to Stein's method (limit theorems, Poisson-Voronoi approximation and
Boolean models), and mathematical finance (parametric and non parametric
estimation procedures). Additional information may be found on the conference
webpage, https://math.uni.lu/icmcrt/index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.