* 2308644
* Collaborative Research: EDGE CMT: Discovery and functional characterization of genes that govern ciliate-algal symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Tingting Xiang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 09/30/2026
* USD 899,809.00

Cnidarians, most notably corals, are cornerstones of marine ecosystems and are
powered by their symbiotic dinoflagellate algae. However, these symbiotic
relationships are particularly susceptible to environmental perturbations such
as high temperature, that can result in the loss of the algae, known as
bleaching. Strategies to stem bleaching of corals and other species can inform
conservation efforts to overcome the crisis coral reefs face globally. This
project will utilize a single-celled model involving a ciliate that forms
endosymbiotic relationships with dinoflagellate algae to identify the molecular
and cellular mechanisms governing these symbiotic relationships. The knowledge
gained about the molecular basis of the symbiosis in this project will provide a
deeper understanding of how symbiosis breaks down under stress and may allow for
the development of strategies to mitigate coral bleaching. Additionally, this
project will directly lead to the training and career development for young
scientists with diverse backgrounds from the University of Guam and the
University of California, Riverside, both of which are Minority-Serving
Institutions.

Endosymbiotic algae in the family Symbiodiniaceae power cnidarians, like corals,
sea anemones, and jellyfish, which are cornerstones of marine ecosystems but
have been increasingly threatened by environmental perturbations and stress.
Despite the critical nature of cnidarian-Symbiodiniaceae symbiosis, the
underlying mechanisms that govern this symbiotic interaction remain largely
unknown. Most of the genes in Symbiodiniaceae symbiosis are not accessible to
hypothesis-driven research due to extremely limited knowledge about their
function. To overcome these limitations, this project will utilize a single-
celled ciliate model which enables identification of genotype-phenotype
relationships by employing systematic high-throughput screening and protein
tagging approaches. This project is expected to elucidate novel mechanisms of
endosymbiosis involving Symbiodiniaceae and provide unprecedented insights to
the gene functions required for symbiosis in general.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.