* 2308895
* Computational and Experimental Studies Towards Ideal Organic Semiconductors for Perovskite Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Zhonghua Peng, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2025
* USD 309,827.00

Non-technical Description Perovskite solar cells are an exciting and promising
solar cell technology with great potential for the future of renewable energy.
However, there are significant technical hurdles to be overcome such as device
stability and the cost of materials. This project combines computational and
experimental approaches to understand the fundamental design principles of
organic semiconductors with desirable properties. These include low-cost, high
stability, and efficient charge transport. Such materials could enable the
fabrication of inexpensive, efficient, and long-term stable perovskite solar
cells. Such organic semiconductors could also have a significant impact on the
field of organic optoelectronics. The project will attract female and minority
undergraduates and high school students from multiple science and engineering
disciplines to participate in research as part of an interdisciplinary team. The
project will also foster outreach efforts to K-12 students and the general
public. Multiple lectures and demonstrations on two global challenges, renewable
energy & circular plastic economy, at K-12 schools and public events per year
are planned with the aim of attracting talented students into the renewable
energy research field. Technical Description High charge mobility is the
critical property that has been targeted by the research community on solution-
processable organic semiconductors. In this project, a team of researchers aims
at designing and developing such materials possessing not only high charge
mobility but also other attributes essential for practical applications such as
low cost, high chemical and thermal stability, good film-forming properties,
hydrophobicity, and frontier orbital matching specifically for perovskite solar
cell applications. Diacenaphtho-fused heterocycle (DAH) cores have been
rationally selected and peripheral flexible groups with or without additional
functions such as polarity or extended conjugation are computationally evaluated
regarding their effects on crystalline order and packing motifs, band energies,
and charge mobilities. The systematic and extensive computational studies not
only provide promising leads for experimental explorations but also help
establish structure-packing motif-charge mobility relationships and crystalize
design rules for solution-processable organic semiconductors. Promising targets
predicted by theoretical studies are synthesized and their thin film
morphological, optical, and charge transport properties are experimentally
measured and compared with theoretical predictions. Some DAH derivatives are
anticipated to be ideal organic hole-transporting materials that encompass all
the desired properties for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Those
DAHs are used to fabricate perovskite solar cells to gauge their promising
potential in simultaneously improving device efficiency, stability, and cost-
effectiveness.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.