* 2308625
* Nanoparticle Materials as Chemical and Biological Tools for Peptides and Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Yan Zhao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Proteins are workhorses of cells and involved in practically every single
biological process. Selective labeling of proteins is important to the
elucidation of their mechanisms, understanding of their functions, and
improvement in the properties of therapeutic proteins such as prolonged
circulation time, reduced immunogenicity, and/or better proteolytic stability.
The research group of Professor Yan Zhao at Iowa State University develops
antibody-mimicking polymeric nanoparticles to recognize specific parts of
proteins and deliver fluorescent tags, affinity labels, or polymeric reagents
precisely to the targeted sites. These site-specifically labeled proteins are
useful in many applications including biological studies of protein functions,
tracing proteins in their cellular fates, and purification of proteins. These
nanoparticles are inexpensive, robust synthetic materials that do not denature
as fragile biomolecules and can be produced in large quantities without using
live animals. They have the potential to replace antibodies under many research
and biotechnology settings. The multidisciplinary research helps trains student
researchers into professional scientists by exposing them to a wide range of
skills in biomaterials science, biology, physical organic chemistry,
supramolecular chemistry, and polymer chemistry.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Proteins rarely work alone in their biological functions but are regulated
through post-translational modifications (PTMs), protein–protein interactions
(PPIs), and other mechanisms. Mapping out these PTMs and PPIs is key to
fundamental biology and drug development, and frequently requires selective
modification of proteins, as well as selective protein-binding materials. The
latter is also useful for a range of other purposes including protein
purification, detection, and replacement of antibodies in certain applications.
This project, funded by the Biomaterials Program of the Materials Research
Division, supports Professor Yan Zhao of Iowa State University to develop
antibody-mimicking polymeric nanoparticles that to bind proteins with high
affinity and specificity. Aim 1 focuses on the site-specific labeling of protein
with a single or multiple tags. Aim 2 focuses on the development nanoparticle
receptors to bind surface groups of proteins. These materials are prepared
through molecular imprinting within cross-linked surfactant micelles. They are
expected to impact multiple research fields including fundamental biochemistry
and cell biology, biotechnology, and protein therapeutics. The education and
outreach activities center on participation in on- and off-campus programs to
engage undergraduate research and increase STEM exposure to K–12 students. In
addition, the PI uses several methods to familiarize students with patents and
the patenting process and to better prepare them for industrial careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.