* 2308161
* LADUMA: Reaching the Highest Redshifts with the Deepest HI Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Baker, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 391,606.00

Since their formation in the early universe, galaxies have been converting their
gas reservoirs - almost entirely composed of atomic (HI) and molecular hydrogen
(H2) - into stars. Astronomers have formed an impressively detailed picture of
this process, including the "hydrogen cycle" by which atomic and molecular gas
transition from one form to the other and back again. The study of H2 in
extremely distant (z > 3) galaxies has been revolutionized by the Atacama Large
Millimeter Array (ALMA), which takes advantage of highly luminous "tracer"
molecules like carbon monoxide (CO). To probe the HI content of galaxies
astronomers must rely on the much weaker 21 cm "spin-flip" transition of HI,
which has effectively restricted studies to the local (z < 0.2) universe. This
project's goal is to extend this HI census in galaxies to the unprecedented
redshift of z = 1.45 and fill a crucial gap in our current understanding of HI’s
role in galaxy evolution through the Looking At the Distant Universe with the
MeerKAT Array (LADUMA) survey. The project, jointly led by the PI, has been
awarded 3,424-hours of high-priority time with the 64-element MeerKAT radio
telescope in South Africa to image a single ultra-deep pointing in the Extended
Chandra Deep Field South. Supporting observations will be used to allow HI
"stacking" observations as well as discriminating HI from OH megamaser emission.
All survey data will be publicly released. This project will allow continued
U.S. leadership in Square Kilometer Array (SKA) precursor science. The award
will also support the training of a graduate student in cutting-edge science as
well as a new outreach program to community colleges in New Jersey.

Results will be derived from both direct HI spectral line detections and by
“stacking” samples of galaxies with previously measured positions and redshifts.
The latter will allow LADUMA to achieve its full potential for studying HI out
to z = 1.45, at least in a statistical sense. The project also encompasses the
identification of OH megamaser “interlopers” in the HI sample that will be used
to trace the cosmic history of gas-rich mergers out to z = 1.86. These research
activities will benefit from detailed comparisons to theoretical models and are
well-matched to the “cosmic ecosystems” theme of the recently released Astro2020
Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics, including that theme’s priority
science area (“unveiling the hidden drivers of galaxy growth”), a science
question (“How do gas, metals, and dust flow into and out of galaxies?”), as
well as a critical discovery area prioritized for galaxy evolution research
(“mapping the circumgalactic medium and the intergalactic medium in emission”).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.