* 2308277
* DISES: Decision Making for Land Use Planning under Future Climate Scenarios through Engaged Research via Co-Design
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amy Frazier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,599,825.00

The apparent loss of biodiversity as a function of human activities has many
species on the brink of extinction. However, humans slso have the power to make
the decisions to prevent biodiversity losses and improve ecosystem functioning
on Earth. This research addresses the question of how scientists and decision
makers can work together to develop sustainable land-use solutions in a way that
leverages the best available data, technology, and predictive tools in a manner
that can be translated into policy action. The researchers on this project will
work directly with scientists and policy makers in Colombia—the second most
biodiverse country in the world—to develop models that can predict future land
use changes and use those models to make sustainable land-use decisions. A broad
set of participants will engage in the research through workshops where the
models will be developed, and participant feedback will be used to improve the
usability and usefulness of the outputs. The effectiveness of the approach will
be evaluated to determine how such an engaged research approach can be improved
in the future. Additionally, this project will broaden participation in
conservation science and STEM by providing training and mentoring to students
and postdocs.

Bringing together scientists and decision makers through an engaged research
approach, this project uses co-design to advance toward more viable systems of
knowledge production that involve decision makers in shaping the research, not
just receiving the outcomes. Basic scientific theories and models of land use
and biodiversity forecasting will be advanced by integrating diverse, multi-
scale data into dynamic prediction models to inform actionable and sustainable
land use plans to prevent the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services while
also ensuring food and energy security into the future. These projections will
be used to prioritize different areas for conservation, agriculture, and energy
land uses according to stakeholder inputs and feedback so that they can support
sustainable land-use decisions in support of global targets such as the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the Convention on Biological
Diversity’s 30x30 target. The sensitivity of the models to user-determined
scenarios and data inputs will be assessed to inform how the model responds to
different points of leverage on the target variables leading to different land
use prioritizations and different model parameterizations. The process of
knowledge creation and use will also be assessed for its efficacy and
effectiveness to better understand how co-design can lead to translational
research outcomes and interventions that will ultimately improve the decision-
making capacity of agencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.