* 2308556
* NSF 22-059 DCL (Ocean Technical Workforce Education) Building an Ocean Technology Workforce Utilizing Microcredentials
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Liesl Hotaling, MARINE TECHNOLOGY SOCIETY, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2026
* USD 216,789.00

Demand is growing for technically skilled workers across multiple sectors within
the marine industry (research, renewable energy, fisheries, ports/shipping,
infrastructure, national security, tourism, etc.), but the current US academic
system is not well equipped to educate students with the required skills. This
award to the Marine Technology Society (MTS) supports a workforce preparation
effort that will develop a series of stackable micro-credentials and create
accessible and flexible pathways to learning and vocational training. The micro-
credentials will address core competencies required for employment in the
ocean/marine/blue economy and capture learners entering the workforce or those
seeking to apply skill sets acquired during military service. The credentials
will offer acknowledgement of skills acquired “on the job” and will function as
a vehicle for employment retraining. Members of the MTS represent several
sectors (industry, government, military, and academia), and the collective
experience within the Society membership, in partnership with academic faculty
from the Rutgers University Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences and from
Northwestern Michigan College, will identify core competencies required for
employment in the ocean/marine/blue economy, create a micro-credential training
program, video hands-on training activities, make the curriculum available on-
line, and create a "badging" system. The MTS Micro-credentials Program will
allow learners to customize their education path to gain the credentials
necessary for their specific career aspirations.

The Micro-credential material will be pilot tested with groups of students,
evaluated and final materials will be available on line. Curriculum will be
developed and tested during one-week immersive technology camps offered to
students at Rutgers and Northwestern Michigan College. The hands-on activities
and presentations at both camps will be filmed for online distribution. The team
will create a total of six credentials, including basic credentials in 1)
Underwater Gliders; 2) Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs); 3) Sonar; and 4) Deck
Operations, and two more advanced micro-credentials in: 5) Underwater Gliders,
and 6) Sonar. This program will provide a total of forty undergraduates with
technical training and access to mentors. The experience will provide a useful
introduction to marine technology fields and open doors to potential employment.
It will engage with the military's Transition Assistance Programs (TAP) program
and the Marine Maritime Academies. The project will support NSF's goals of
increasing the diversity of the ocean science workforce. If successful, the
project will result in an expandable micro-credentialing program for the marine
technical workforce. The program will also be promoted with employers to ensure
that the Micro-credential system opens doors to employment and is eventually
self-sustaining.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.