* 2308274
* Resolving the Structure of Photodissociation Regions at Low Metallicity
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Karin Sandstrom, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 402,509.00

Photodissociation regions (PDRs) --- interstellar gas whose properties are
determined by far-ultraviolet radiation --- govern the formation of cold, dense,
molecular gas where star formation can occur. This research project will use
high quality observations from the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
(ALMA) to resolve and characterize the different layers of gas within PDRs in
the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC). The processes within PDRs are sensitive to the
abundance of heavy elements, and the SMC is poor in heavy elements relative to
the Milky Way, so the results from this project will help shed light on how
physical conditions within PDRs depend on the “metallicity” of the gas. The
project will train a graduate student in methods of advanced astronomical
research, and it will develop a program to facilitate the participation of
incoming community college transfer students in undergraduate research.

The investigators have obtained new ALMA observations that resolve the structure
of a PDR in the low metallicity environment of the SMC. They will undertake
three efforts to characterize the observed PDR. First, they will measure the
temperature of the gas using the rotational emission lines of carbon monoxide
(CO) and the fine structure lines of neutral carbon (C), comparing the
measurements to PDR models. Next, they will compare the location of the atomic-
to-molecular hydrogen (H/H2) transition to the C+/C/CO transition to study the
nature of “CO-dark H2 gas” --- PDR layers where hydrogen is molecular (H2) while
carbon is either ionized (C+) or neutral. Finally, they will use the high
velocity resolution possible with ALMA to study the dynamics and turbulence of
gas in the PDR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.