* 2308629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Material Culture Networks and Social Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Robert Bischoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,509.00

The goal of this research is to clarify the complicated relationships between
archaeological material culture networks and past social networks. Social
network analysis is used to study the structure and dynamics of interactions
among social actors at a variety of scales. Network methods provide a means to
study the relations between entities and how those relations affect outcomes.
The usefulness of this approach in archaeology is attested by its rapid
adoption, yet there remain substantial questions regarding the fundamental
nature of the material culture networks used as proxies for social networks.
Archaeologists typically use similarities between types of artifacts as a proxy
for the probability that social groups interacted in the past. But what type of
interaction is represented by similarities in ceramic pots? Is it the same type
of interaction as that represented by similarities in arrowheads? This
dissertation research is designed to answer these questions using multilayer
network analysis. This form of analysis handles multiple networks in at once,
which will allow the researcher to conduct a study comparing many types of
material culture using data from the Western Pueblo Region of the Southwest
United States between AD 1150 and AD 1500. This region has an excellent
chronological record and archaeological coverage, which makes it an ideal area
to test the efficacy of using material culture networks as proxies for social
networks. By determining how different material culture networks correlate with
each other, this research will inform the broader archaeological community
regarding the ways different types of material culture may or may not reveal
different aspects of past social networks. Furthermore, this study will be the
first to formally explore the network trajectories of communities across a
period of rapid social-organizational change in the Western Pueblo region. The
research also involves significant collaboration with the living descendants of
the ancient inhabitants of the Western Pueblo region who will provide native
interpretations of the results of this study. The first portion of the study
involves archival research documenting thousands of projectile points across the
Western Pueblo region. Images will be obtained of each projectile point for use
in a geometric morphometric analysis that uses homologous landmarks on each
projectile point to mathematically compare similarities in outlines. A smaller
sample of projectile points will also be scanned in 3D to compare the entire
surface of the point to make a more detailed comparison. The second portion of
the study combines the projectile point analysis with existing databases on
ceramics, architectural features, and geochemically sourced obsidian and
ceramics. These data will be converted into material culture networks used to
represent ancient social networks. The networks will then be analyzed using
standard multilayer and individual network analysis methods to compare the
differences between them and to examine the trajectory of change throughout the
Western Pueblo region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.