* 2308503
* US-UK Collab: Resurrecting a role for roguing: Presymptomatic detection with multispectral imaging to quantify and control the transmission of cassava brown streak disease
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Linda Hanley-Bowdoin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,180,198.00

This project will test the practical usability of newly-developed multispectral
imager (MSI) technology to rapidly determine the infection status of cassava
plants in agricultural fields in Tanzania. Climate change-resilient crops like
cassava are projected to play a key role in 21st century food security. However,
cassava production in East Africa it is limited by RNA viruses that cause
cassava brown streak disease (CBSD). CBSD causes subtle or no symptoms on stems
and leaves, while destroying the root tissue, which means farmers are often
unaware their field is infected until they have a failed harvest. The subtle
symptoms of CBSD have made it difficult to study the spread of the disease in
fields. This project will use the MSI to accurately model the local spread of
CBSD for the first time. In addition to improving the food security of people
who eat cassava in sub-Saharan Africa, this technology and modeling framework
may be useful for diseases of other vegetatively propagated crops such as
potato, sweet potato, taro, and yam. In addition, the multinational team will
train undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral scholars to tackle
problems in globally-connected agriculture research.

The MSI works by observing leaves using many different wavelengths; the
resulting light spectra are then interpreted by machine learning models trained
on cassava leaf scans. Under laboratory conditions, the MSI detects CBSD
infection with 95% accuracy at 28 days post infection, when plants have no
visible symptoms. This project will assess and improve the performance of the
MSI to detect CBSD infection in the field and to compare those spectral to ones
caused by other plant stresses. The project will measure the spread of CBSD in
experimental fields, and model its spread to evaluate the efficacy of using the
MSI to detect and remove infected cassava plants from fields before CBSD can
spread. The project will determine whether the MSI can improve the success of
clean-seed systems in East Africa. Those systems aim to distribute disease-free
planting material, but have had problems controlling the spread of CBSD.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.