* 2308519
* I-Corps: Electrospun Nanofiber
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Morshed Khandaker, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a nanofiber cloth to filter carcinogenic chemicals such as
formaldehyde when used in face masks. The innovation can be adapted for other
airborne carcinogenic chemicals (e.g., benzene, toluene, and ammonia) detection
and prevention. This innovation will have commercial and societal benefits and
applications for various industries, including health, education, and fuel
delivery. The project's interdisciplinary nature will advance electrospun
nanotechnology, material characterization, and experimental techniques.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a filter fabric for a
facemask or air filter, which will absorb airborne formaldehyde and pathogens,
preventing human exposure. This project will use an electrospun nanofiber mesh
technology to produce a unique, biofriendly fabric incorporating formaldehyde
absorption and antibacterial agents. This fabric will be capable of filtering
out airborne pathogenic molecules less than 120 nm. Electrospinning is an
engineering process by which threads 1000 times less than a spider web can be
processed into a non-woven fabric. The nanofibers have been used to coat
implants (e.g., dental, knee, and bone anchor) and produce antibacterial
bandages, bones, skin grafts, and intervertebral discs. The outcome of this
project is an improved, cost-effective, and bio-friendly filtration material and
production technology that will impact human health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.