* 2308045
* Laboratory investigation of the gas-phase formation of (poly)cyclic hydrocarbons under interstellar conditions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jordy Bouwman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 418,655.00

Cyclic molecules composed of five or six carbon atoms, as well as small
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) represent the most complex molecules
unambiguously identified by radio astronomy in cold dark molecular clouds, but
little is known about how they are formed under interstellar conditions. Using a
combined experimental and computational approach, this research project will
investigate key gas phase reaction mechanisms driving the formation of complex
cyclic hydrocarbons in cold interstellar clouds. Results from the project will
serve as critical input to astrochemical models, allowing astronomers to explain
the presence of complex cyclic hydrocarbons in space. This project will train a
graduate student in methods of advanced laboratory astrophysics and provide
research opportunities to an undergraduate student. The research team will
investigate the reactivity of two radical species, ortho-benzyne and
2,3-pyridyne. The investigators have shown that ortho-benzyne, a molecule
recently identified in the Taurus Molecular Cloud (TMC-1), plays a crucial role
in the synthesis of the complex hydrocarbons ethynylcyclopentadiene and indene
which have also been identified there. This project will build upon that work by
investigating reactions of ortho-benzyne and 2,3-pyridyne that potentially form
the PAH naphthalene, as well as the cyanocyclopentadienes which have been
detected in TMC-1. A pyrolysis microreactor coupled to a double imaging
photoelectron photoion coincidence (i2PEPICO) spectrometer connected to the
vacuum ultraviolet beamline of a synchrotron will be used in the study. The
i2PEPICO system will be capable of measuring---with isomer specificity---the
products formed in chemical reactions of the selected radical species. Quantum
chemical calculations of potential energy surfaces will yield insights into the
reactions and a statistical model will be employed to derive product branching
fractions. Because the reactions investigated have the potential to yield
products that are plausible candidates for detection in space, results from this
study would also guide future radio astronomical observations. Besides
astronomy, results from this project are directly applicable to PAH and soot
formation mechanisms in combustion chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.