* 2308488
* Defining glucan dikinase phosphorylation of starch from multiple kingdoms
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Matthew Gentry, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 09/30/2024
* USD 122,710.00

Starch plays a central role in human food, agricultural animals feed, biofuels,
and as an industrial feedstock. Starch from cereal crops and tubers account for
50-80% of daily caloric intake. In the U.S., 36% of corn is dedicated to animal
feed and 34% is converted into biofuels. Starch is both a first-generation
biofuel and a feedstock for molecular hydrogen and oil production by micro-
algae. It is also an industrial feedstock for paper, textiles, adhesives, and
plastics. Therefore, defining the pathways that control starch metabolism is
needed in order to develop novel strategies that manipulate these pathways and
satisfy the growing starch demand. This project will define molecular energy
storage mechanisms from algae to plants while teaching students to test
hypotheses using bioinformatics, biophysics, structural biology, cell biology,
and enzymology. The broader impacts of this project may increase participation
of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM, improve STEM education and
educator development, help develop a diverse and globally competitive STEM
workforce, and increase public scientific literacy and engagement with science
technology.

Reversible phosphorylation of starch glucose is the only known natural
modification of starch, and it directly influences starch hydration,
crystallinity, freeze-thaw stability, viscosity, and transparency, which are all
central to industrial applications. Starch producing organisms possess either
one or two glucan dikinases that phosphorylate starch glucose. Their activity is
critical for the production and utilization of starch in vivo. Despite their key
biological role, little is known regarding the physical and functional basis for
glucan dikinase action. To define the biology and biochemistry of glucan
dikinases, the researchers focus on green plants which possess two glucan
dikinases. Further, there is currently no means to harness their unique
activity. This research will develop methods to utilize glucan dikinases by
focusing on algal systems that possess only one glucan dikinase. The project
combines state-of-the-art biophysical approaches with biochemistry, cell
biology, algal genetics, and glucan analysis to define the function, dynamics,
structures, and regulation of glucan dikinases. The objectives of this research
are to: (I) define the molecular enzymology of glucan dikinases, (II) determine
structural dynamics and crystal structures of glucan dikinases, and (III)
elucidate the biological function of algal glucan phosphorylation.

This award was co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and the Rules of Life Venture
Fund.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.