* 2308300
* ORCC: Marine predator and prey response to climate change: Synthesis of Acoustics, Physiology, Prey, and Habitat In a Rapidly changing Environment (SAPPHIRE)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Kim Bernard, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,077,478.00

Oceans are experiencing significant impacts of climate change, yet the effects
on marine organisms remain largely unknown. It is critical to understand how
rapid environmental changes will impact the availability and quality of prey
species, and consequently how these changes will impact predator health and
population resilience. This project identifies and describes the impacts of
environmental variation on a crucial marine prey species (krill) and one of its
primary predators (blue whale). The project examines how changing ocean
conditions affect the availability and quality of krill, and how this then
impacts blue whale body condition, hormone levels, and foraging and reproductive
effort. The focus on prey and predator physiology and fitness will inform the
development of novel Species Health Models (SHM), which will advance the
understanding of prey-predator co-responses to changing climatic conditions and
the influence of species health on population resilience. SHM will provide a way
to monitor and predict species response to climate change by shifting the focus
of management efforts toward thresholds based on health, which could enable
mitigation measures before population-level declines occur. Furthermore,
understanding krill response to variable environmental conditions will inform
management of marine prey and predator response to climate change broadly, while
public attention on the iconic blue whale can enhance societal awareness and
motivate behavioral change.

Species resilience to climate change over shorter timescales will be determined
by fitness and fecundity of individuals mediated through behavioral and
physiological response pathways. This project aims to describe the co-response
of marine prey (krill; Nyctiphanes australis) and predator (blue whale;
Balaenoptera musculus brevicauda) health to environmental variation at
individual and population levels, enabling a comprehensive understanding of
impacts on species fitness under climate change conditions. Data will be
collected on krill and blue whale ecology and physiology in the South Taranaki
Bight of New Zealand during three consecutive years (2024-2026). Controlled
experiments will determine effects of temperature on krill metabolic rates,
energy requirements, and body condition (bioenergetic and biochemical
responses). The availability of prey to foraging blue whales will be assessed
through net tows and active acoustics to determine krill energetic content,
distribution, and density. Impacts of changes in prey and environmental
conditions on individual whale physiology will be quantified through Unoccupied
Aircraft Systems assessments of body condition to document nutritive state, and
biopsy sampling of skin and blubber tissue to quantify stress (glucocorticoids),
nutrition (thyroid, leptin) and reproductive (progesterone, testosterone)
hormone levels. At the population level, hydrophones will record blue whale
vocalizations to quantify changes in foraging and breeding effort relative to
changes in prey and environmental conditions. These data streams will be
integrated through multivariate analyses and development of Species Health
Models to understand prey and predator co-response to environmental change,
predict species health impacts and fitness consequences, and identify thresholds
in prey and predator population resilience.

This award was co-funded through the GEO/OCE Biological Oceanography Program and
the BIO/IOS Organismal Responses to Climate Change Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.