* 2308380
* Charge Quantizing CCDs Optimized for Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Roger Smith, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,482,618.00

Spectroscopy is a key tool used in many branches of science and industry. Light
emitted in specific colors can identify the elements present, their relative
concentration, temperature or even the velocity of the source. However, the
signals are weak, and the electrical noise added by the sensor itself can limit
what can be measured. This electrical noise cannot be eliminated, but in sensors
called “Charge Couple Devices” (CCD) the electrical charge generated by the
signal can be measured many times and averaged until the exact number of
electrons in the pixel is determined. Unfortunately, this technique greatly
increases the time to readout a complete image. This team will demonstrate the
ability to readout an image in a few minutes instead of hours. The image sensor
will be designed by the vendor Semiconductor Technology Associates (STA) to have
4096x4096 pixels, with several hundred optimized outputs operating in parallel.
Caltech will develop compact electronics located near the sensor to digitize the
many output signals. These sensors will be manufactured at Microchip Technology
silicon foundry in Arizona and will subsequently become commercially available.
These CCDs will typically improve the sensitivity of spectrographs used in
astronomy by a factor of two to four. Similar gains will be possible in low
light applications in chemistry, biology, and medicine. Caltech will involve
undergraduate students in the testing of electronics and detectors.

This team will produce an n-channel Quantizing CCD (qCCD) in a commonly used 4K
x 4K format (split frame transfer) with 128 floating gate amplifiers per
extended serial register. A new differential version of the standard Floating
Gate Amplifier (FGA) will halve the readout time for any given channel count and
pixel sampling rate. The Differential FGA output will first be optimized in
numerical simulations using a commercial software package from SILVACO and then
validated by testing a range of transistor geometries and doping profiles. A new
mounting package to support the high pin count will connect by flex circuit to a
compact electronics module designed to support 128 differential channels. This
will perform digital differential averaging close to the detector to greatly
reduce the number of signal connections needed through the vacuum wall. The 4K x
4K qCCD will be manufactured using conventional epitaxial n-channel technology
at an onshore foundry. The move from traditional 6” wafers to 8” wafers will
increase the number of devices per wafer from one to four. Backside processing
and thinning will be optimized to maximize UV and blue response. This program
will include a demonstration on a new spectrograph being deployed at Palomar
Observatory. The creation of a 4Kx 4K blue optimized CCD that achieves charge
quantization in under 2 minutes should open a pathway to very significant
sensitivity gains at astronomical telescopes. This project will result in large-
format image sensor manufacturing in the USA again, and it will promote global
competitiveness of USA-based small businesses engaged in semiconductor design
and fabrication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.