* 2308141
* Global Dynamics of Accretion in High-Mass X-Ray Binary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Blondin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 325,460.00

Some of the most spectacular X-ray sources in the sky are High Mass X-ray
Binaries (HMXBs). These are systems where a compact object, such as a neutron
star or a black hole, rapidly orbits a hot, young, massive star. The
gravitational pull of the compact object pulls material from the star which then
spirals onto the compact object producing bright X-ray emission. The PI and his
team will run computer simulations to better understand how much material falls
onto the compact companion vs. how much escapes the gravitational field of the
binary and is lost to interstellar space â€“ this quantity is key for
understanding how HMXBs evolve. This work will aid the interpretation of current
observations of HMXBs by relating observational properties to the mass transfer
rate. Much of this research will be done by undergraduates and will be used to
introduce a diverse group of young students to astrophysics research. In
addition to their research, the students will present their work at the North
Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences and work with staff at the Digital Media Lab
in the NC State library to create short YouTube videos. The PI will continue to
build a series of short (10 minute) video lessons on fluid dynamics and
computational physics that help students get started in this kind of research,
with more senior students presenting some of the lessons.

The investigator will use a new circumbinary gas dynamics code to investigate
the global dynamics of mass and angular momentum accretion in HMXBs to connect
observations to system parameters relevant to the evolution and classification
of these systems. This work will focus both on well-observed systems like Vela
X-1 as well as the broad class of systems ranging from Be X-ray binaries to
supergiant fast X-ray transients and accreting black hole systems. By coupling
together numerical models of the circumstellar gas dynamics (e.g., Roche lobe
overflow, acceleration of the tidally enhanced wind from the donor star, X-ray
heating and photoionization of the wind) and of the accretion flow (following
the gas to small radii while conserving angular momentum), the investigators
have developed a circumbinary gas dynamics code that can improve our
understanding of the varied properties of HMXBs. This effort will enable
simulations of gravitational accretion flows in three dimensions with sufficient
detail to qualitatively describe the origin of any dynamical instability and to
quantitatively characterize the resulting flux of mass and angular momentum
accreted onto the compact companion or lost from the system in a variety of
circumstances.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.