* 2308708
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at UCSB
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nontechnical description The NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center at UC Santa Barbara develops and sustains a productive, collaborative,
and engaged community that drives a portfolio of transformative materials
research and empowers a diverse workforce. The research team addresses
fundamental materials challenges at the interface of chemistry, biology, and
engineering with applications in advanced manufacturing, and clean and
sustainable energy. The research advances materials synthesis, characterization,
measurements, and modeling. A focus on fundamental understanding has sustained
impact, for example, through the development of new methods and tools. In
addition, given the central role of data-driven discovery, a Data Expert Group
has been created whose members have core research expertise in developing
artificial intelligence and machine learning and collaborate with all
participants. Shared research facilities promote effective collaboration at all
levels, catalyze interactions with industry, and nurture start-ups. The vision
of a thriving and engaged community at UC Santa Barbara community helps
cultivate a diverse range of participants through a comprehensive portfolio of
research, education, and outreach activities. A range of education and outreach
activities introduce materials science to schoolchildren and the public, support
teachers to develop science curricula, provide undergraduates with high-quality
research experiences, and encourage graduate students and other researchers to
engage and interact with the public.

Technical description The two Interdisciplinary Research Groups in the UC Santa
Barbara Materials Research Science and Engineering Center advance national
priorities in advanced manufacturing and materials for sustainable energy,
engineering biology, and materials science. Both projects integrate synthesis,
characterization, measurement, theory/computation, and data-driven discovery.
Electrostatically Mediated Polymer Processing develops strategies and design
principles for ion-mediated, solvent-free processing of polymers, blends, and
nanostructures. The research advances fundamental understanding to link
molecular design with material properties in solvent-free or lean systems with
implications for polymer sustainability and manufacturing. Bioinspired
Plasticity focuses on water-swollen networks that are critical as biomaterials
for soft implants and haptics. Such plasticity mimics living systems wherein
cells and tissue reconfigure in response to stimuli with synthetic systems that
better adapt and strengthen in response to a range of stimuli through
dissipation and deformation. Central to these research efforts in both projects
are broader impacts in training a diverse, collaborative, and interdisciplinary
next-generation workforce. Education and outreach activities focus on community
building with participants from K-12 students and teachers, undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty mentors. A range of
activities introduce materials science to schoolchildren and the public, support
teachers to develop science curricula, provide undergraduates with high-quality
research experiences, and encourage graduate students and other researchers to
engage and interact with the public. Diversity and inclusion are central themes
throughout all research, education, and outreach efforts with broader impacts
enhanced by the institutional setting of UC Santa Barbara being both a Hispanic-
serving and an Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving
Institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.