* 2308686
* CNS Core: Medium: Communication and Networking with Diffused Laser Light
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Xia Zhou, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 10/31/2024
* USD 852,567.00

Technological advances have driven an unprecedented acceleration of mobile
bandwidth demand, with examples including 4K video streaming, virtual/augmented
reality, and autonomous vehicles. It exacerbates the pressure on the rapidly-
dwindling radio frequency (RF) spectrum. Visible light communication (VLC)
emerges as a promising wireless technology to mitigate the pressure on the RF
spectrum. It turns ubiquitous sources of artificial light into wireless access
points, promising unparalleled communication bandwidth. Existing VLC research,
however, is fundamentally shackled by the limits of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs). Their slow response time and low spectral efficiency have resulted in
either moderate data rates or centimeter-level transmission distances. The
project aims to overcome this limit. It studies the use of diffused laser light
as the next-generation transmission medium while qualitatively boosting
practical VLC performance to the next level.

The project envisions that future indoor (e.g., offices, homes) and outdoor
(e.g., car headlights, street lamps) illumination will gradually take advantage
of laser diodes because of their superior illumination efficiency. Multiple
collocated laser diodes emit light at different wavelengths that are mixed and
diffused to generate diffuse white light. The same diffused white light is
reused to transmit data at ultra-high speeds, thanks to laser diode's unique
properties of high modulation bandwidth and spectrum efficiency. Diffusing laser
light not only makes laser light safe for illumination but also mitigates the
alignment issues faced by conventional free-space laser communication. Proposed
research tackles networking, systems, and optics issues in jointly utilizing
diffused laser light for both normal illumination and high-speed, reliable
communication, which sets a key departure from prior works that study laser
light communication and illumination in isolation. It addresses key research
questions including how to build efficient and robust communication link with
diffused laser light, how to reconcile the illumination and communication
functionality of laser light, and how to leverage links with diffuse laser light
for expanded coverage and support of user mobility. The proposed work, if
successful, will represent a major paradigm shift in VLC and establish crucial
systems pieces to overcome key barriers in systems, networking, and optics to
bring VLC links in gigabit data rate range to practical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.