* 2308698
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance:  New York State's Upstate LSAMP (ULSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Tamara Hamilton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,000,000.00

The overall goal of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program is to assist universities and colleges in diversifying the
nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by
increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
persons from LSAMP populations LSAMP populations are defined as persons from
groups underrepresented in the STEM enterprise: Blacks and African-Americans,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders.

The Upstate Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ULSAMP) is led by
Syracuse University. Six partner institutions in New York participate in the
alliance: Clarkson University, Cornell University, Monroe Community College
(MCC), Onondaga Community College (OCC), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI),
and Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). The project goals are to 1)
institutionalize promising practices for increasing the number of students from
LSAMP populations in STEM majors; 2) expand and refine practices to increase the
number of underrepresented students entering STEM careers or graduate-level
programs; and 3) conduct and disseminate scholarly research to assess the impact
of research experiences for undergraduates (REUs) on graduate enrollment and
completion. Several industries will collaborate with the alliance over the next
five years to provide research opportunities including Micron Technology,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and National
GRID, among others.

ULSAMP will meet these goals by offering student supports and research
opportunities in three categories: 1) bridge initiatives; 2) retention and
graduation initiatives; and 3) graduate school enrollment initiatives. ULSAMP
will strengthen its Alliance by improving its shared activities, providing
resources and incorporating best practices to institutionalize alliance
practices and activities. In addition to bridge programs, recruitment and
retention activities include the Community College Research Scholars Program,
Summer Math Institutes, Power Labs, student research conferences, Graduate
School Examination and Application Support and Graduate School fairs and visits.
The project will generate new knowledge related to the recruitment, academic
success, and persistence of LSAMP populations, particularly the pathway to STEM
graduate STEM programs in its investigation of aspirations, pathways and
outcomes of alliance participants preparing for entry into STEM graduate
programs. ULSAMP will contribute innovative methods and approaches to meet the
crisis of educating more STEM workers from diverse populations at critical
junctures in STEM education. Project findings from external evaluation and
outcomes of the research study will be disseminated broadly through STEM
journals, conferences, social media and websites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.