* 2308500
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Indiana LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Janice Blum, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2028
* USD 1,278,381.00

The overall goal of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program is to assist universities and colleges in diversifying the
nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by
increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
persons from LSAMP populations. LSAMP populations are defined as persons from
groups underrepresented in the STEM enterprise: Blacks and African-Americans,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders. The Indiana Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (Indiana LSAMP) is comprised of six institutions - Indiana
University (Lead), Purdue University Indianapolis, Indiana University
Bloomington, Ball State University, Indiana University Northwest, Indiana
University South Bend, and Ivy Tech Community College of Indianapolis (ITCC).
The goal of Indiana LSAMP is to significantly increase the number and
competitiveness of students from LSAMP populations earning STEM baccalaureate
degrees. To achieve this goal, the institutions will employ evidence-based
interventions such as faculty-mentored research, peer mentoring, tutoring,
professional and STEM career development, graduate education preparation and
application support. Alliance mentors are drawn from a pool of 109 STEM faculty
research mentors.

The outcomes of the Indiana LSAMP will be disseminated through reports, LSAMP
networking events, and professional conferences like the local annual Assessment
Institute in Indianapolis which focuses on broadening the participation of LSAMP
populations in STEM. The success of Indiana LSAMP can serve as a model for other
states wishing to implement robust LSAMP programs. The long-lasting impacts from
the project outcomes will foster a more diverse and inclusive environment on
college campuses and assist in the development of a globally competitive
workforce that helps restore STEM innovation in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.