* 2308873
* PlantSynBio: Construction of a plant chassis as a platform for biological discoveries and innovations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Natalie Deans, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 999,995.00

A wide range of plants are grown for food, feed or fuel, and biotechnology has
the potential to improve the quality, yield, and sustainability of these plants.
Biotechnology applications include improving nutrition, enhancing resilience to
stress, carbon sequestration, production of
bioplastics/biomaterials/bioproducts/biofuels, and space exploration. Yet,
technology barriers currently prevent construction of plants with complex new
features. This project will generate a novel, first-of-its-kind platform - a
chassis - that will enable the design and fabrication of plants with novel
properties. These properties include 1) the production of high value chemicals
such as pesticides, bio-materials, bio-plastics, and pharmaceuticals, 2)
improved carbon sequestration to address excess global carbon dioxide levels, 3)
enhanced sustainability such as the reduced need for fertilizer or insecticides
and 4) improved resiliency and adaptation to drought and temperature stress. To
encourage participation in science and to convey to a younger generation that
science can address global challenges, this project will directly engage
undergraduates in the characterization of the chassis. To broaden the diversity
of participants in science, this project will recruit and train members of
under-represented groups in emerging biotechnology and computational methods,
thereby aiding development of a 21st century workforce in scientific
disciplines.

In the 21st century, the nexus of genomics and biotechnology will be the
development of plants with improved yield, nutrition, and market quality,
enhanced resilience to biotic and abiotic stressors, increased sustainability,
and/or novel phenotypes such as the ability to sequester carbon or synthesize
bio-products, biomaterials, and new-to-nature molecules. To achieve this ‘Third
Green Revolution’ in agriculture, we need the ability to engineer complex
pathways and processes to harness the sustainable production platform of plants.
Development of minimal bacterial and yeast genomes have permitted the rewriting
of genomes and enhanced the utility of engineered microbes for biotechnology.
Advancing plant genome engineering methods and resources are essential for
plants to be utilized as sustainable platforms in the bioeconomy. One barrier to
either singly or combinatorial engineering complex metabolic pathways and
developmental processes is the sheer redundancy of gene function due to
whole/segmental genome and gene duplication in all angiosperms. This project
will develop a gene editing platform at scale that will be used to generate
novel plant genotypes with reduced gene content and redundancy, which can serve
as chassis (i.e., a platform) to rapidly engineer plants with new phenotypes and
test heterologous genes relevant to biological processes of interest. This
project will be the first phase in creating a true minimal plant genome, such
that we can begin to rewrite the genome for new-to-nature molecules and
biological processes. Due to its small stature, rapid life cycle, and
amenability to transformation, the logical choice for creating a minimal plant
genome is Arabidopsis thaliana, the mouse-ear cress. Our specific aims include a
design phase and two cycles of build-test-learn in which we target 324 protein-
coding genes for deletion across 18 5 Mb modules that span the Arabidopsis
genome using state-of-the-art multiplexed gene editing approaches. The presence
of synthetic lethal pairs will be tested through pairwise and higher order
crosses of the modules. Machine learning approaches will be used with empirical
and bioinformatic data to develop and improve models that predict gene
dispensability. This project will include a Vertically Integrated Project in
which all personnel are engaged across the project and institutions and in which
a larger number of undergraduates can participate via a custom course entitled
Building a Minimal Plant Genome to Enable a Sustainable Bioeconomy. This project
will engage under-represented groups to advance participation in STEM
disciplines relevant for the 21st century.

This project is jointly supported by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering
Program in ENG/CBET, and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in BIO/MCB.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.