* 2308947
* Collaborative Research: ECLIPSE: Physical and Chemical Insights into Particle-Plasma Interactions in Dusty Plasma using Optical Trapping and Multi-Fold Laser Diagnostics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Chuji Wang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 357,868.00

This award supports a collaborative project between Mississippi State University
and Auburn University to develop a novel method to trap and control dust
particles in a low temperature plasma. Low temperature plasmas are partially
ionized gases, comprising of electrons, ions and neutral molecules. Small solid
particles, or dust, introduced in a low temperature plasma can get charged and
become suspended against the force of gravity. Dusty plasmas are common in
space, such as tails of comets and the rings of Saturn, and in the semiconductor
industry, where dusty plasmas can form during manufacturing of computer chips.
Control of floating and moving dust is a challenge for both fundamental plasma
physics studies and the industrial applications. This collaborative project
allows the development of a novel method to trap dust particles in plasmas by
combining cutting-edge optical and laser diagnostic techniques at Mississippi
State University with advanced dusty plasma systems at Auburn University. The
project also provides opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students from
historically excluded communities to obtain hands-on plasma science experience
geared toward industrial applications.

This collaborative project will address one of the key challenges in the field
of dusty plasmas: “Tuning of plasma - dust grain interactions for precision
control of trajectories and growth of nanometer and micrometer size particles”
as stated in the 2020 Decadal Assessment of Plasma Science. A novel optical
trapping technology will be designed to actively pin down single dust particles
in the plasma and to transport them in a controlled way anywhere in the device.
In addition, multifold laser diagnostic techniques will be used to measure the
impacted plasma parameters resulting from physical and chemical processes, thus
aiding understanding of particle-plasma interactions, particle charging
behavior, and particle growth in a reactive dusty plasma at the microscopic
level. The single-particle dusty plasma diagnostic techniques developed in this
project can be readily adopted to other dusty plasmas such as magnetized dusty
plasma, and for plasma fabrication and control in the industry. The synergy of
the expertise of the collaborating research groups both enables fundamental
dusty plasma research at a deeper level with unprecedented precision, and
provides a new platform to grow future workforce in laser-based diagnostics and
plasma physics at two NSF EPSCoR jurisdictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.