* 2308901
* NeTS: Small: Enabling Long-Range Underwater Backscatter via Van-Atta Acoustic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Fadel Adib, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The ability to perform low-power long-range underwater sensing can have
transformative impact on climatology, oceanography, marine biology, food
security, defense, and even extra-terrestrial exploration. Motivated by the fact
that over 95% of the ocean has not been observed or explored, this project aims
to push the limits of scalable and low-power ocean sensing in order to scalably
measure the oceanâ€™s vital signs (temperature, pressure, salinity) for climate
models, weather prediction, disaster response, and marine life discovery.
Scalable and low-power underwater sensing also has important applications in
food security, where it can support the world's fastest-growing food sector,
aquaculture (seafood farming). To this end, the project will develop fundamental
technologies that advance the ability for scalable ocean sensing and disseminate
these technologies to the academic community, industry, and the broader public
through publications, technology transfer, and public-facing videos about the
developed technologies to increase public education and engagement with science,
technology, and climate.

The goal of this proposal is to design, build, and evaluate a low-power, long-
range underwater backscatter network. Underwater backscatter is a new
communication technology that consumes 5-6 orders of magnitude lower power than
prior low-power underwater acoustic communication technologies. However,
existing designs for underwater backscatter are limited in their communication
range to within few to tens of meters, which restricts their scalability and
application domains. To overcome this range limitation, this project explores
retroreflective designs for underwater backscatter. In contrast to existing
architectures which are inefficient because they backscatter underwater sound in
all directions, the proposed designs will achieve much higher efficiency by
backscattering sound retroreflectively to the sender. This retrodirectivity
enables boosting the signal-to-noise ratio of the backscatter packets, which in
turn boosts communication range, throughput, and scalability. To realize
retroreflective underwater backscatter, the proposal will design Van-Atta
architectures, which have been demonstrated over the past 50 years in the
wireless RF (Radio Frequency) domain, but have never been applied before in
underwater environments or acoustic networks. The proposal will explore designs
that enable 2D and 3D retrodirectivity through Van-Atta arrays, implement these
designs into practical systems, and develop them into end-to-end scalable
networks for both underwater communication and localization. If successful, the
resulting system will be the first to enable low-power long-range underwater
backscatter, paving the way for scalable networked sensing of underwater
environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.