* 2308044
* Drivers of infection outbreaks in a temperature-sensitive host-pathogen system
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* David Miller, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,370,227.00

Emerging infectious diseases threaten global biodiversity and often exhibit
seasonal outbreaks that are linked to temperature. Seasonal temperature
variation may shape disease dynamics through a variety of host-related (e.g.,
behavior, immune response) and pathogen-related (e.g., development, growth)
pathways, making it challenging to predict when and how large outbreaks will be.
This research project combines lab experiments, field data, and modeling to
understand drivers of disease in an amphibian-pathogen system and to make
predictions about the size and timing of outbreaks. The employed model is useful
across temperature-sensitive disease systems, and the findings within the study
system are being incorporated into ongoing amphibian management decisions. The
team also is creating a lesson plan on the importance of temperature to disease
outbreaks that will be used by the Student Network for Amphibian Pathogen
Surveillance, a growing network that integrates classroom learning with student-
powered pathogen surveillance. Collectively, the project utilizes a
multidisciplinary approach - employing lab experiments, field data, and modeling
- to elucidate the relationship between temperature variations and disease
dynamics, particularly in amphibians. The research paves the way for better
ecological understanding of temperature-sensitive diseases, more informed
management decisions, and new educational tools that connect our science with
students.

This project builds on five years of preliminary data in an amphibian-chytrid
system with strong seasonal dynamics and detailed longitudinal infection data on
individuals, as well as information about animal movements. The investigators
use these field data along with complementary laboratory experiments and the
development of a mechanistic model to answer the following four questions: (1)
How does host temperature determine in-host pathogen growth? (2) How does host
behavior affect the relationship between environmental temperature and host
temperature? (3) How does environmental temperature influence pathogen
transmission? (4) How do different seasonal temperature profiles affect the
timing and magnitude of seasonal disease outbreaks? To make inferences and
predictions about the magnitude and timing of seasonal outbreaks, the team is
developing a Bayesian implementation of an integral projection model that
accounts for imperfect host and pathogen detection and integrates both field and
laboratory data. This approach extends our understanding of temperature-
sensitive disease systems, such as white-nose syndrome, salamander
chytridiomycosis, and snake fungal disease, as well as the general role of
temperature in host-pathogen dynamics.

This work is funded by the Divisions of Environmental Biology and Integrative
Organismal Systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.