* 2308383
* Discovery and Modeling of Merging Galaxy Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Wittman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 353,236.00

A cluster of galaxies is an enormous laboratory hosting a variety of physical
processes that play out on a stage millions of light-years across. A
particularly dramatic process is when two clusters collide and merge. Because
most of the mass of each cluster is dark matter, a cluster merger serves as a
"dark matter collider" capable of revealing how dark matter particles interact
with each other---something no Earthbound lab can currently do. The team will
identify merging cluster candidates using a new technique, then study the
candidates in greater detail to identify the simplest systems, and finally model
them to create an ensemble of well-modeled dark matter laboratories. The team
will also expand research opportunities for undergraduates by continuing
participation in Cal-Bridge, which helps undergraduates bridge up to PhD
programs with long-term support, and by running graduate admissions boot camps
open to all.

The team will mine large optical cluster catalogs (currently using redMaPPer
while establishing a foundation for using future larger catalogs) for candidates
with signs of binarity, then study those candidates with X-ray data (both
archival and newly pointed) to identify "dissociative" systems where gas has
separated from galaxies. The team will conduct a spectroscopic survey of each
dissociative system to further assess binarity; quantify the line-of-sight
velocity difference between the subclusters; and assess potentially confusing
foreground/background structures. The team will then use gravitational lensing
to map the mass in good candidate systems, and model binary systems by
extracting analogs from cosmological simulations. The proposed work includes
upgrading from using dark-matter-only simulations to using hydro simulations,
and modeling and observation of shock positions to better constrain the merger
scenario.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.