* 2308576
* EAGER: Rational Choice in the Real World: Unpacking Neighborhood Influences on the Decision Process for Youth Violence
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Carole Gibbs, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan F. Hirsch
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,976.00

Within Criminology, rational choice theory provides the dominant framework by
which researchers have attempted to understand the decision process as it
relates to crime. Traditional examinations of rational choice theory have
assumed that would-be criminals prefer crime and therefore only calculate its
costs and benefits to decide whether to commit it. However, little is known
about how the full, more nuanced decision process (from decision sciences) plays
out in actual criminal incidents or how it is shaped by living in areas of
concentrated disadvantage that contribute to high rates of community violence.
This omission can distort how we view offenders and produce less effective
policy based on faulty assumptions. The overarching goal of this EAGER project
is to unpack the black box of the decision process as it unfolds in incidents of
violence among youth living in disadvantaged neighborhoods. This basic science
can advance understanding of all forms of crime by drawing on insights from
those navigating the real-world contexts associated with crime to understand the
role of neighborhoods in the decision process. In addition to these theoretical
insights, this project will inform efforts to reduce youth violence through
decision aiding that targets specific components of the decision process and by
seeking to change the contexts that produce such outcomes. The impact of this
work will be enhanced by providing students and a postdoctoral fellow with
research and professional development opportunities, partnering with a community
advisory board from the communities most impacted by community violence, and
creating a technical advisory board to inform the dissemination plan.

To achieve project goals, the research team will collect data from multiple
interviews with youth ages 18 to 24 residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods in
Lansing, Michigan, to examine how the decision process operates during violent
incidents and the contextual influences on it. Interview protocols will be
derived using inductive and deductive techniques, and a coding scheme will be
developed to construct mental models of youthâ€™s decision process and its
neighborhood influences. Completion of this work will produce an updated choice
framework to the field of Criminology to improve understanding of decision-
making and violence and inform related policies that largely respond to crime as
though it is unrelated to the social milieu in which it occurs. It is imperative
that we address this problematic aspect of criminological theory, as current
policies (e.g., mass incarceration) are detrimental to an already marginalized
segment of society (i.e., young Black males) for whom we tend to overlook the
complexity of decision processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.