* 2308849
* Investigation of the Dynamics of Interacting Magnetized Plasmas Through Experiments and Extended MHD Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Mark Gilmore, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 561,175.00

This award supports a study of how clouds of magnetized plasma - ionized gas of
electrons and ions permeated by magnetic fields - interact with each other.
Interacting plasmas with different particle densities occur in a wide variety of
natural systems, including astrophysical jets propagating into the intergalactic
medium and coronal mass ejections from the sun propagating toward earth in the
background solar wind. Additionally, such interacting plasmas can be found in
engineered nuclear fusion systems, such as in the fueling of tokamak plasmas and
in jets of shell material generated in laser-driven inertial fusion systems. In
this project, laboratory-scale interacting plasmas will be studied in detail in
a basic plasma science device at the University of New Mexico. The experiments
will be complemented by large-scale computer modeling. The project is jointly
funded by the Division of Physics and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

Although there is a long history of studies of dense magnetized plasmas
propagating into background vacuum, studies of propagation of such structures
into background plasma began only relatively recently. A number of important
questions remain about these magnetized plasma interactions, such as the details
of how heat, particles, and magnetic flux or magnetic helicity are transported
into background regions, and how such systems may self-organize. The goal of
this work is to elucidate the detailed plasma and magnetic field dynamics of
higher density plasma jets and bubbles propagating into lower density background
plasma. This will be accomplished through controlled cm- and microsecond-scale
laboratory experiments and closely coupled magnetohydrodynamic modeling. The
project will complement other ongoing experiments that utilize laser- or pulsed
power-driven jets on submillimeter- and sub microsecond-scale plasmas, where the
spatial and temporal fidelity of measurements are more limited.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.