* 2308933
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Hurricane Ian's overwash deposit: impacts of high-intensity landfalling tropical cyclones in southwest Florida
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jennifer Walker, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 7,850.00

Tropical cyclones are amongst the most dangerous and costly natural hazards to
impact U.S. coastlines. These events will have worsening effects with changing
storm characteristics and sea-level rise in a warming climate. Most recently,
southwest Florida has been impacted by two Category 4 hurricanes, Irma in 2017
and Ian in 2022. Two major events in the same region within 5 years presents a
unique opportunity to study geological data from these storms. This rapid
response project will explore the impact of high-intensity hurricanes by
collecting geological data related to Hurricane Ian’s storm surge and
sedimentary deposit. Further, previous work on Hurricane Irma in 2017 and 2019
will allow for a comparison between these two recent events. This multiple storm
focus will help to understand the impact of hurricanes across the southwest
Florida coast. The data will also add further knowledge about the preservation
of geological deposits from repeated storms. Such data are crucial to improve
understanding of past and present storm activity. The project advances broader
representation in STEM through support of an all-female team of early career
scientists and as well as undergraduate and graduate students.

To extend our understanding of past tropical cyclones, we rely on geologic
records to reconstruct a history of cyclone intensity and frequency beyond the
instrumental period. However, reconstructing geologic records of tropical
cyclones relies on modern analog studies of overwash deposits and how they are
preserved in coastal environments. The aim of this study is to investigate two
sites in southwest Florida by 1) measuring land elevation and recording the
thickness and landward extent of Hurricane Ian’s overwash deposit and 2)
comparing Ian’s deposit with a previous hurricane (Hurricane Irma) which also
made landfall and deposited sediments throughout southwest Florida in 2017. The
project is enabled by previous field investigations in 2017 and 2019 which
documented Hurricane Irma overwash sediments in southwest Florida. Samples will
be collected for sedimentologic (grain-size and organic content), geochemical
(stable carbon isotopes and C/N values), and microfossil (foraminifera) analyses
to compare biogeochemical indicators from Ian, Irma, and pre-storm sediments.
Results of this project will advance paleo-storm studies in the sub-tropical
southern Florida region by identifying key biogeochemical indicators and
providing critical insight into the preservation potential of hurricane deposits
in areas impacted by repeated, high-intensity hurricanes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.