* 2308412
* Travel: Student Travel Grant for the 2023 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Giulia Fanti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The ACM Sigmetrics 2023 conference will be held at the Orlando World Marriott in
Orlando, Florida, USA between June 19–23, 2023. Sigmetrics 2023 will be part of
the ACM Federated Computing Research Conference (FCRC) 2023, and will thus be
colocated with other leading conferences in other communities including ISCA
2023, STOC 2023, PODC 2023, SPAA 2023, and PLDI 2023.The SIGMETRICS conference
is primarily focusing on the performance analysis, measurement, and modeling of
networked computer systems. ACM SIGMETRICS 2023 aims to provide a high-quality
forum for presenting results and discussing ideas that further our knowledge and
understanding of the measurement, modeling, analysis, and design of computing
and networked systems. The conference interprets computer systems broadly,
including traditional computing systems as well as social networks, data
networks, and other types of systems. Contributions containing highly original
ideas, new approaches, and/or ground-breaking results are particularly
encouraged.

This grant provides travel support for about 25 US based students to attend the
SIGMETRICS 2023 conference. The support will make possible the participation of
students who would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. Particular
attention will be paid to directing support towards various underrepresented
population. SIGMETRICS brings together professionals from a wide variety of
academic and industrial backgrounds; student participants will thus get the
opportunity to interact with mentors and peers of varying gender, ethnicity, and
background. Students will also benefit from the student-centric events,
including a student workshop/panel and a student research competition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.