* 2308679
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Risk Analysis for Extreme Climate Events by Combining Numerical and Statistical Extreme Value Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Likun Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 56,441.00

Climate profoundly influences the severity and frequency of extreme phenomena
like large wildfires, heatwaves, floods, and droughts. Resilience to the most
dramatic effects of climate change requires an understanding of extreme events
under future climate conditions. Climate models are invaluable tools for
interrogating the dynamics of the Earth system, but they have shortcomings with
respect to extreme event analysis. First, the behavior of extremes of many
meteorological variables shows a profound mismatch compared to real-life
observations. Second, they live in gridded spaces that must be reconciled with
the continuous world in which observations are made and for which risk analysis
is performed. To resolve these two difficulties, we will model weather phenomena
in their native real-world domain, leveraging information from representations
of large-scale patterns from climate models, in a way that preserves realistic
properties of extreme events. The project also provides research training
opportunities for graduate students.

PI will focus on two main research aims, which develop and apply analytical
tools that turn climate model output into a realistic analysis of extreme
events. First, this project will develop models, and associated model-fitting
software, that leverage dynamically-derived large-scale features from climate
model output to inform stochastic process descriptions of local extreme
meteorological phenomena in continuous space. This will require two
interconnected modeling components: 1) a stochastic analogue model to link
climate model output in gridded space to extreme spatial events in continuous
space, and 2) a stochastic process model, conditional on the analogue model,
that realistically represents spatial tail dependence. Second, this project will
generate model-based projections of extreme events for use in impact analysis.
Random draws from the model developed in the first research aim, conditional on
climate model projections of large-scale features, functionally constitute an
extreme weather generator. PI will use these random draws as inputs to one of
the two impact models: precipitation draws feed into a hydrology model to
project pluvial flood risks, and wind, temperature, and precipitation draw feed
into a fire spread model to project wildfire risk. The software implementation
of their model will produce stochastic draws of potential future climate
variables that have realistic tail behavior, which can be used downstream as
inputs to other numerical models that directly aid in risk assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.