* 2308838
* RAPID: Measuring the distribution and character of sedimentary deposits resulting from Hurricane Ian in Southwest Florida
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 99,700.00

Tropical cyclones can cause significant change to the coastal zone by eroding
and transporting sediments. These sediments can be deposited into coastal
sinkholes and offshore blue holes allowing scientists to study long-term
hurricane activity. However, it remains poorly understood how sediment transport
and deposition can vary due to different storm characteristics. The landfall of
Hurricane Ian along the southwest coast of Florida provides an opportunity to
study how intense hurricanes move sediments in the coastal zone. Knowing more
about storm impacts will help clarify long-term risks associated with
hurricanes. This project will study sediment from coastal sinkholes and offshore
blue holes in southwest Florida. These data will be used to determine where, how
much, and what kind of sediment was deposited from the storm. The results of
this study have important implications in terms of coastal response to intense
storms. These storms may become more frequent in response to Anthropogenic
climate change. More storms may further alter coastal carbon cycling and
nutrient flow in marine ecosystems. The Broader Impacts for this project include
documenting local flooding patterns and sediment transport pathways that
resulted from the storm. This information may be used to identify hazards
associated with similar storms in the future. In addition, the project will
provide support for an early-career postdoctoral researcher as the lead PI, and
students will also participate in the project. Both PIs will work closely with
local educators and stakeholders to disseminate the results broadly to the
general public.

This RAPID response study will examine the geomorphic and sedimentological
impacts of the passage of Hurricane Ian on coastal sinkholes and offshore blue
holes and the adjacent seafloor. Tropical cyclones can cause significant change
to the shorelines and coastal oceans by eroding and transporting sediments.
Coastal sinkholes and offshore blue holes can act as natural sediment traps that
archive evidence of tropical cyclone sediment transport and have thus been
utilized to reconstruct long-term hurricane activity. However, it remains poorly
understood how archived deposits vary spatially and how they are expressed in
relation to hurricane characteristics (e.g., intensity, translation speed) as
relatively few hurricanes have impacted sites with sinkhole reconstructions in
recent history. Hurricane Ian presents an exceptional opportunity to assess the
sedimentary structure and composition of event deposits in a number of sinkholes
and offshore blue holes along the coast most heavily impacted by the storm
(Sarasota to Naples). By characterizing recent, minimally reworked or degraded
deposits from a hurricane of known characteristics (i.e., intensity, track,
translation speed, size), scientists can better constrain how paleo-hurricane
deposits are related to local storm intensity. Further, significant offshore
particulate organic matter export occurred as a result of Ian based on spatially
and temporally constrained plumes captured in satellite imagery. Blue hole
sediment records in The Bahamas contain organic rich layers atop coarse sediment
beds attributed to hurricane driven transport, but the causality of these
organic carbon rich beds has never been directly linked to event deposits in
sinkholes and blue holes. Given that the post-Ian organic matter plumes
intersect many offshore blue holes and terrestrial sinkholes, this is an ideal
place and time to test this hypothesis by assessing transport potential,
settling time, and provenance in the wake of hurricanes. The results of this
study will improve understanding of hurricane-induced sediment transport, which
will provide context for identifying and interpreting event beds deposited in
sinkholes and offshore blue holes. This work will also begin to quantify
hurricane-induced offshore organic sediment flux and provenance, which has
important implications for understanding long-term coastal carbon cycling in
coastal areas prone to hurricane strikes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.