* 2308077
* WoU-MMA: Dwarf AGNs from Variability for the Origins of Seeds (DAVOS)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 443,703.00

Mergers of intermediate mass black holes are expected as prime sources of
gravitational waves to be detected by upcoming experiments in space. To
determine the rates and interpret the gravitational wave signals, independent
measurements of the black hole number densities are critical. However, the
fraction of black holes in dwarf galaxies is poorly constrained. This presents a
major hurdle in advancing the exciting new frontier of multi-messenger
astronomy. This project will measure the number densities and distributions of
intermediate mass black holes in dwarf galaxies. It will discover new dwarf
active galactic nucleus (AGN) candidates in lower mass galaxies at higher
redshift. It will make informed inferences on the origins of intermediate mass
black holes. It has broad implications for galaxy evolution and for interpreting
gravitational waves. The program will also create societal values. It will
disseminate knowledge in public education and classrooms. It will also develop
dedicated outreach programs to promote diversity in science.

This program will leverage a new mass estimation method and harness state-of-
the-art synoptic surveys to measure the black hole occupation fraction in dwarf
galaxies in the best extragalactic deep fields. It will test and potentially
distinguish seeding models for all supermassive black holes. It will produce
direct black hole mass estimates (or upper limits) that are not yet feasible
otherwise in the poorly explored intermediate-mass regime. All codes generated
will be open-sourced to enable broad community usage. The program will be a
pathfinder for large-scale dwarf AGN studies with the Rubin, Euclid, and Roman
observatories.

This award addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.