* 2308120
* Scaling limits of queueing systems on graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* RUOYU WU, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2026
* USD 185,000.00

Networks of queueing systems have broad applications in applied probability and
operations research, such as in the design of call centers, factories, shops,
offices, hospitals, public transportation services, and cloud computing systems.
The goal of this project is to understand the impact of the network on the
performance of large interacting queueing systems, in both typical scenarios and
rare and unexpected scenarios with significant consequences. This research will
help system managers design the queueing network and queueing policies, which
will lead to better system efficiency and stability. The project will also
develop new mathematical techniques for problems of networks of interacting
queues, and the results will be beneficial to the study of areas beyond queueing
systems, such as social science and epidemiology. This research project includes
training undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers.

This project focuses mainly on the analysis of asymptotic behavior of large-
scale load balancing queueing systems on random graphs, including join-the-
shortest-queue, join-the-idle-queue and power-of-d policies. Three classes of
graphs will be considered: classic complete graphs, random graphs with
homogeneous limits, and heterogeneous random graphs. The research objectives are
to rigorously understand the crucial and challenging impacts of stochastic
networks on the system performance, in particular the significant deviation from
the classic complete graph setup, via obtaining various scaling limits,
including laws of large numbers, central limit theorems, long-time stability,
large deviation principles and moderate deviation principles, together with
analyzing the associated accelerated Monte-Carlo schemes of numerical estimation
of rare event probabilities. The study of typical asymptotic behaviors will
require a combination of tools from the theory of weakly interacting particle
systems and random graph/graphon theory. The main challenges of obtaining large
and moderate deviation principles arise from system features of infinite
dimensional dynamics, vanishing transition rates, and discontinuous statistics.
Besides using classic large deviation approaches and weak convergence
approaches, the study of atypical asymptotic behaviors will also require the
development of new techniques, involving a combination of tools from stochastic
analysis and differential equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.