* 2308631
* Collaborative Research: Tailoring the Catalytic Properties of Pd Single Atoms Using Covalent Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Hani El-Kaderi, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2026
* USD 231,811.00

Catalysts are used widely in industrial processes to improve energy efficiency
and direct chemical reactions toward desired products. The project examines
novel catalyst designs for an important class of industrial reactions â€“
selective hydrogenations - used for many applications such as the production of
plastics, fragrances and pharmaceuticals. The precious metal palladium (Pd) is
widely used for selective hydrogenation reactions. The project aims to maximize
utilization of the precious metal in the form of isolated atoms, and tailor
their properties by anchoring them to covalent organic frameworks (COFs), which
are highly crystalline porous materials with specific binding sites for the
metal atoms. The investigators will synthesize and characterize the catalysts
using a suite of laboratory- and synchrotron-based characterization techniques.
The catalysts will be tested for the selective hydrogenation of acetylene to
ethylene to determine how the binding sites affect the activity and selectivity
of the Pd atoms. Beyond the research, the project involves education of graduate
and undergraduate students with cross-training of researchers between the two
institutions and focused efforts to increase participation of underrepresented
groups in catalysis science.

The project aims to tailor the properties of Pd single atoms using covalent
organic frameworks (COF) as the support/ligand, and thus circumvent trade-offs
between activity and selectivity associated with traditional metal oxide
supported nanoparticle catalysts for the semi-hydrogenation of ethylene. Areas
of focus include 1) the effects of the COF binding sites and secondary ligands
on the Pd electronic properties, 2) hydrogen activation, 3) binding with
adsorbates and 4) catalyst activity/selectivity. Those thrusts will be
accomplished through precise catalyst synthesis, advanced characterization
techniques (in-situ/operando X-ray spectroscopies, microcalorimetry) and
detailed kinetic measurements. The project will identify the possibilities and
limitations for designing catalysts based on Pd metal single atoms. The
interdisciplinary nature of this research, and the integration of research and
education plans will lead to a cadre of students obtaining a unique educational
experience on heterogeneous catalysis and advanced lab- and synchrotron-based
characterization techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.