* 2308306
* Collaborative Research: Citizen CATE Next-Generation 2024 Total Solar Eclipse Experiment, Phase 2
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Paul Bryans, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 02/28/2025
* USD 215,044.00

This is a collaborative project between the SouthWest Research Institute, and
two of NSF’s Federally Funded Research and Development Centers – the National
Solar Observatory and the National Center for Atmospheric Research. In August of
2017, the Great American Eclipse traversed the continental United States from
Oregon to South Carolina. The Citizen Continental-America Telescopic Eclipse
(Citizen CATE) successfully deployed over 300 volunteer citizen scientists at 68
sites to continuously observe totality from coast to coast. That effort resulted
in a novel and unique dataset containing 90 minutes of continuous coverage of
the inner solar corona. On April 8, 2024, a total solar eclipse (TSE) will again
traverse United States, this time from Texas to Maine. The project outlined here
is to build on the successes of CATE 2017 and improve the observations with
upgraded instrumentation to better observe the middle layer of the solar
atmosphere (the middle corona). CATE 2024 project will deploy 40 teams of
citizen scientists along the path of totality to collect over 60 minutes of
high-resolution data which will be used to study several outstanding problems in
the hard to observe middle corona. A previous planning work including site
selection, identification of necessary equipment, and initial development of the
citizen science network as already been carried out. This award is to carry out
the planned activities, which includes equipment purchase and telescope
building, coordination and training for the teams, data collection during the
eclipse and preliminary compilation of the data. The broader impacts include
engagement with Native American and other underrepresented community groups
along the eclipse path, the donation of telescopes to the community groups for
use in other astronomical observations, and the inclusion of an early career
female scientist as the project manager.

CATE 2024 will use high-cadence high dynamic range (HDR) polarimetric
observations of the corona to characterize the physical processes that shape the
heating, structure, and evolution of the solar corona at scales that cannot be
studied outside of a TSE. The science objectives of CATE 2024 are to (1)
determine the connectivity of structures that span the middle corona, where the
coronal magnetic field transitions from primarily closed to primarily open; (2)
measure the flow of the nascent solar wind, by characterizing small scale
dynamics that occur during the eclipse; and (3) identify and characterize
magnetic reconnection, which is believed to generate structure in the solar wind
and to heat the low and middle corona, by identifying features and dynamics
related to this process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.