* 2308172
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Structure and Mode of Action of Fungal Ice Nucleators
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Konrad Meister, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,542.00

Some cold-adapted fungi contain compounds with the unusual capability to
catalyze the freezing of water. These fungi are known to have a role in making
ice in the atmosphere; however, little is known about how these fungal compounds
function in ice nucleation or the role they have in influencing the earth’s
climate. This project seeks to unravel the working mechanism of fungi’s ability
to optimize ice formation and to improve our understanding of how these fungi
influence the amount and intensity of precipitation and impact the earth’s
climate. Because these fungi are also plant pathogens, this research will also
help with understanding the impact of fungal ice nucleation on crops and the
rhizosphere and enable new strategies for the design and preparation of powerful
new freezing technologies. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will
provide novel learning opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.
Underrepresented students from the University of Alaska Southeast, a rural
native-serving Primarily Undergraduate Institution, will have unique
opportunities to learn advanced bioanalytical techniques, crystal growth, and
advanced spectroscopy and will be encouraged to attend graduate school through
peer-to-peer mentoring and interactions with graduate students from Baylor
University. Graduate students from Baylor University will have unique research
experiences studying ice-binding biomolecules of organisms inhabiting Alaska and
a unique mentoring experience through working with rural, Alaska Native
undergraduates.

Pure water does not freeze at 0 °C owing to the energy barrier associated with
creating the initial crystallization nucleus. In nature, water typically freezes
in a heterogeneous process, facilitated by the presence of particles that serve
as ice nucleators. Ice-nucleating biomolecules (INBs) from fungi are among the
best ice nucleators known, enabling the formation of ice at temperatures close
to 0 °C. The control fungal INBs exert over the phase transition of water has
direct relevance for disciplines as diverse as cryobiology, plant pathology,
biomedical engineering, and climate science. Despite their importance, the
structural basis and molecular mechanisms behind INB-mediated freezing have
remained largely elusive. Progress towards answering the question of what makes
INBs so much better at nucleating ice than any other material requires a
microscopic picture of the structure and interactions that enable superior ice
nucleation in their natural environment. The main objectives of this project
are: 1) Identify and characterize the compounds and structural moieties
responsible for ice nucleation in fungi, 2) Determine conformational changes of
the compounds when they make ice, and 3) Determine changes in the hydration
shell of the compounds in the process of ice making. These objectives will be
accomplished using novel ice-binding assays and advanced spectroscopic methods.
This research will allow the derivation of general structure-function
relationships and optimal functionalities of INBs, enabling unprecedented
insights into the molecular basis of biological ice nucleation.

This project is jointly funded by Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB)
Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.