* 2308206
* CRII: III: Structure-aware Graph Compressing: From Algorithms to Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Esra Akbas, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 151,643.00

Graph mining is an emerging field with a wide spectrum of applications across
many disciplines, such as social media and healthcare. Examples of applications
include finding groups of users in social networks (e.g., Facebook), which is
useful for a personalized recommendation, and detecting drug-drug interactions,
which may cause dangerous side effects on health. In graph mining, many useful
methods can be applied to small graphs effectively. However, the ever-increasing
size of real-world networks is a major challenge for these methods due to their
high computational and space costs. This project aims at developing novel graph
compression (summarization) methodologies that facilitate efficient analysis of
large graphs and advancing a wide spectrum of graph-related applications. Graph
compression aims to create a smaller graph from a massive graph. Compressing
graphs achieves several benefits, including but not limited to 1) significant
speed-up for current graph mining algorithms, 2) memory space and communication
cost reduction, 3) improved data privacy, 4) more effective graph visualization.
This project will provide research opportunities to graduate students,
especially female and underrepresented students, in graph mining and its real-
life applications. The PI will also incorporate the results of the research in
undergraduate and graduate-level courses.

Graph compression algorithms reduce the complexity and size of large graphs
while maintaining the crucial information of the original graph in the smaller
graph. Such reductions are essential to scale up or scale out existing
algorithms to better manage, query, store, and display them. The investigator
will design graph compression methods that preserve the desired structural
information of graphs, including similarity and cohesiveness, specific to the
selected graph mining problems. This project will: 1) explore the spatial
locality property of graphs by taking the structural information from different
aspects, including similarity of nodes and cohesiveness of subgraphs; 2) develop
the corresponding novel structure-aware compression methods to tackle the
challenges brought by large real-world networks; and 3) build more tailored
architectures with proposed compression methods for various problems, including
network embedding and community search and evaluate them on real-world
applications such as link prediction, node classification, anomaly detection,
and community detection. Its outcomes will be disseminated through publications,
tutorials, workshops, as well as open-source tools, code, and datasets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.