* 2308492
* CAREER: Robot Reflection in Lifelong Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hao Zhang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2025
* USD 345,708.00

Lifelong adaptation will enable robots to operate over long periods of time in
unstructured and ever-evolving worlds. Without effective adaptation, lifelong
robots will inevitably fail, jeopardizing both their missions and surrounding
environments. Change and novelty are two of the greatest challenges that prevent
robots from achieving lifelong adaptation. The goal of this award is to develop
and gain a fundamental understanding of a novel paradigm, called robot
reflection, to address change and novelty in order to achieve lifelong robot
adaptation. Inspired by theories of cognitive reflection for human adaptation,
the proposed robot reflection paradigm will allow a robot to reason about itself
and adjust its own adaptation process without requiring human supervision. This
award stands to provide significant benefit to society by enabling robots that
reflect to improve performance over their lifetimes, thus broadly impacting
lifelong robotics applications in which robots must operate over long periods of
time, such as search and rescue and autonomous driving.

To produce algorithms for robot reflection in lifelong adaptation, the technical
aims of this award are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust enables
self-aware robot adaptation in context, through a principled method that offsets
a robot perception and decision making model according to combinations of
changes in the environment and the robot itself. The second thrust addresses
adapting robot adaptation according to the degree of novelty in the robot's
experiences, through a novelty estimation approach that compares the current
experiences against past episodes in the robot's memory to estimate novelty, and
a machine forgetting method to update the robot's fixed-capacity memory by
adaptively selecting past episodes to forget while avoiding catastrophic
forgetting. The third thrust focuses on robot adaptation by imagination without
requiring a robot to physically experience a new scenario, through a novel
approach that formulates robot imagination as sequential decision making and
explores interpretable methods for modeling the underlying relationships between
experienced and new scenarios for data-efficient imagination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.