* 2308169
* Brittle Fracture of Dissipative Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Oscar Lopez-Pamies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Because of its pervasiveness and high-stakes impact on the mechanical
performance of structures made of inorganic and live matter alike, such as
bridges, airplanes, bones, and ligaments, fractures have attracted the attention
of humans, researchers and laymen alike, for centuries. Arguably, it is in the
past 25 years of this long and rich history that most progress has been made in
the quest for a complete mathematical formulation of fractures. This has been
made possible by a pivotal idea, to wit, the casting of the phenomenon of
fracture as a competition between energies: the energy required to deform the
structure and the energy required to create a crack in the structure.
Critically, this progress has been restricted to the elementary case of brittle
fracture in elastic solids, that is, materials that respond in one of two ways
to mechanical forces: they either deform elastically or create new surface,
i.e., they fracture. Yet, while within certain restricted conditions some
materials may be safely idealized as brittle elastic solids, as in the case of
glass at room temperature, all materials dissipate energy when they deform,
primarily by viscous or plastic deformation, or both, as for rubber and
aluminum. In this context, based on a universal energy competition recently
discovered by the investigator, this project aims to develop a rigorous
mathematical formulation to describe fracture in dissipative solids at large.
The project will provide interdisciplinary research training opportunities for
graduate students.

The project has three main objectives: 1) to develop a mathematically well-
posed time-discrete formulation of brittle fracture evolution in a large class
of dissipative solids subjected to isothermal quasistatic mechanical loading; 2)
to develop a phase-field regularization of the time-discrete formulation and
establish its convergence to the sharp limit; and 3) to numerically implement
the developed phase-field formulation and validate its predictions against
representative experiments on different types of solids. From a fundamental
standpoint, the project seeks to provide a first step towards a mathematically
well-posed universal formulation of fractures in any type of solid subjected to
quasistatic mechanical loading. In other words, to provide a first step in
establishing that the so-called brittle Griffith fracture is a universal
description of fracture in any type of solid. From an applications standpoint, a
tractable computational tool will be developed with the capability to describe,
explain, and predict the nucleation of a fracture from large pre-existing
cracks, as well as the propagation of fractures in structures made of a large
class of dissipative solids under arbitrary quasistatic loading. Such a general
quantitative tool would provide exceptional insight into a broad spectrum of
phenomena dominated by fracture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.