* 2308417
* Conference: Harmonic and Complex Analysis: Modern and Classical
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Catherine Beneteau, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 42,500.00

This award supports U.S. participation in the conference “Harmonic and Complex
Analysis: Modern and Classical” to be held June 18-22, 2023 at Bar Ilan
University, Israel. The conference is jointly organized by researchers from Bar-
Ilan University, Holon Institute of Technology, ORT Braude College, Tel Aviv
University, and the University of South Florida. Presentations at the conference
range from plenary lectures describing recent breakthrough results in complex
and harmonic analysis in a form accessible to advanced graduate students and
young researchers, to more specialized talks on focused research topics. The
award supports the travel of early-career researchers and graduate students from
U.S. institutions. Participation of beginning researchers in this international
conference will benefit the U.S. research community by fostering new
collaborations and the exchange of research ideas between U.S.-based researchers
working in harmonic and complex analysis and their counterparts across the
globe.

The conference focuses on a suite of currently emerging themes at the borderline
between mathematics and physics. Areas of research of the plenary speakers
include (1) localization of eigenmodes of elliptic operators, which unites deep
results in geometric measure theory and harmonic analysis with modern
applications to quantum physics, noise abatement walls, LEDs, and optical
devices; (2) harmonic analysis with applications to medical imaging; (3)
stochastic algebraic geometry and gravitational lensing; (4) classical harmonic
analysis with applications to probability theory; and (5) classical complex
analysis and function theory, with new lines of attack on well-known problems in
mathematical physics, such as Hele-Shaw flows, Laplacian growth, and the study
of Coulomb gases. Further information can be found at
https://hca2023.math.biu.ac.il .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.