* 2308075
* First high-resolution studies of photospheric bright points as heating drivers: early DKIST science
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Samuel Van Kooten, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2026
* USD 335,047.00

This project seeks to address the coronal heating problem – the phenomena in
which the Sun’s atmosphere increases in temperature as one moves away from the
surface of the Sun. In this study, observations with NSF’s Daniel K. Inouye
Solar Telescope of photospheric bright points, which are the smallest and short-
lived features on the Sun and appear in regions of strong magnetic field, will
be compared with simulations. The broader impacts of this study include
understanding of the solar atmosphere, in which the Earth and all planets exist,
and it supports an early career scientist as project lead.

Specifically, this project will identify and track photospheric bright points,
which will be used to constrain several models of coronal heating. A recently
developed technique to connect bright-point shape changes to individual wave
modes will be used compute corresponding energy fluxes, providing insights into
driving of wave-modes, which could carry energy to the corona. The number
density and motions of bright points at a level of detail previously impossible,
and the degree of bright-point rotation will be measured, enabling more
realistic simulations of nanoflare-driven heating. Distributions and
correlations of properties, particularly those relating to the shapes of bright
points and of the corresponding magnetic flux enhancements, will be measured,
enhancing understanding of bright-point properties on the smallest scales.
Finally, the team will carry out computer simulations, which will extend
previous work on bright points and enhance our understanding of wave-driving.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.