* 2308999
* Experimental Study of Quantum Jumps with a Single Trapped Ion
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Boris Blinov, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 154,007.00

Quantum theory is perhaps one of the most important developments and triumphs of
20th century science. Now in the 21st century, the “second quantum revolution”
is underway with the advent of quantum computing and other quantum technologies
that make practical use of the powerful concepts and ideas of quantum theory.
Yet, even after more than a century of scientific research, many of these
concepts and ideas remain incompletely understood. One such concept is the
collapse of the wave function. According to quantum mechanics, microscopic
objects such as atoms behave like waves, and they can exist in so called
superposition states, just like the famous Schrodinger’s cat that is both dead
AND alive at the same time. However, according to quantum mechanics, these
superpositions cannot be observed: when an observation is made, the
superposition “collapses” to one of the states. Using the Schrodinger’s cat
example, when we open the box, we find a cat that is dear OR alive, not both at
the same time. This project aims to study the details of quantum mechanical
collapse using single atoms as they undergo “quantum jumps” between different
quantum states. Single atoms will be trapped by electromagnetic fields and
controlled with lasers to induce quantum collapse, which will be studied by
observing single photons that the atoms emit. Understanding the nature of
quantum collapse is important both for the foundations of quantum mechanics as a
theory, and for the very practical aspects of quantum computing and quantum
information. Quantum technologies such as quantum computing and quantum
communications promise faster computing speed, improved information security,
and development of better materials for energy conversion, electronics and
biomedical applications. The award will support research of two graduate student
researchers, as well as undergraduate students who will be trained for the
future quantum-ready workforce.

Quantum jumps were first theorized in 1913 by Niels Bohr, but it wasn’t until
1986 that they were observed experimentally by Hans Dehmelt’s group. In the
original experiment, the jumps manifested themselves as instantaneous
transitions of a single trapped, laser-cooled ion from the “bright” state to the
“dark” state as measured by a photon-counting detector. More recent observations
of quantum jumps in artificial atoms built from superconducting circuits allowed
researchers at Yale to “catch” and “reverse” the jumps in an experiment that was
enabled by the fact that nearly every single photon emitted by the
superconducting qubit was detected. This project plans to achieve similar level
of single photon detection from a single trapped ion using a novel ion trap that
incorporates a deep parabolic mirror covering more than 95% of the solid angle
around the ion. This will enable observing of the quantum jumps at the
nanosecond time scale, limited only by the scattering rate of light by the ion,
in a system that is free from dissipation, with the possibility to track and
control the dynamics of the wave function collapse.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.