* 2308409
* Collaborative Research: EAGER--Evaluation of Optimal Mesonetwork Design for Monitoring and Predicting North American Monsoon (NAM) Convection Using Observing System Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Christopher Castro, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2024
* USD 243,784.00

North American Monsoon (NAM) thunderstorms in the Southwest United States
account for nearly 50% of the annual precipitation in this region, yet these
phenomena have been relatively understudied and are difficult to predict. The
NAM brings a host of hazards in a part of the country experiencing very rapid
population growth: life-threatening flash floods, damaging microburst winds,
sudden mile-high dust storms that sometimes form in association with
thunderstorm outflows, and lightning-triggered wildfires made even more
dangerous by the outflows (lightning is responsible for 62% of the wildfires in
central Arizona). The timing, location, and intensity of such hazards are
challenging to predict, even with state-of-the-art numerical weather prediction
(NWP) models having sufficient resolution to explicitly resolve storms. A
primary deficiency is that observations of the atmosphere above the surface used
to initialize NWP models are currently too widely distributed compared to the
spatial scale of thunderstorms; also, these data are available just twice daily,
whereas a typical thunderstorm has a lifetime of less than one hour. Therefore,
the goal of this project is to determine the optimal distribution and types of
much-improved arrays of instruments within both future NSF-supported field
campaigns and for a future statewide operational high-resolution “mesonetwork”
in Arizona to have the greatest positive impacts on the predictability of the
initiation, evolution, and upscale growth of thunderstorms in the NAM. The
findings from the study should provide the many current stakeholders of the
University of Arizona NWP system with information about the expected value (and
cost) of a statewide mesonet for improving the prediction of NAM weather. The
project will also inform decisions regarding the optimum instrument deployment
strategies to be made for future higher-resolution field campaigns designed to
improve understanding and predictability of storms in complex terrain. Lastly,
an important result of the effort will be the development of the modeling and
data assimilation infrastructure needed to obtain four-dimensional consistent
datasets of temperature, moisture, winds and precipitation using the optimally-
determined arrays of observations in the future.

The project will use a novel application of the Observing System Simulation
Experiment (OSSE) methodology to determine the optimal configurations for a
future operational Arizona state mesonetwork and the complementary requirements
for the design of more densely spaced instrument arrays in future mesoscale
field campaigns. OSSE is a modeling experiment used to evaluate the value of
observing system when actual observational data are not available. Each new (not
currently operational) instrument type can be introduced, along with appropriate
error variances, in a systematic manner by using Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF)
data assimilation to evaluate relative impacts on model predictions. The
innovative OSSE approach for optimizing network design has the potential for
high reward as it represents a fundamentally different approach from what has
been previously used for state-operated mesonet design considerations and large
field campaigns, thus making such decisions more cost-effective. The research
team has ample peer-reviewed experience conducting OSSEs for the following
synthetic observations to be investigated: GPS vertically integrated
precipitable water vapor, vertically-resolved measurements of water vapor from
MicroPulse Differential (MPD) absorption lidars, winds from Doppler Lidars, and
data from rotary-wing Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS) data and 3-hourly
soundings. The OSSEs will be conducted within the framework of the University of
Arizona WRF modeling system and the ensemble adjustment EnKF available within
NCAR’s Data Assimilation Research Testbed (DART). An important benefit of the
research is development of the scientific and technical infrastructure needed to
create Four Dimensional Dynamically Consistent (4DDC) datasets from the
assimilation of the various observing system data, since many of the governing
factors in performing the data assimilation will have been addressed during this
research. Because the project will develop the 4DDC infrastructure prior to
commencement of any future field campaign, scientists will be able to utilize
the field 4DDC datasets in their research more efficiently and quickly. Thus,
the project represents both a risk reduction effort regarding optimization of
network design and the means by which greater use of the data can occur.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.