* 2308208
* Pathological solutions of fluid equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Mimi Dai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

This project studies some fundamental open questions concerning the equations of
fluid motion. The equations, widely used by physicists and engineers for real-
life applications, were introduced almost two centuries ago. However, some
essential questions, such as the existence and uniqueness of classical
solutions, are still not answered. Therefore, a notion of weak solutions, whose
existence is known, has been extensively used by mathematicians. The project
will demonstrate a limitation of this notion by constructing weak solutions with
various unphysical properties. On the other hand, the project proposes to prove
the existence of physical solutions that are expected to describe turbulent
flows. This project will also provide opportunities for the involvement of
graduate students in the project.

In the past couple of decades, mathematical fluid dynamics has been highlighted
by numerous constructions of solutions to fluid equations that exhibit
pathological or wild behavior, such as loss of the energy balance, non-
uniqueness, singularity formation, and dissipation anomaly. Interesting from the
mathematical point of view, these solutions provide counterexamples to various
well-posedness results in supercritical spaces. Moreover, these constructive
approaches are becoming more and more relevant from the physical point of view
as well. Indeed, a fundamental physical property of turbulent flows is the
existence of the energy cascade. Conjectured by Kolmogorov, the energy cascade
has been observed both experimentally and numerically but had been difficult to
produce analytically. The purpose of this project is to use state-of-the-art
methods, such as convex integration and new developments in efficient mixing, to
construct not only mathematically pathological, but also physically realistic
solutions of fluid equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.