* 2308152
* Frames as dictionaries in inverse problems: Recovery guarantees for structured sparsity, unstructured environments, and symmetry-group identification
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bernhard Bodmann, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2026
* USD 266,748.00

Many challenges in remote sensing or other types of signal acquisition and
communication systems become feasible when the signal is assumed to be sparse,
that is, it can be generated with a small number of contributing terms selected
from a dictionary of signal components. This project addresses the need for
establishing universal guarantees for sparse recovery of signals that are
related to both the mathematical structure of the dictionary as well as the
geometric conditions that are used to synthesize the signal. These results will
be used for developing requirements and recovery guarantees for accurate machine
learning predictions from a sparsely generated signals, detecting emerging hot
spots in an epidemic spreading through a network of cities, and detecting
symmetries in molecular dynamics to reduce the relevant data when calculating
various quantities such as binding energies. The project also involves the
training of graduate students in the mathematical, computational, and
interdisciplinary aspects of this project.

The expected outcomes of the project include the following goals with broad
relevance in data science. The first is the accurate recovery of signals that
are sparsely synthesized in a finite or infinite-dimensional reproducing kernel
space from noisy measurements. Sparse recovery is a central part of support
vector regression, which will be carried out for radial Gaussian kernels in
high-dimensional spaces. These results from sparse recovery are expected to give
insight in the choice of model parameters such as the width of the Gaussian
depending on the spacing of the samples. Similar recovery guarantees will also
be established for functions on graphs, when the dictionary consists of heat
kernels that are indexed by the pair of a vertex and a time for the diffusion of
the kernel under the heat semigroup, will also be established. These results
have relevance for the detection of hot spots when an infectious disease spreads
across the globe, driven by local exponential growth and diffusion between
population centers. Another goal is to identify group symmetries from noisy
observations of the orbit of a collection of vectors. This question of symmetry
identification is motivated by an application in quantum chemistry where
identifying symmetries of molecules can reduce the space of samples needed to
estimate energies or force fields for molecular configurations based on electron
densities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.