* 2308173
* RUI: characterizing and optimizing extensions of LCDM
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Tristan Smith, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2027
* USD 293,196.00

This project seeks to address fundamental issues in cosmology, specifically the
discrepancies in our understanding of the expansion rate of the universe and the
clustering of matter. These inconsistencies, known as the 'Hubble tension' and
the ’sigma-8' tension, challenge the current standard cosmological model.
Scientists at Swarthmore College will conduct new theoretical work to provide
insights into the nature of these tensions and offer new theoretical
explanations. As part of this project, the PI will train undergraduate students
in effective science communication and involve them in research activities. This
effort will leverage existing training programs and develop a science
communication curriculum, fostering a culture of research and spreading
knowledge of the scientific process. This approach not only enhances education
but also promotes diversity and inclusivity in the scientific community.
Overall, this project has the potential to advance our understanding of
cosmology, address fundamental tensions in the standard model, and contribute to
the training of future scientists while promoting effective science
communication.

The PI will address tensions in the current standard cosmological model, known
as LCDM, by investigating extensions and alternative models. The tensions arise
from inconsistencies between predictions made by LCDM and measurements of the
cosmic microwave background (CMB) and the clustering of matter. The project will
determine the theory space available to models addressing these tensions,
characterize their specific signatures on the CMB and large-scale structure, and
further explore the non-linear dynamics of cosmological scalar field models. The
project's intellectual merit lies in its contribution to the cosmological
research community's readiness for upcoming observations. It will develop a
robust method to determine the properties of models that successfully address
the tensions, provide new insights into constraints using current and future
cosmological data, and explore the effects of cosmological scalar fields on
various phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.