* 2308763
* I-Corps:  Interactive noise canceling headphones for construction workers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Jung Sohn, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of modified hearing protection to reduce the adverse effects of
noise pollution on workers on construction jobsites. More than one-half million
construction employees are exposed to potentially hazardous noise levels
annually. Overexposure to noise induces several potential physical and mental
health risks for on-site employees. These potential risks include hearing
impairment, stress, loss of attention, hypertension, enhanced blood pressure,
and cardiovascular disease. Moreover, several studies have also found a loss of
productivity for employees due to exposure to construction equipment noise. The
prevalence of hearing protection device (HPD) use among U.S. construction
workers is very poor. Some of users' most common complaints are that hearing
protectors are uncomfortable, hot, and create difficulties in hearing and
understanding speech communication and warning signals. Standard earphones do
not adequately filter out ambient environmental noise. Users wearing standard
earphones must raise the volume of the sound to overcome the environmental
noise, which may cause further damage to their hearing.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of hearing protection for
construction workers that is designed to work with an interactive software
application to give the user control of surrounding noise. This device
recognizes all the sounds in the environment from a predefined library and
labels them based on their type. This assignment may allow the user to filter
out the background noises based on their needs using the application. The
application is designed to produce a signal with a 180-shift delay to cancel the
noises that the user selected to block. The interaction of these two noises is
found to be destructive, causing the sound to be phased out. Using the
application, people exposed to the job site noise may customize and choose which
ambient sounds they want to hear and which ones they do not want to hear based
on their needs. Therefore, they may opt out of the sound of a jackhammer while
still being able to hear any warning signals. This sound selectivity may provide
greater safety and hearing protection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.