* 2308743
* Collaborative Research: Study of Anisotropic Dust Interactions in the PK-4 Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Truell Hyde, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 291,301.00

This award supports a collaborative effort between Auburn University and Baylor
University to study behavior of a complex plasma under microgravity in the
PlasmaKristall-4 (PK-4) experiment on the International Space Station. Complex
plasmas, also known as dusty plasmas, are collections of micron-sized dust
particles immersed in a plasma, or ionized gas. The dust grains typically become
charged by collecting electrons and ions on their surface. When dusty plasmas
are placed in external electric fields, anisotropic interactions between dust
grains and ion flows can lead to the formation of filamentary dust structures.
Anisotropic interactions, which depend on the relative orientation of
interacting particles, are known to arise in some of the most interesting
complex systems, including proteins and smart materials. A fundamental open
question in the study of these systems is how anisotropic interactions lead to
structure formation. This project addresses this question using a combined
analytical, numerical, and experimental approach to investigate how anisotropic
interactions lead to structure formation in dusty plasma experiments on the
International Space Station (ISS).

This project will use data from several PK-4 campaigns to investigate the form
and origins of the anisotropic dust-dust interaction potential that leads to the
formation of filamentary dusty plasma structures. Data collected from PK-4
experiments will be used to quantify structural anisotropy as a function of
plasma conditions using statistical analysis and data-driven methods. Molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations of dust and ions will be used to calculate the
dustâ€“ion wakefield potential. A machine learning (ML) model will be applied to
experimental data to identify the most likely form of the interaction forces as
a function of plasma parameters. Interaction forces and potentials learned with
the ion-dust MD simulation and the ML model will be applied in MD simulations of
larger dust clouds to validate against the experimental data. Experiments in the
PK-4 BU device, a ground-based replica of the PK-4 ISS with additional
diagnostic capabilities, will be used to determine the relationship between
plasma conditions and the onset of plasma ionizations waves. Finally, an
analytic model will be employed to determine the spectrum of energy states of
the Hamiltonian representing the anisotropic interaction potential. This method
will be used to determine the relationship between PK-4 filamentary dusty plasma
and other filamentary structures, such as electrorheological materials and
liquid crystals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.