* 2308705
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Virginia--North Carolina (2023-2028)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Holly Jackson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,179,361.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers
in STEM.

For the United States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps
into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The
Virginia-North Carolina STEM Pathways and Research Alliance (VA-NC SPRA) has
formed an alliance in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled
technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in the
States of Virginia and North Carolina. The institutions that make up the
Alliance are diverse and include the University of Virginia, lead institution,
Bennett College, Elizabeth City State University, George Mason University,
Johnson C. Smith University, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Old Dominion
University, Piedmont Virginia Community College, St. Augustineâ€™s University,
Virginia Commonwealth University, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University. Through this project, the Alliance will implement activities to
support student success by improving retention, participation in undergraduate
research, and the overall number of historically underrepresented populations
graduating with STEM degrees from the eleven Alliance institutions. Through this
effort, researchers involved in this project believe that the improved results
will strengthen the STEM workforce in the States of Virginia and North Carolina
and ultimately contribute to America's national security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.