* 2308791
* NSF-BSF: Universality Puzzles and Coherent Control of Efimov Physics with 7Li Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jose D'Incao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,003.00

This project aims to advance the understanding of the nature of atomic multi-
body interactions in the nearly resonant regime and will study various methods
for control and manipulation of their quantum mechanical properties. While a
theoretical description of few-atom systems is extremely challenging, requiring
the development of highly efficient numerical and computational techniques, it
provides a broad and rich range of opportunities to advance scientific knowledge
and has potential technological impact. This project represents a theoretical
and experimental collaboration via the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF). The combined theory and
experimental effort will enable a deeper understanding of few-atom processes
which may lead to various applications in atomic clocks, quantum information
science, and the exploration of numerous novel phases of matter. Additionally,
the educational impact of this research lies in training graduate and
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art theoretical and computational
research techniques, providing them with valuable skills and knowledge.

Recent experimental observations of Efimov physics with 7Li atoms have exhibited
discrepancies compared to theoretical calculations, highlighting the need for a
more comprehensive understanding of the concept of universality and its
relevance to this particular system. 7Li atoms possess unique properties that
distinguish them from other commonly used atomic species in ultracold quantum
gases, demanding a more detailed and rigorous analysis. Specifically, the
interaction between 7Li atoms is strongly influenced by electronic-exchange
interactions, even at significant distances comparable to the van der Waals
length. Consequently, electronic-exchange interactions can have a greater impact
on Efimov physics in 7Li than in any other atomic species currently under
investigation. Addressing this question will enable the development of accurate
theoretical models for achieving coherent control over few-body processes. Such
control has the potential to stabilize strongly interacting gases by minimizing
few-body losses, while also providing avenues to manipulate three-body
interactions and create exotic dynamical regimes. Notably, the investigation of
superposition states utilized in 7Li interferometric experiments holds
particular interest. These experiments have demonstrated coherence times longer
than the lifetime of Efimov states themselves, suggesting the existence of novel
physical phenomena that current theory has yet to fully comprehend.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.