* 2308786
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: LSAMP Alaska Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Herb Schroeder, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2028
* USD 954,638.00

With support from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
this STEM Pathways and Research Alliance (SPRA) from the lead institution, the
University of Alaska Anchorage will effect a systemic change in the hiring
patterns of Alaska Natives in the STEM professions. There are approximately
3,000 students in our STEM pipeline. Since the first LSAMP award in 2001, the
Alliance has graduated 1,296 minority STEM students and increased bachelor
degree attainment from underrepresented STEM students from a pre-LSAMP number of
16.7 to 64.8. The Alaska Alliance includes all 19 campuses within the University
of Alaska system. The focus of the effort is to effect systemic change by
eradicating forever the belief that minority students are not science and
engineering material; inspiring students to complete advanced science and math
coursework in middle and high school, and developing students so they are
socially and academically hyper-prepared for BS STEM degrees when they arrive at
the university.

This LSAMP Alliance serves as a support for the undergraduate portion of a
multi-stage institutional initiative designed to prepare and support Alaska
Native students and other minorities from middle school through graduate school
to succeed in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) careers. The
project goals are to 1. Continue to expand the work we are doing with Summer
Bridge at the transitions between high school and college, and from
undergraduate to graduate school; 2. Expand our capacity for undergraduate
research and build our capacity to conduct international research; 3. Strengthen
our presence on additional Alliance Community campuses; 4. Complete internal and
external research studies assessing the effectiveness of our longitudinal model.
Dissemination efforts will include publishing results of the impacts of the
Alliance on a website, presentations at conferences, and submitting journal
articles. The LSAMP program takes a comprehensive approach to student
development and retention. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Therefore,
the project will contribute significantly to broadening participation in academe
and science research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.