* 2308617
* Correlation and Dynamics of Ultracold Atoms in Optical Tweezer Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Erhai Zhao, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 239,999.00

This project addresses open problems brought forth by recent experiments on
strongly interacting atoms in optical tweezer arrays. In these experiments, each
tweezer (made of laser light) holds an individual atom, while the tweezer array
is programmed to herd the atoms into desired spatial configurations with the
tunneling and interactions under precise control. This new platform promises to
assemble quantum matter from the ground up, atom by atom, to realize correlated
quantum phases which have remained inaccessible so far. Tweezer arrays also
furnish a scalable architecture to generate and probe entangled states of
central importance to quantum information. The proposed research develops novel
numerical algorithms to compute and understand the correlations and dynamics of
interacting atoms in tweezer arrays. Inspired in part by machine learning and
digital quantum simulation, the proposed algorithms will be complementary to
traditional many-body techniques based on perturbation theory. The outcomes of
this project help understand the collective behaviors of cold atoms observed in
ongoing experiments. The principal investigator will continue to improve the
local support for student professional development and mentor high school
students in summer research.

More specifically, the proposed work is divided into three parts. Project A
solves quantum spin models of Rydberg atoms in two-dimensional tweezer arrays
using two innovative techniques: a variational ansatz based on the neural
network representation of many-spin wave functions and high-resolution
functional renormalization group. Both approaches faithfully treat all
competing, longer-range spin interactions to yield the phase diagrams. Project B
computes the real space correlation functions of Fermi-Hubbard gas on small
tweezer arrays. The problem of interacting fermions is mapped exactly to a set
of qubits (spins) with non-local interactions, which is then solved to seek the
onset of pairing and its orbital symmetry. Project C develops field theory for
the entanglement transition in one-dimensional arrays of Rydberg atoms under
repeated measurements and post-selection. Overall, the project explores unknown
regimes of quantum many-body physics, and stimulates the dialogue between atomic
physics, condensed matter, quantum information, and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.