* 2308387
* Collaborative Research: Experimental controls on Clumped Isotope Signatures of Methane in Deep-Sea Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* George Lazar, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wanamaker
* 04/30/2026
* USD 140,466.00

The project will study the controls on the chemical characteristics of methane
gas in ocean hydrothermal systems. This project will use laboratory experiments
to explore the isotopic composition of methane gas and carbon dioxide. Those lab
data will enable future studies of CH4 and CO2 in seafloor vents. The study will
inform studies of the cycling of carbon between the Earth’s interior and oceans.
It is also relevant to life in extreme environments and the origin of life.
Project broader impacts include research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students and high-school summer interns. Graduate students from
California State University, San Bernardino (a minority-serving institution)
will spend time at the University of Maryland and the Carnegie Institution of
Washington. There they will gain experience with state-of-the-art isotope
geochemistry.

Deep-sea hydrothermal vent systems affect the cycling of carbon between the
Earth’s interior and oceans by introducing organic compounds of thermogenic,
abiotic and microbial origin to the overlying water column. Vent fluids from
both basalt and ultramafic-hosted hydrothermal systems contain abundant CH4 in
addition to other organic species. This project aims to explore the origin and
evolution of CH4 in deep-sea vents by employing the use of double-substituted
and doubly-deuterated isotopologues (13CH3D, 12CH2D2). In a series of
hydrothermal experiments involving organic matter decomposition. CO2 reduction
and non-equilibrated CH4 gases in the presence of mineral catalysts, the
distribution of rare methane isotopologue will be assessed by the use of a high-
mass-resolution gas-source multiple collector mass spectrometer (Panorama, UMD).
Experiments will assess the equilibrium relationships in the
12CH2D2-13CH3D-12CH3D-12CH4-13CH4-HD-HDO-H2O system and describe isotope effects
associated with the impact of mineral phases and H2O H isotope composition on
the abiotic and thermogenic formation mechanisms. This study aims to be a
comprehensive study of Delta-12CH2D2 and Delta-13CH3D evolution applied to
subseafloor hydrothermal systems and water/rock interactions deeper in the
oceanic crust.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.