* 2308163
* Stress Modulated Phase Transition in 2D TMDC Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Wei Gao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2023
* USD 87,732.00

Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide (2D TMDC) are atomically thin
materials with a generalized formula of MX2, where M is a transition metal atom
(Molybdenum or Tungsten) and X is a chalcogen atom (Sulfur, Tellurium, or
Selenium). One layer of M atoms is sandwiched between two layers of X atoms. 2D
TMDC can exist in two stable structural phases with different atomic
arrangements: semiconducting 2H phase and conducting 1T' phase. The dynamic
control of transitions between these two phases through applied mechanical
stress can lead to revolutionary device applications such as memory devices,
reconfigurable circuits and topological transistors at atomically thin limits.
This project will provide fundamental knowledge of the role of the stress field
on the atomistic mechanism of phase transitions of 2D TMDC, facilitating the
application of phase engineering in next generation 2D electronics and
optoelectronics, thereby advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare.
Educationally, taking advantage of the large Hispanic student population at
University of Texas at San Antonio, the major educational goal of the project is
to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research, and train
them through active research engagement.

The mechanism of stress dependent phase transition is that the stress field can
be applied to change transition energy barriers and pathways. The barriers
determine phase transition rates and pathways reveal the atomistic transition
process such as new phase nucleation and propagation. So far, the role of stress
on transition behaviors of 2D TMDC is not clear. The central objective of this
project is to determine transition barriers and pathways of 2D TMDC as a
function of applied stress field, in order to build a mechanics foundation for
phase engineering of 2D TMDC at the atomic level. A combined computational and
theoretical approach will be employed to achieve this objective. However, it is
noted that the existing methods cannot be readily used for this study when one
considers the finite deformation of 2D materials. Hence, new methods will be
developed. A new computation method, called Finite Deformation Nudged Elastic
Band method, will be developed by adding nonlinear mechanics to conventional NEB
method, for finding transition barriers and pathways under finite deformation.
Meanwhile, since it is time consuming to simulate all possible stress states,
there is a need to develop a theory that can predict the barriers. Hence, a new
theoretical method, called Finite Deformation Bell Theory, will be developed
based on the concept of original Bell theory and continuum mechanics. The
methodologies developed in this project can be applied to study phase
transitions of other crystalline materials, and more broadly to study mechano-
chemical problems beyond phase transitions, such as diffusion, dislocation
motion, fracture formation and so on, where the rate dependent transition
behaviors in materials are coupled with stress and finite deformation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.