* 2308182
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Searches After Gravitational-waves Using Arizona's Observatories (SAGUARO)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wen-fai Fong, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2026
* USD 337,029.00

The first detection in 2017 of both gravitational waves and light from a neutron
star merger opened a new era of ‘multi-messenger’ astrophysics. It provided
direct evidence for the origin of short gamma ray bursts, cosmic heavy element
production (like gold and platinum), and the launching of relativistic outflows
from compact object mergers (like neutron stars and black holes). When neutron
stars merge, they can produce electromagnetic light, including explosive
‘kilonova’ emission that is visible in the optical and near-infrared for only a
few days. With only one such detection thus far, however, there is still much to
learn by identifying the systems that produce gravitational wave events and
studying them intensely. The investigators will run an electromagnetic observing
campaign associated with gravitational wave detector observations. The search
incorporates two discovery telescopes and a set of 1-10m telescopes for
immediate and frequent monitoring of new kilonovae. As part of this project, the
investigators have developed a course at a Hispanic Serving Community College,
which will introduce students of all skill levels to basic python programming
and to give them a view of what a STEM/academic future looks like.

The investigators will carry out comprehensive discovery and follow-up
observations of gravitational wave events during the fourth Advanced Detector
run (O4) and beyond, taking advantage of a new discovery machine (the Bok 2.3-m
telescope on Kitt Peak). Crucially, they will use newly upgraded software, which
includes pre-vetting of incoming transients within the gravitational wave
localization region (by cross-matching with other transient surveys and relevant
catalogs) and tools to enable same-night triggering of photometric and
spectroscopic resources on viable counterparts. Ultimately the team will measure
the color and spectroscopic evolution of a sample of new kilonovae to
disentangle projection effects and measure physical properties such as the
composition, ejecta mass and velocity. It is only with a sample of counterparts
that a true physical picture of kilonovae can be obtained. The investigators
will also carry out deep observations of the host galaxies and stellar environs
of kilonovae, which will constrain associations to globular clusters and
quantify offsets between the merger site, host galaxy star formation, and other
galaxy properties. These observations will constrain the viable pathways that
lead to compact object mergers. This project advances the goals of the Windows
on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.