* 2308193
* Probing the Universe's expansion and gravitational wave sources with ground-based optical telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Antonella Palmese, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2026
* USD 465,884.00

A research team at Carnegie-Mellon University will carry out an observational
campaign of astronomical transient events using primarily the Dark Energy Camera
(DECam), with a focus on the gravitational wave (GW) sources that will be
detected in the upcoming LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA GW detectors observing run (expected
during 2023-2024). So far, only one electromagnetic (EM) counterpart to a GW
binary neutron star merger has been confidently identified. The goal of the
project is to discover new electromagnetic counterparts to mergers of binary
neutron stars, while also searching for the first optical transient events
associated with GW neutron star-black hole mergers and massive stellar binary
black holes. The team will make use of a state-of-the-art difference imaging
software pipeline, and machine learning methods to identify transients and model
their light curves. Finally, this program will use the DECam observations, in
combination with spectroscopic data from other ground-based facilities and GW
data, to study the environment of GW sources to understand the origin of
gravitational wave sources, and to produce new measurements of the Hubble
constant H0, a measure of the expansion rate of the universe, through a
procedure called the standard siren method. As part of this program, the team
will provide tutorials based on the new DECam data at local public high schools
through the Teachers Training program, and providing outreach to the broader
community through public lectures and articles.

DECam is one of the very few currently functioning instruments with the
capabilities to enable EM counterpart discoveries in the upcoming GW observing
run. This project, therefore, serves an important role within the multi-
messenger astronomy community. EM counterpart discoveries enable a wide range of
scientific analyses that are otherwise inconclusive or impossible with GW data
alone. These include constraining (1) the equation of state of neutron stars,
(2) modifications to General Relativity, and (3) the production of the heaviest
elements in the Universe. This project focuses on addressing two pressing
questions in astrophysics: the puzzling “Hubble constant tension”, a discrepancy
between values of H0 measured through different probes, and the origin of
merging binary systems, whether facilitated by dynamical interactions or by
stellar evolution. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.