* 2309946
* Heavy Quarkonia in Lattice QCD with Anisotropic Highly Improved Staggered Quarks
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexei Bazavov, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The strong force binds elementary particles called quarks into protons and
neutrons and the latter into atomic nuclei that are the fundamental building
blocks of the matter observed in the Universe at all scales. These strong
interactions of the elementary constituents are successfully described by
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) - a quantum field theory developed in the course of
20th century. Predictions of QCD have been verified with amazing experimental
precision. Under normal conditions isolated quarks are not observed - they are
confined in composite objects like protons and neutrons. However, when strongly
interacting matter is heated up to very high temperatures (about million times
the temperature in the core of the Sun) or compressed to very high densities
(the ones presumably achieved at the core of a neutron star), a novel phase of
matter called Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP) is formed. This project will study from
first-principle QCD calculations the properties of QGP, in particular, how
composite states of heavy quarks respond to the QGP medium and how the strong
force behaves at very short distance scales (microscopy of QGP). These
investigations will provide theoretical understanding and interpretation of the
experimental results from the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider at Brookhaven
National Laboratory and Large Hadron Collider at the European Organization for
Nuclear Research.

Lattice QCD simulations are performed by Monte Carlo sampling the most probable
configurations of fundamental fields on the four-dimensional space-time grid and
computing physical observables on them. The physical information about heavy-
quark bound states is encoded in their spectral functions. For reliable
extraction of the spectral functions from Euclidean lattice correlation
functions, the PI will develop a formalism of anisotropic Highly Improved
Staggered Quarks (aHISQ), where the space-time grid is anisotropic with higher
resolution in the temporal direction. The project will develop necessary
algorithms and computer codes for lattice QCD simulations with dynamical aHISQ
quarks and will generate a publicly available library of high-quality aHISQ
ensembles of field configurations at various lattice spacings and anisotropies
specifically for heavy quarkonia spectral function reconstruction. The heavy
quarks will be included in the framework of Non-Relativistic QCD (NRQCD). Very
high anisotropies combined with dynamical aHISQ quarks will pave the way to
reliable extraction of the spectral functions with fully assessed statistical
and systematic uncertainties. The PI will mentor doctorate students involved in
the research as well as engage in public outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.