* 2309146
* Quantum Dynamics of Near-One-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Marcos Rigol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Understanding the behavior of many interacting particles whose dynamics is
dictated by quantum rather than classical physics is a current frontier in
science. In addition to its fundamental appeal, it is, for example, of relevance
to understanding what happens when many qubits are coupled together to create
and scale up quantum computers, as well as for the development of effective
hydrodynamics descriptions equivalent to those used to describe classical
fluids. The latter descriptions are used in a wide range of applications, e.g.,
in aeronautics, hydrology, and geophysics, and their quantum counterparts are
expected to play a similarly important role in quantum technologies. Central
roles in the outcomes of the quantum dynamics are played by the geometry of the
quantum system and by the type of interactions between the particles. Of special
interest in recent years has been the case in which the particles are cooled to
ultra-low temperatures (nano Kelvins) and trapped in such a way that their
motion is restricted to a line (one dimension). The goal of this project is two-
fold, on the one hand the PI will develop and use theoretical tools to
understand and quantitatively describe experiments in the ultra-low temperature
regime, and on the other hand will theoretically study quantum states that can
be created in those systems in the presence of different types of interactions
and symmetries. This award will support the training of graduate students in
quantum physics and computational physics. Some of the most important theory-
experiment findings will be included in a graduate quantum mechanics book that
the PI is co-writing. The PI will continue his recruiting efforts to attract
graduate students from underrepresented groups to the physics graduate program
at Penn State, and will continue his efforts to encourage members of those
groups to pursue careers in Physics. In the context of theory-experiment
collaborations, the PI plans to study the dynamics of near-one-dimensional
ultracold gases following Bragg scattering pulses. The main goal of these
studies will be to explore universal processes that occur at very short times,
such as hydrodynamization (which also occurs in heavy-ion collisions in particle
accelerators), and local equilibration processes that depend strongly on the
nature and interactions in the system. At longer times, the PI plans to develop
and use generalized hydrodynamics approaches to study the effect of dipolar
interactions in the dynamics following sudden changes of a confining potential.
For the latter studies, the PI and his group will consider thermodynamically
stable states with repulsive contact interactions and metastable states with
attractive contact interactions. Central to all the previous studies will be the
characterization of the far-from-equilibrium states using rapidity and momentum
distributions. Beyond near-integrable one dimensional systems, the PI and his
group will use typical fidelity susceptibilities and spectral functions to study
the onset of quantum chaos in 2D lattice systems. They will also study the
properties of eigenstates of integrable and nonintegrable models with SU(2)
symmetry, as well as far from equilibrium dynamics in those models. The latter
studies will characterize the entanglement entropy and eigenstate thermalization
(lack thereof) in the quantum-chaotic regime (at integrability). For the quantum
dynamics, the goal is to understand prethermalization when the SU(2) symmetry is
weakly broken, and the far-from-equilibrium dynamics of specially engineered
initial states with support in exponentially small Hilbert space sectors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.