* 2309361
* PM: Cold Radioactive Molecules for Precision Measurements.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nicholas Hutzler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 643,068.00

The fact that the Universe is made from matter, yet contains no anti-matter, is
a mystery. Nobody knows which physical process was responsible for generation of
matter in the early Universe, but we do know that it can manifest itself in some
unusual ways. One way is by modifying the electromagnetic properties of nuclei,
which can be studied precisely in a table-top setting using laser-controlled and
atoms and molecules. Some nuclei are more sensitive than others to these
effects, and it has been known for decades that polar molecules containing
certain heavy, unstable nuclei in the last row of the periodic table amplify the
effects of this new physics by around a million times compared to current state-
of-the-art experiments. However, these gains remain unrealized; the complexity
of even the simplest molecule, combined with the limited amounts of unstable
nuclei which can be obtained and handled in the laboratory, made this research
very challenging. Indeed, the first precise laser-based measurement of any
radioactive molecule was first performed a few years ago. For this present
study, the PI will lead a team of students to develop and demonstrate a new
method to synthesize, cool, and precisely study the structure and properties of
molecules containing radium – one of the nuclei with the highest sensitivity to
new fundamental physics. The research team will combine laser-driven chemical
reactions, cryogenic helium gas cooling, and new approaches to precision
spectroscopy to study polyatomic radium-containing molecules, whose chemical
structures are tuned to enable advanced quantum control to study these exotic
nuclei. Furthermore, the method will be widely applicable to molecules
containing unstable or rare nuclei for studies in nuclear structure,
radiochemistry, and nuclear astrophysics.

Molecules containing heavy, octupole-deformed nuclei, such as radium, offer
extreme enhancement of hadronic CP-violation. The combination of the
intermolecular electromagnetic environment and the shape deformation of the
nucleus result in around a million-fold enhancement in sensitivity to CP-
violating nuclear Schiff moments compared to state-of-the-art experiments using
atoms with spherical nuclei. Furthermore, many radium-containing molecules are
predicted to be laser-coolable, meaning that they offer an avenue to advanced
quantum control for highly sensitive measurements. However, the difficulty of
working with these species has stifled their study; indeed, only in the last few
years has precision spectroscopy been performed on any short-lived radioactive
molecular species. The goal of this research program is to synthesize, cool, and
spectroscopically study radium-containing polyatomic molecules, including RaOH,
by combining laser-driven chemical synthesis, cryogenic buffer gas cooling, and
new approaches to both broadband and narrowband spectroscopy with very small
quantities of material. The method will produce molecules which are rotationally
and translationally cooled to around 4 K in a static buffer gas cell, thereby
placing them at a starting point for spectroscopy, laser cooling, and precision
measurements. Furthermore, the methods will be very general, and can be applied
to a wide variety of molecules containing exotic nuclei or otherwise available
only in trace amounts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.