* 2309376
* Preparing Hamiltonians for Quantum Simulation: A Computational Framework for Cartan Decomposition via Lax Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Moody Chu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,999.00

The juxtaposition of Feynman's conjecture that, “if we could build a quantum
simulator at our disposal, composed of spin-½ particles that we could manipulate
at will, then we would be able to engineer the interaction between those
particles according to the one we want to simulate, and thus predict the value
of physical quantities by simply performing the appropriate measurements on the
quantum simulator,” and Lloyd's article in Science affirming that, “quantum
computers can be programmed to simulate any local quantum system,” evinces the
profound gravity of the Hamiltonian simulation problem and its applications. To
prepare for such a simulation, it is essential to convert the unitary operators
described mathematically to the unitary operators recognizable as quantum
circuits, yet most current techniques are prone to approximation errors which
affect the simulation authenticity. This project tackles the difficulties from
an innovative avenue of the Cartan decomposition via the Lax dynamics. Not only
is this process numerically feasible, but also produces a genuine unitary
synthesis that is optimal in both the precision and the usage of minimally
required synthesis components. This project aims to establish theoretic and
algorithmic foundations and develop numerical methods. Upon completion, the
theory and the experiments are expected to find applicability extending from
quantum simulation to other areas such as gauging the quality of other
approaches or evaluating the robustness of a given system. The gains from this
work will solidify the many studies under one standard framework. Preliminary
results show promising potential of this project. Training of at least one
graduate student on the topics of the project is expected.

To simulate the time evolution of a quantum system on a classical computer is
hard - The computational power required to even describe a quantum system scales
exponentially with the number of its constituents, let alone integrate its
equations of motion. Hamiltonian simulation on a quantum machine is a possible
solution to this challenge - Assuming that a quantum system composing of spin-½
particles can be manipulated at will, then it is tenable to engineer the
interaction between those particles according to the one that is to be
simulated, and thus predict the value of physical quantities by simply
performing the appropriate measurements on the system. Establishing a linkage
between the unitary operators described mathematically as a logic solution and
the unitary operators recognizable as quantum circuits for execution is
therefore essential for algorithm design and circuit implementation. Most
current techniques are prone to approximation errors. This project is to tackle
the Cartan decomposition via the notion of Lax dynamics, which not only is
numerically feasible, but also produces a genuine unitary synthesis that is
optimal in both the precision with controllable integration errors and the usage
of only minimally required synthesis components. This project aims at
establishing theoretic and algorithmic foundations of the goals: 1) exploit the
geometric properties of Hamiltonian subalgebras; 2) describe a common mechanism
for deriving the Lax dynamics; 3) develop a decomposition-based quantum
algorithm; and 4) experiment the algorithm on the IBM Quantum Hub systems. Six
specific tasks will be undertaken to derive the theory and numerical methods to
reach these goals. Upon completion, the theory and the experiments are expected
to find applicability extending from quantum simulation to many-body problem,
and to various research endeavors in quantum information science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.