* 2309431
* In-situ and ex-situ STEM study of non-conventional line defects in perovskite oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Andre Mkhoyan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2027
* USD 495,872.00

Non-Technical Summary The nanoscale materials present in electronic devices used
every day should be engineered to make the devices smaller and increase their
functions. To do this, new ways to harvest the properties of these materials
should be found. One route is engineering atomic-level defects naturally present
in these nanomaterials. While all crystalline nanomaterials have variety of
defects in them, some defects are more promising than others. One dimensional
defects, often referred to as line defects, are only a-few-atoms-wide and run
along the entire crystal. This is an excellent opportunity to engineer them to
get the properties wanted. Since they are only a-few-atoms-wide, they are
intriguing objects embedded inside the main material, and they can have new and
exciting properties that are unique to them. Study of these line defects
requires ultra-high-resolution microscopes with features that can probe the
properties of these defects. This project employs specialized analytical
scanning transmission electron microscopes to study the identities, properties,
and origins of these line defects. Combining these observations with theoretical
predictions will provide additional flexibility when characterizing the defects.
Perovskite oxide thin films have proven to be excellent hosts for such defects.
The results will affect not only the science of defects in perovskite crystals,
but also affect next-generation nanomaterial engineering by defect engineering.
Within the framework of this project, high-school students will visit the
University of Minnesota to have interactive tours of the Electron Microscopy
Center at the Characterization Facility and see high-resolution electron
microscopes in action. This outreach educational activity will be an academic-
year-long program. Each year, groups of students and teachers from local high
schools will participate in these tours, including schools with a considerable
minority student population. Such a real-time dive into the structure of the
materials and the operations of advanced electron microscopes should inspire
students to pursue technical disciplines in college. It should also help
teachers better convey to their students the science behind nanomaterials and
microscopes using images obtained during their University of Minnesota visit.
Technical Summary Advances over the past two decades have shown large numbers of
materials can be scientifically exciting and technologically desirable when they
have dimensions at the nanometer scale. Discoveries of new phenomena unique to
nanoscale materials are being made almost daily, ranging from new physics—such
as quantum transport of qubits in semiconductor nanowires or tetradymite
chalcogenides being topological insulators—to new applications. Identifying the
next frontiers in nanomaterials becomes more-and-more relevant. A new path for
exciting new science and next-generation technology is possible through
exploring and engineering the naturally-occurring defects in nanoscale
materials, especially extended defects. These extended line (or 1D, dislocations
and disclination, etc.) and planar (or 2D, grain boundaries, stacking faults,
etc.) defects are particularly promising because they run across the entire
crystal in one or two directions and are atomically small in other directions.
Among them, line defects are only a-few-atoms-wide in two directions and
extended in the third direction. With such natural geometry, it is expected that
the properties of 1D defects should resemble a chain of atoms or a chain of
single-unit cells. These defects should be rich with new physics and new quantum
materials’ phenomena not seen in 2D materials. Nanostructures containing them
could take advantage of both the features of the defect and the host. The study
of new defects – understanding their properties and engineering them into new
structures – is the main topic of this project, and it could be what is next in
nanomaterials. Determining the effects of key factors (such as composition,
strain, and temperature) on formation of line defects and their rearrangements
in perovskite oxides are central aims of this work. Perovskite oxides (ABO3),
are highly flexible and can accommodate various types of distortions, due to
their complex structure. Such structural flexibility allows the perovskite host
to accommodate unique extended defects, including those of different
compositions. Thus, exploring such non-conventional defects in perovskite oxides
has the potential to be extremely fruitful, largely expand the fundamental
science of ceramic crystals, and transform next-generation nanomaterials. This
study of non-conventional 1D line defects in perovskite oxides will be conducted
ex-situ and in-situ using atomic-resolution, analytical scanning transmission
electron microscopy (STEM) aided by density function tehroy (DFT) calculations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.