* 2309031
* STTR Phase I:  Multifunctional Lipid Nanoparticle Delivery System for Targeted Delivery of Vascular RNA Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Deidra Mountain, ORION THERAPEUTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is that the proposed delivery system will
advance many RNA therapeutic solutions to address intimal hyperplasia (IH) and
other vascular conditions. Vascular disease is the most common disease pathology
in the US, costing the countryâ€™s healthcare system over $437 billion dollars
annually. Because vascular interventions have limited long-term success, there
is a critical need for effective therapeutics, including to address the
condition of IH which, post intervention, can lead to restenosis, or artery
narrowing. By delivering therapeutics safely and efficaciously to specific
tissues, the proposed technology will result in improved quality of life and
decreased morbidity and, in combination with a Contact Research Organization
business model, will contribute to the advancement of a multitude of RNA
therapeutics targeting the vascular system and eventually other areas of the
body. Eventually, the platform will contribute to the development and
commercialization of a broad range of RNA drugs, creating jobs in science,
sales, and manufacturing. This project will lead to improvements in the
treatment of a variety of diseases and conditions that currently lack effective
therapy, resulting in improved quality of life and decreased morbidity in the
broader society.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a novel multifunctional lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery system for tissue-
specific targeted delivery of RNA therapeutics to the vascular system. Intimal
hyperplasia (IH), a condition triggered by mechanical injury to blood vessels,
causes artery thickening in ~ 60% of peripheral vascular disease patients 12
months post-intervention. IH often results in the need for additional surgical
intervention with associated costs and increased patient morbidity and
mortality. This project will focus on inhibiting the remodeling pathways that
lead to IH via RNA therapeutics delivered directly to the injury site. The
project will develop vascular targeting liposomes designed to exhibit
multifunctional potential to target exposed collagen matrices specific to areas
of vascular pathology and enhanced targeted vascular uptake/delivery. Phase I
will advance the LNP technology by showing that an active therapeutic
encapsulated by the system is appropriately delivered and results in a
clinically relevant drug concentration. If successful at delivering bioactive
RNA payloads to injured vascular tissues, the technology will reduce the risk of
post-intervention complications and reduce the need for revascularization.
Ultimately, this novel LNP packaging and delivery system will provide a new tool
for advancing a broad range of RNA therapeutics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.