* 2309542
* CoCoA: Cold Cores with the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA)
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Thushara Pillai, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 228,609.00

Understanding star formation is one of the most fundamental problems in
astrophysics. Most of the stars in the Universe form in dense clusters. Low-mass
stars, like our own Sun, are much more commonly formed in star clusters. High-
mass stars, that are at least eight-times more massive than the Sun, on the
other hand, are very rare. High mass stars live a short, but very bright, life
characterized by their strong stellar winds, and sometimes a death in supernovae
explosions. The investigators will test models that high-mass stars originate in
"cores" where many solar masses of dense gas are concentrated into a small
volume. In the investigator’s CoCoA project, they surveyed these high-mass cores
with NSF’s Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) observatory. The
investigator will test predictions that high-mass are born in cold high-mass
cores that are very turbulent. An international team of collaborators, that
includes observers as well as theorists, will support this work. Custom-made
numerical simulations will be used to study source properties in detail. Some of
the analysis tools will be transformed into simple high-school level experiments
that will be introduced to students via a local community center. The
investigator seeks to introduce the scientific process to minority students.

The CoCoA project has performed a systematic search for the earliest phase of
high-mass star formation that builds on the ATLASGAL survey at 870 mu wavelength
that covers the entire inner Galactic plane. The clumps extracted for the survey
are massive, dense, and devoid of infrared sources up to 70 mu wavelengths.
Using sensitive high-resolution ALMA data towards all potential candidate
starless high-mass clumps within 5 kpc, CoCoA will reveal if there are any high-
mass cores embedded within these clumps. The investigators will deliver
information on the internal density and temperature structure of high-mass
cores, and robust constraints on the lifetimes of the elusive early phase of
high-mass star formation, at an unprecedented level of detail. This will involve
detailed studies of the fragmentation properties of the high-mass clumps. The
ALMA-based dust polarization data for a small sub-sample will tell us whether
magnetic fields play any role in the early phase of high-mass star formation. In
summary, the synthesis of this massive dataset will place stringent constraints
on the existing theories on high-mass star formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.