* 2309333
* Upcycling Plastic Waste into Graphitic Carbon - Identifying the Roles of Oxygen Content and sp2 Extent in Graphene Forms: Complementary Tests with LDPE and PET
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Randy Vander Wal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 384,439.00

The proposed study seeks to upcycle consumer plastic waste into high value
graphitic carbons for electric vehicles and renewable energy storage. Presently,
petroleum and coal are the precursors for graphitic carbons used in Li-ion
batteries. These sources are non-renewable and require substantial energy input
for their processing. This research program will test the hypothesis that
plastic waste constitutes a high-quality feedstock for graphene given its higher
purity and uniformity compared to natural graphite. Upcycling waste plastic into
high-value graphitic carbons will lead to improved recycling economics,
increased recycling infrastructure investment, and growth of the recycling
workforce while reducing greenhouse gas emissions and raising public awareness
for recycling. This upcycling approach recovers the embodied energy cost of the
plastic materials while trapping the carbon as a solid. As a new “resource,”
plastic waste would eliminate petroleum and coal as feedstocks and displace
mining for natural graphite. Upcycling plastic waste could transform the
plastics recycling economy and thereby reduce plastic pollution, contributing to
sustainability and adding a new path to a circular carbon economy. Outreach
efforts include a) increasing diversity by summer internships for women in
science and engineering research, b) promoting K-12 STEM through one-week
science camps; and c) after-school events along with d) public dissemination via
YouTube videos.

The proposed study seeks to upcycle consumer plastic waste into high value
graphitic carbons for electric vehicles and renewable energy storage. Low- and
high-density polyethylene (LDPE, HDPE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
bracket the challenges of forming graphitic carbons from varied waste plastic
feedstocks: high aliphatic (hydrogen) content (LDPE) and high oxygen content
(PET). It is hypothesized that oxygen groups on graphene oxide (GO) can act as a
substitute for the stabilization process required to promote carbonization over
cracking reactions, while the 2D graphene sheet promotes ordered development of
aromatic clusters during graphitization. Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) will
be used as a measure of stabilization effectiveness. Raman spectroscopy will
quantify graphene lateral spacing La across the carbonization temperature range
along with amorphous and molecular content to track carbonization progress.
Polarized light microscopy (PLM) will visualize pre-graphitic domains,
quantified by image analysis to be developed in this project. Wide angle X-ray
scattering will gauge aromatic domain growth at pre-graphitic (pre-crystalline)
stages. Upon emergence of graphitic structure, standard X-ray diffraction (XRD)
will be used to determine crystal lattice parameters d002, La, Lc and
graphitization index g. A sequence of experiments will be conducted to
collectively characterize the level of graphitization with GO oxygen content and
graphene (GR) sp2 area and peripheral length, to validate reactive force field
(ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulations. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) will provide localized measures of
graphitic quality and microscopic uniformity at the nanoscale. Electrical
conductivity will assess crystallite connectedness via impedance spectroscopy
using a Randall circuit model. A potential implication of the GO stabilizer is
that the rate of graphitization will increase, thereby realizing energy savings
and CO2 reduction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.