* 2309906
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Misinformation on the Covid-19 Response in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Emily Maxwell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 21,003.00

Though a small body of prior research on health misinformation exists, there is
a pressing need to gain a better understanding of how to detect, monitor and
understand misinformation and its impact on population health during
emergencies. This qualitative study investigates the role of misinformation in
Alaska’s response to Covid-19 using systems mapping and data gathered from semi-
structured interviews. The project takes a One Health approach, documenting
perspectives of public health officials and healthcare providers on
misinformation.

The field of infodemiology investigates the determinants and distribution of
health misinformation and its effects on public and individual health. This
research investigates qualitative impacts of misinformation on individuals,
private entities, and public agencies in Alaska using the OH-SMART (One Health
Systems Mapping and Analysis Resource Toolkit) framework. Methods include semi-
structured interviews and snowball sampling of public health personnel and
healthcare providers. Project results will be disseminated via a dissertation,
peer-reviewed journal articles, and conference presentations. The co-PI also
plans to engage the public via social media and to develop a digital dashboard.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.