* 2309547
* Collaborative Research: Accurate and Structure-Preserving Numerical Schemes for Variable Temperature Phase Field Models and Efficient Solvers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Steven Wise, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 213,743.00

The project aims to design and study highly efficient, positivity-preserving,
and entropy-stable numerical schemes for variable-temperature phase field
equations with singular energy potentials. The research will provide an
understanding of two-phase flows and phase separation in battery systems and
other energy devices where temperature variation would be significant, affecting
the performance and durability of the systems. The project will enhance graduate
student training through cutting-edge training opportunities in scientific
computing, modeling, and numerical analysis. The research will provide
opportunities to increase participation from underrepresented groups in STEM and
enhance the emerging interdisciplinary graduate program. The results will be
disseminated through a monograph, and the algorithms and software will be freely
available to the public.

In more detail, the project will develop numerical schemes addressing three
important properties by design: positivity-preserving, energy/entropy stability,
and unconditionally unique solvability. For the variable-temperature models
studied herein – namely, gradient flows with singular potentials – positivity is
an important and nontrivial issue for both theoretical and numerical analyses.
This research will provide theoretical numerical analysis alongside of model
building for a comprehensive class of variable-temperature phase field models.
The project will be the first attempt to prove the convergence of any numerical
scheme for the model systems. The numerical methods will be applicable in large-
scale, multi-discipline, multi-physics scientific simulations. The algorithms
and software will impact research in several areas, including atomic-scale phase
transitions, complex biological growth and cancer, and multi-phase ionic fluids
used in energy storage/conversion. The concept of preconditioning, which is
vital for nonlinear scientific problems, will potentially form a new frontier in
data science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.