* 2309935
* Conference: The First International Symposium on Integrated Magnetics (iSIM-1)
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Nian Sun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2024
* USD 15,000.00

With the rapid progress in the research and development of magnetic materials,
devices, and microsystems for sensors, memories, power, radio frequency,
microwave, and millimeter wave electronics, there are great new opportunities
for integrated magnetics in IoT, 5G, smartphones, etc. The iSIM (International
Symposium on Integrated Magnetics) series are started to serve the fast-growing
needs of the IEEE Magnetics Society to reach out to other IEEE societies and
industries and bring the science and technology on magnetics to the market and
the public. The iSIM will foster scientific discussion and catalyze innovation
and partnerships to significantly enhance our understanding of the challenges
and potential solutions to integrating magnetic materials on Si substrates and
PCBs (print circuit boards). The iSIM-1, and the future annual iSIM symposiums,
will call attention to the IEEE Magnetics Society and the public on the topics
of integrated magnetics. Integrated magnetics is a key topic for semiconductor
technologies, well aligned with The CHIPS and Science Act, a national strategic
and historic investment to surge production of American-made semiconductors,
tackle supply chain vulnerabilities to make more goods in America, revitalize
America’s scientific research and technological leadership, and strengthens
America’s economic and national security at home and abroad.

Magnetic materials on Si and on PCBs, if realized, can lead to magnetic
inductors and transformers on-chip or in package with significantly reduced
sizes and costs, and improved performance. Despite the significant progress of
research on magnetic materials and devices, integrated magnetic inductors and
transformers have not been applied on commercial RFICs (radio frequency
integrated circuits), and rarely on power integrated circuits. Surface mount
discrete components are widely used in power management circuits and RFICs,
leading to significant costs and sizes, etc. There is a critical need for a
symposium on integrated magnetics such as iSIM. The proposed iSIM-1 will be the
first satellite symposium being organized for May 14-15, 2023, in conjunction
with the IEEE International Magnetics Conference (INTERMAG) 2023 in Sendai,
Japan, being held from May 15 ~ 19, 2023. INTERMAG is the premier international
conference on fundamental and applied magnetism but has limited bandwidth to
cover topics on integrated magnetics. The iSIM-1 will be at the same venue as
the INTERMAG 2023, with focused coverage on topics for integrated magnetics for
power supply on chip (PWRSOC), power supply in package (PWRSIP), RFICs, on-chip
magnetic sensors, flexible magnetic electronics, magnetic memory, etc. It is
expected that the iSIM will be held continuously every year as a satellite
symposium of the future INTERMAG conferences. A key output of iSIM-1 will be
high-impact, multi-disciplinary position papers with direct implications for
integrated magnetics. The iSIM-1 will foster discussion and identify innovations
for the next frontier of magnetic materials and devices for integrated circuits,
on-chip magnetic sensors, flexible magnetic electronics, magnetic memory, etc.
At the same time, iSIM-1 will provide ample training opportunities for U.S.
nationals with a focus on underrepresented groups, including women and minority
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.