* 2309225
* Sensors for Low-Frequency Improvements in Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

This award will support research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics,
and it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational waves have recently become a new way that humanity can observe the
Universe. The NSF's LIGO observatories in Louisiana and Washington State are on
the forefront of this new frontier of astronomy. This award will develop novel
instrumentation that will improve the robustness and sensitivity of the LIGO
observatories. Specifically, this award will further the development of novel
seismic sensors, precision alignment technologies, and gravitational calibration
systems. The development of these technologies impacts a wide array of
tangential fields including seismic imaging, absolute metrology, and earthquake
early warning. With the improvements developed by this award and the future
observations that they will allow, the LIGO observatories will continue to
further the knowledge of the fundamental laws of the Universe, explore the
birthplaces of the elements, and illuminate the cosmic history of the universe.
Additionally, this award will support the education of both undergraduate and
graduate students as they conduct research within one of the world's leading
scientific collaborations.

This award will support the continued development of a variety of novel
instrumentation for the LIGO gravitational wave observatories. Specifically,
broadband inertial rotation sensors, gravitational calibration systems, and
optical alignment techniques. To operate on the surface of the Earth, the LIGO
observatories employ a series of 6-degree seismic isolation platforms that are
currently limited by their rotational noise. This award will continue the
development of compact, vacuum compatible rotation sensors that reach picoradian
sensitivity. These sensors are expected to yield significant improvements to the
robustness and sensitivity of the LIGO observatories, especially below 20 Hz. To
accurately interpret the gravitational wave events seen by LIGO, the
observatories need to be well calibrated. This award will further the
investigation of gravitational calibration systems that currently reach 1%
absolute precision and are expected to reach 0.1% precision with future
upgrades. Finally, LIGO employs a set of optical levers to align the various
optics within the observatory. These have been known to be glitchy and do not
meet their desired performance. Research into improvements to the existing
optical levers and future upgrades will be supported by this award. All three of
these projects will be conducted at the University of Washington in close
collaboration with the LIGO observatories. The improvements to the observatories
will be pursued once the instrumentation is developed and the observing schedule
permits. The group expects to make significant contributions in the next round
of observatory upgrades which will provide improved sensitivity and robustness
for all future LIGO observing runs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.