* 2309530
* Adaptive Hybrid Method for Radiative Transfer and Related Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* YIMIN ZHONG, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 209,173.00

The overall purpose of this project is to develop new directions of scientific
computing for photon-based imaging applications by bringing the advantages of
existing numerical methods. The commonly used model for these applications (e.g.
biomedical imaging, clinical radiotherapy treatment planning, security scan) is
known as the radiative transport equation (RTE). Computationally, finding an
accurate solution to RTE is very challenging due to its high dimensionality.
Although many studies and developments of numerical methods solving RTE are
based on differential formulation, the methods that are based on integral
formulation are not fully understood. In this project, the investigator focuses
on developing efficient computational tools based on the adaptive hybrid
formulation by combining the advantages of both differential and integral
formulations. The algorithm will benefit a broad class of forward and inverse
problems. It could also be extended to various applications based on nonlocal
PDE models. The proposed methods will benefit biomedical imaging, national
security, and biofuel development. The developed mathematical tools and
computational algorithms will be disseminated broadly to advance scientific and
technological progress in these areas. Education and training plans at multiple
levels will be provided for future researchers in computational mathematics and
related interdisciplinary areas. Supervised research projects and seminars
related to this proposed research will be available to junior/senior
undergraduates and graduate students. The investigator aims to recruit
underrepresented and minority groups to participate in the project by providing
them with more opportunities and possibilities. This project is jointly funded
by the Computational Mathematics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The project will start with the integral formulation of RTE to derive and
analyze the adaptive hybrid numerical algorithm for it. The analysis will help
to determine a balanced combination of short-range differential and long-range
integral operators. Computationally, an efficient approximation of the hybrid
formulation covering both short and long range interactions that could be a
suitable preconditioner for RTE will be developed. Rigorous analysis and fast
numerical reconstruction algorithms based on the adaptive hybrid formulation
will be investigated for nuclear resonance fluorescence imaging, fluorescent
lifetime imaging, RTE identification, and phototaxis navigation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.