* 2309446
* Collaborative Research: Elements: A Cyberlaboratory for Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Maldonado, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Modern scientific and engineering computations require processing data at speeds
and scales that overwhelm traditional linear algebra algorithms, which creates a
substantial bottleneck in solving cutting-edge scientific and engineering
problems. To overcome this challenge, linear algebra algorithms are being
augmented with randomization to compress input data, a technique that has shown
tremendous promise in theory. Unfortunately, these theoretical advances have not
transformed into practical implementations because of a lack of a
cyberinfrastructure that enables rapid and reproducible prototyping of such
algorithms. To address this deficit, this project creates an innovative
cyberinfrastructure to enable rapid implementation and reproducible comparison
of these randomized linear algebra algorithms. Additionally, this project
enables easily testing randomized linear algebra algorithms in scientific
computations prior to expensive software development. Thus, this project is
poised to support the solution of cutting-edge computational science and
engineering problems. Moreover, this project utilizes the cyberinfrastructure to
deliver publicly accessible educational modules on randomized linear algebra
theory and implementation.

This project develops a cyberinfrastructure for randomized algorithms with a
focus on algorithms for linear algebra problems. This project maps our
innovative theoretical modularization of randomized linear algebra algorithms to
computational kernels, which can be readily composed and extended to rapidly
develop novel, tailored methods for specific scientific computations. Moreover,
this cyberinfrastructure includes a framework for reproducibly testing
algorithms, and enables benchmarking codes prior to deployment. This
cyberinfrastructure demonstrates its power by directly addressing cutting-edge
data problems in climate applications. The project emphasizes best scientific
software practices to develop a sustainable, community-engaging and impactful
cyberinfrastructure.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.