* 2309073
* CRCNS Research Proposal: A Unified Framework for Unsupervised Sparse-to-dense Brain Image Generation and Neural Circuit Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Dawen Cai, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2028
* USD 740,000.00

Understanding how information is processed and propagated in neural circuits in
the brain, requires the connections among extremely large numbers of densely
packed, intermingled neurons to be accurately mapped out. Despite the century-
long effort to map brain circuits, dissection of these complex networks remains
technically challenging and time-consuming. This project builds on recent
advances in genetic, imaging, and computational methods to develop a unified
framework for reliable reconstruction of genetically identified neurons and
their connections at single-neuron resolution from 3D image data. The resulting
computational methods will be applicable to a wide range of problems in
biological and biomedical image analysis.

The technical aims of the project are divided into four thrusts. The first
thrust generates a large number of super-resolution three dimensional (3D)
images of whole Drosophila brains, in each of which connected neurons are
labeled by multispectral trans-Tango/Bitbow labeling. The second thrust creates
computer vision and unsupervised machine learning algorithms to generate
neuronal tracing, and software to aid efficient human proofreading and error
correction. This will allow the generation of gold-standard neuronal tracing and
segmentation from relatively sparse Brainbow labeling as training inputs. The
third thrust creates a generative machine learning model to create realistic
Bitbow neurons and synthesize images with various labeling densities based on
the sparse annotation training inputs. The fourth thrust develops an annotation
machine learning model to reconstruct the densely labeled trans-Tango/Bitbow
Drosophila brains with the machine-learning-generated Bitbow images and their
corresponding ground truth annotations as training inputs. Together, these
efforts form a novel computational framework to enable accurate automatic
reconstruction of densely labeled neural circuits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.