* 2309670
* Conservative discontinuous Galerkin methods with implicit penalty parameters and multiscale hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods for PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Bo Dong, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2026
* USD 365,401.00

This project concentrates on the development of novel computational methods for
efficiently solving problems that have conserved physical properties or highly
oscillatory wave solutions. The new conservative methods can preserve physically
interested quantities and allow accurate and stable simulations over a long time
period. They will be useful for applications in various fields, such as fluid
dynamics, nonlinear optics, plasma physics, and Bose-Einstein condensates. The
new multiscale methods can accurately and efficiently capture highly oscillatory
wave solutions. They will have a positive impact in the study of quantum
mechanics and great potential in application to the design of ultrafast and low
consumption nanoscale electronic devices. The methods developed in the project
will help people understand theoretically unresolved issues and provide new
frameworks for devising competitive numerical algorithms for solving other
complex problems. The project will also involve mentoring and training of
undergraduate and graduate students, including the traditionally
underrepresented groups. It will provide students great opportunities to
integrate research into their educational experience.

The project includes the following topics: (1) in-depth investigation of the
novel conservative discontinuous Galerkin (DG) method with implicit penalty
parameters for the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation, (2) development of
conservative DG methods via implicit penalization for more complicated wave
models with conservation properties, including the Hirota-Satsuma coupled KdV
system, the Schrodinger-KdV system, the abcd-Boussinesq system, and the two-
dimensional Zakharov-Kuznetsov (ZK) equation and Kadomtsev-Petviashvili (KP)
equation, (3) design, analysis, and implementation of hybridizable discontinuous
Galerkin (HDG) methods with multiscale basis for efficiently capturing highly
oscillatory solutions of Schrodinger equations on coarse meshes. The novel idea
in the first two topics is to enforce conservation properties via implicit
penalization, and this can be generalized to other types of problems that
feature conservation of physical quantities. The methods in the third topic
integrate the efficient HDG framework and the multiscale non-polynomial basis
functions, which makes them perform better than traditional finite element
methods for Schrodinger equations on both coarse meshes and fine meshes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.