* 2309207
* Multi-Physics of Elastomer Aging: Macrostructure Mechanical Properties based on Morphological Chemical Degenerations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Maryam Shakiba, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 116,903.00

Elastomers, often commonly referred to as rubbers, have a wide range of
applications as bearings, sealants, tires, and anti-vibration mountings. Under
such operation, elastomers are exposed to oxygen and elevated temperature, in
addition to cyclic mechanical loading. Oxygen and temperature heavily degrade
the materials' properties. This degradation is known as aging and induces
brittle, shrunken, and aggravated surfaces. The aging process, coupled with
mechanical loading, intensifies crack propagation in elastomers and reduces
their serviceability. Experimental testing of aging is, necessarily, a time-
consuming process. Having a theoretical framework that can be used for
simulations will tremendously speed up the development of new, exciting, and
reliable materials with a broader range of applications. This work will
elucidate how the mechanical response of elastomers changes over their lifetime
under the coupled effects of mechanical loading and aging. This research will
advance the scientific knowledge of degradation effects on durability of
elastomers. The development cycle of the project consists of experimental work,
followed by modeling, simulation, and back to experimental verification. This
combined approach, which is an ideal illustration of the scientific method, will
be used for outreach to K-12 and minority students through university programs.
This research will also train a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students in this interdisciplinary field, forming the next generation of
scientists that the U.S. elastomer industry critically needs to compete
globally.

To characterize the evolution of the deformation response and failure mechanism
of elastomers under thermo-chemo-mechanical aging processes, this project
outlines a series of interconnected experimental, theoretical, and numerical
studies of the chemical, morphological, and mechanical changes. In the first
stage of work, the aggravation of macrostructural mechanical properties of
elastomers will be experimentally linked to their morphological changes (such as
cross-link breakage/formation, and transformation of linkages). The second stage
of the project will develop a mathematically verifiable procedure for
incorporating stored and dissipated energies - obtained in chemical experiments
- into the thermodynamic formalism. In the third stage, the project seeks to
understand the effects of heterogeneous aging degradation on the mechanical
response of elastomers. Numerical simulations of the constitutive equations will
be used to verify the model against further experimental studies. The to-be-
obtained knowledge and to-be-developed theoretical framework will lead to highly
coupled physics-based models which map the elastomers' macrostructural behavior
and failure mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.