* 2309442
* Biomechanics of the Swimming and Chemotaxis of the Leptospiraceae
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Charles Wolgemuth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2026
* USD 587,130.00

This award will support research that will improve our understanding of physical
aspects of bacteria. Specifically, this work will focus on the bacterium
Leptospira interrogans, which is highly invasive. Relatives of this bacterium
cause diseases such as Lyme disease and syphilis. This work will explore how
specific proteins in the bacterium influence its physical structure and
movement, how the bacterium interacts with mammalian-like tissues, and how the
bacterium controls its ability to navigate through its hosts. The results of
this work will reveal why this bacterium is so efficient at invading mammals and
creating infections in them. This work is interdisciplinary, and will use
techniques from physics, microbiology, cellular biology, bioengineering, and
mathematics. Insights gained from this work will provide new information about
the disease processes of this bacterium and related species and may eventually
lead to novel therapeutics. The interdisciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups and will be used as an outreach
opportunity for lower socio-economic K-12 students at schools in the Tucson
area.

Spirochete bacteria are long and thin and can propel themselves through fluids
and tissues with surprising ease. This motility is driven by internal helical
flagella that rotate in between the cell wall and the outer membrane. While past
research elucidated some basic mechanisms of spirochete motility, many questions
remain elusive. This research examines the bacterium that causes leptospirosis
as it has a single flagellum at either end of the cell, thereby allowing direct
analysis of the direction of rotation of the flagella and how it is impacted by
different alterations and perturbations, while also providing a comparative
analysis for previous work that has been done on the Lyme disease spirochete.
Specifically, this research will assess the specific role of biophysical
parameters and proteins on motility, determine the effect of external
environment on movement, and determine whether mechanical cues are involved in
chemotaxis. The research will use live cell imaging, optical trapping and other
micromanipulation techniques, and computational modeling to explore the general
hypothesis that biophysical interactions between the flagella and cell body are
a crucial aspect of this bacterium’s ability to invade and infect mammalian
hosts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.