* 2309080
* Precision Spectroscopy with Single Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* David Patterson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 472,456.00

We learn a great deal about the structure and quantum mechanical nature of
molecules by studying how they absorb and emit light (spectroscopy). Almost all
spectroscopy is done on samples containing many molecules. These large samples
give large signals, but they come with a disadvantage - everything that is
measured is actually an average value of the sample. For example, some molecules
are moving fast, some are moving slowly, some are spinning, and so on. This
variety limits the precision with which the molecules can be measured. In this
work, the research team of undergraduate and graduate students and the principal
investigator will use new, very sensitive techniques which can measure single
molecules. The team will measure these single molecules very precisely - in
fact, these measurements will be the most precise measurements ever made of
molecules that are composed of more than two atoms. This precision will, in the
future, allow scientists to use such molecules to search for new physics beyond
that envisioned in our current theories. This research provides challenging,
hands-on research projects for graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of California, Santa Barbara.

Action spectroscopy is a versatile technique capable of measuring the
vibrational spectra of molecular ions. A new, powerful version of action
spectroscopy, leak out spectroscopy, has recently been demonstrated on ensembles
of molecules at temperatures of ~10 K. This method has yielded Doppler-limited
vibrational spectra with resolution of about 100 MHz. The research team at the
University of California, Santa Barbara will extend this technique, first into
the single molecule regime at millikelvin temperatures, and then to the Lamb-
Dicke regime, which exhibits no first order Doppler shift. This will give a
resolution in the kHz regime, and will for the first time enable high-precision
spectroscopy of a broad range of polyatomic molecular ions, including chiral
molecular ions. The technique has applications in searches for new physics and
nano-analytic chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.