* 2309037
* Illinois Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (I-MRSEC)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Harley Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:

The Illinois Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (I-MRSEC) has a
mission to perform fundamental, innovative research that supports technological
applications in areas of societal need, while promoting interdisciplinary
materials-focused education and training of students. The work of the Center is
carried out by two interdisciplinary groups, and is broadly centered on
controlling how charged particles, specifically electrons and ions, flow in
materials, which is essential for developing next generation advancements in
information storage and processing and energy technologies. The research in the
first group helps to advance microelectronics. The work focuses on using
deformation fields -- so-called strainscapes -- in two-dimensional (2D) and thin
film materials, to control the motion of electrons. The research in the second
group contributes to the design of new battery materials. The focus of the work
is to use light to control the flow of ions in materials, a phenomenon called
photo-ionics. The Center supports new types of shared facilities for materials
synthesis, measurement, and analysis. The Center also supports an educational
program, focusing on K-12 outreach, which promotes materials knowledge for
populations traditionally underrepresented in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM). There is a special focus on mentoring Center
participants at all levels, from undergraduate students to faculty, in order to
foster retention in STEM courses and fields. The activities in the Center are
designed to achieve diversity in participation that is well above nationwide
averages for STEM fields, helping to promote an expanded and more successful
STEM workforce.

Technical Abstract:

The research activity of the Illinois Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center is broadly centered on designing and controlling transport of electrons
and ions in materials. Directing Spin, Charge, and Energy with 2D Strainscapes
focuses on creating strain distributions in 2D materials and quasi-2D thin film
materials to access new materials systems whose symmetry, topology, and band
structure can be designed and patterned at the nanoscale. The goal is to achieve
multi-dimensional control over strainscapes, to include spatially heterogeneous
strain, strain gradient tensors, and heterostrain. This behavior couples to
superconductivity, topological phases, protected edge states, and spin textures,
and enables possible devices that direct energy and process information. Photo-
Ionics: Controlling Ion Transport and Defects with Light investigates mechanisms
by which light-excited electronic carriers interact with dynamic ion
configurations. By determining materials design principles for illumination-
induced changes in kinetic and thermodynamic parameters governing ion flux, the
work enables efficient, nanoscale control over ions with orders-of-magnitude
changes under illumination, and possible new electrochemical manufacturing, and
energy and information technologies. The research in the Center provides a
platform for broadening participation and promoting diversity through support
for recruiting and retention of participants traditionally underrepresented in
STEM. The Center emphasizes K-12 outreach and programs that support mentoring of
all center participants, from undergraduate students to faculty. As part of the
research programs in the Center, the work has broader technical impact by
supporting significant new shared facilities for materials science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.