* 2309174
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Modeling traveling waves in the human cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joshua Jacobs, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The human brain consists of a massive network of interconnected brain cells, and
an important unanswered question is to explain how these cells interact to
flexibly support different types of behaviors. In this project the principal
investigators (PIs) hypothesize that rhythmic waves of neuronal
activity—traveling waves—play an important role in allowing the brain to
flexibly reorganize and cause task-related activity to move to its proper
destination during behavior. This project will measure traveling waves from the
human brain directly, using electrodes surgically placed inside the brain in
collaboration with neurosurgeons performing clinical procedures. Further, using
these recordings, the PIs will create computational models of these waves to
test theories for how traveling waves move across the brain and how they change
direction in relation to different task behaviors. In addition to explaining the
fundamental mechanisms of traveling wave propagation, this work also has
practical implications for creating brain-computer interfaces and treating
diseases related to disrupted neuronal interactions. This research thus has
implications for improving human health by showing how traveling waves should be
structured in healthy individuals and demonstrating how they may not propagate
properly in people with brain disorders. The project is a collaboration between
Columbia University and the University of Pittsburgh and offers valuable
educational and outreach opportunities. Specifically, it offers training
opportunities in neuroscience methods for undergraduates and other trainees from
the New York City and Pittsburgh areas as well as an online monthly meeting
group for the discussion of scientific issues related to traveling waves, which
is fully open to all.

The goal of this project is to perform novel experiments and build computational
models to explain the functional properties and mechanisms of traveling waves in
the human cortex. Traveling patterns of neuronal oscillations are a widespread
but mysterious phenomenon in which neuronal oscillations propagate spatially
across the human cortex. The PIs hypothesize that traveling waves coordinate
information transmission across the brain such that their direction and timing
reveal where and when specific task-related information is processed along
large-scale brain regions. This project will create biologically plausible
computational models of how neural traveling waves are generated in the human
brain and iteratively refine these models by conducting parallel experiments in
human neurosurgical patients with implanted electrodes. These subjects will
perform realistic spatial memory and navigation paradigms and measure how
traveling waves propagate in different directions to support separate behaviors.
It will also create computational models to explain these task-related direction
shifts. The PIs will analyze how the timing of traveling waves relates to the
speed of memory retrieval in the experiments. Specifically, the PIs will create
​​computational models that simulate how the timing of traveling wave
propagation relates to the fidelity and speed of neural signal propagation
across the cortex. In this work, through close interaction between experiments
and theoretical modeling, the PIs will obtain a rigorous explanation of the
neural basis of traveling waves for high-level cognition and detailed types of
neural computation.

This award is being co-funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate (MPS) and Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) in the Directorate of Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.