* 2309396
* Discovering Novel Properties in Few-Layer MXenes Using Analytical, In-Situ Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2027
* USD 413,242.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials known as MXenes are part of a growing
family of two-dimensional structures that have attracted significant research
interests due to their wide range of properties. These layered transition metal
carbides and nitrides have the chemical formula of Mn+1XnTx (n=1-3), where M is
a transition metal, X is either carbon or nitrogen, and Tx is either O, OH, F,
Cl, or other surface groups that are bonded to the transition metal of the two-
dimensional MXene layer. This project focuses on developing an atomic-scale
understanding of the optical properties of MXenes, including their tunable
plasmon resonances in the visible and near-infrared regime, which can be used
for applications in nano-photonics or plasmonics. It is the PI’s hypothesis that
different functional groups, Tx, control not only the layer-to-layer spacings of
the two-dimensional MXene layers, but also provide the ability to tune the
interactions between MXene layers as well as the density of free charges in each
layer. Ti3C2 and Ti2C-based MXenes with a single type of surface termination
will be used to study the atomic, electronic and plasmonic structures high-
resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy. Access to unique
instrumentation at University of Illinois - Chicago (UIC) will be leveraged to
study these materials over a wide range of temperatures and with unprecedented
spatial and energy resolution. The project’s research activities center around
hands-on research and learning experiences for science and engineering
undergraduate and graduate students at the UIC, a Research-1 Hispanic-serving
institution. Recruitment and training focuses on the next generation of
researchers, in particular involving students from underrepresented groups and
minorities through a student exchange program with Tecnologico de Monterrey,
Latin@s Gaining Access to Networks for Advancement in Science and the DuSable
Scholars programs. The participation of undergraduate students in active
research projects is fostered through the PI’s Journal of Undergraduate Research
at the University of Illinois - Chicago. Graduates of this program will
contribute to academia, National Laboratories or industry, including
semiconductor companies.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objectives of this research project are to develop an
atomic-scale understanding of the nano-photonic and plasmonic properties of
Ti3C2Tx and Ti2CTx MXenes, functionalized with a single, well-controlled
species, using atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) imaging, conventional and monochromated electron energy loss spectroscopy
(EELS) combined with in-situ cooling to liquid nitrogen temperatures. Twisted
bi-layer MXenes exhibiting Moiré lattice effects will be studied for the
emergence of hybridized plasmons or excitons, as well as other emerging,
potentially strongly correlated phenomena. Using autonomous anomaly detection in
multi-dimensional data cubes via machine learning (ML), the correlation between
structural defects and their impact on the plasmonic and photonic properties
will be studied. This research project will consist of two tasks, i) atomic-
resolution analysis of MXenes and ii) development of convolutional neural
networks to identify crystal defects in atomic-resolution STEM images and
identify the correlated changes in the low-loss or valence EELS. The insights
from both tasks will be combined, yielding the ability to measure and control
the optical or electronic, and possibly even magnetic properties of single-
functionalized MXenes. The integration of research and education through the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art in-situ
scanning transmission electron microscopy and state-of-the-art ML approaches is
an integral feature of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.