* 2309000
* Wisconsin MRSEC
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract The Wisconsin Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center addresses grand challenges in two areas of materials science and
engineering: (1) how atoms and molecules move in liquids and glasses and (2)
developing new forms of magnetism using ultrathin, atomically perfect membranes.
Addressing the first challenge depends on combining new kinds of experiments
with developments in artificial intelligence. Advances will have applications in
creating new glasses for organic electronic applications like electronics
displays and photovoltaics and in enabling new formulations of drug molecules
into pills (or other forms) patients use. Addressing the second challenge
involves using bending and stretching of membranes to disturb their regular
pattern of atoms, creating new patterns in the distribution of magnetic poles on
very short length scales of just tens of nanometers. Advances will have
applications in information processing, including in high-speed, nonvolatile
data storage, and in the emerging area of quantum computing. The Center also
supports materials research infrastructure, including a new facility using
ultrafast pulses of ultraviolet light to study materials, and partnerships with
industry. To broaden participation in materials research, the Center runs an
extended orientation program called Forward Fellows to jumpstart the graduate
careers of first-generation, historically underrepresented, or other non-
traditional students. It also seeks to inspire people to pursue careers in
science and engineering through public outreach, including reaching economically
disadvantaged people in partnership with service organizations and reaching
blind and low vision people in partnership with the Wisconsin Council for the
Blind and Visually Impaired.

Technical Abstract The Wisconsin Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center addresses grand challenges in two areas of materials science and
engineering: (1) mobility in glasses and supercooled liquids at the molecular
level and (2) creation and control of nonequilibrium magnetic states in strained
single crystal membranes. Research in the first area will utilize coherent
electron nanodiffraction experiments to resolve local dynamics and physics-
inspired machine learning to develop molecular-level understanding from
simulations. Potential technological applications include glassy films of
organic semiconductors with high molecular anisotropy for organic electronics
and stabilization of drug molecules in the amorphous state for pharmaceutical
preparations. Research in the second area builds on a unique materials platform
of non-van der Waals single crystal membranes, subjected to strains and strain
gradients to break crystal symmetries and induce novel magnetic states.
Potential technological applications include stabilizing skyrmions or other spin
textures for nonvolatile memory and increased efficiency quantum transduction
from spins to light and vice versa. The Center also supports materials research
infrastructure, including a new facility for ultrafast extreme ultraviolet
absorption spectroscopy, and an industrial consortium to foster partnerships
between companies and Center researchers. To encourage broader participation in
materials research, the Center runs an extended graduate orientation and
professional development program called Forward Fellows, designed to give first
generation, historically underrepresented, or other non-traditional students a
jump start on graduate school. The Center also seeks to inspire people to pursue
careers in science and engineering through public outreach, including reaching
economically disadvantaged people in partnership with service organizations and
reaching blind and low vision people in partnership with the Wisconsin Council
for the Blind and Visually Impaired.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.