* 2309254
* NSF-BSF: Development of High-Precision Atomic Methods and Dark Matter Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 411,952.00

Plentiful observational data on galactic and larger scales cannot be explained
based on the observed matter content in the framework of “normal gravity.” The
prevailing view is that invisible “dark matter” dominates the matter content of
the Universe. This project will explore new ways to study the nature of dark
matter, which is one of the most puzzling scientific questions of the 21st
century. The overarching goal of the research is to provide a number of dearly
needed theoretical results that are necessary to take full advantage of the
revolutionary progress in atom-based quantum technologies that are a new
frontier in searches for new physics. The tools that will be developed,
especially in understanding atomic structure calculations and theoretical
concepts related to new physics models and how to benchmark them, will have far-
reaching use for the community. The work will be important for applications in
quantum information and the development of quantum sensors, studies of
fundamental symmetries, determination of nuclear properties from atomic
spectroscopy, astrophysics, plasma physics, and others.

The project will spearhead a new generation of atomic precision measurements
aimed at searches for physics beyond the Standard Model with a particular focus
on dark matter (DM) searches. It was previously assumed that the ratio of the
optical atomic clocks is only sensitive to photon-DM coupling via the variation
of the fine-structure constant. This project will explore additional
sensitivities of optical clocks to the hadronic sector due to the oscillation of
the charge radius. Moreover, the clocks are sensitive not only to scalar dark
matter but also to highly motivated pseudo-scalar axion and axion-like (APL)
particles. Exploiting sensitivities to these hadronic DM couplings requires
knowledge of the field shift constants that can be computed with the methods
that will be developed in this project. The PI will explore the sensitivities of
different clocks, including highly charged ions, to these new effects. The goals
of the project are to (1) develop new paradigms for the detection of ultralight
dark matter (UDM) with quantum sensors, (2) develop the phenomenology of
specific UDM models, and (3) develop methods to significantly increase the
precision of the atomic theory needed for the design and interpretation of
experiments.

This project is jointly funded by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics
Theory Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.