* 2309685
* Outliers are not what they seem: data-aware, flexible, and robust randomized iterative methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Elizaveta Rebrova, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 74,353.00

As the amount and size of the large-scale problems grow across the application
areas, a need for scalable and efficient solvers steadily grows. Stochastic
iterative methods are ubiquitous for this goal: the randomization makes such
methods both more robust and theoretically treatable, and inexpensive iterative
steps make them scalable and parallelizable and allow for flexibility in the
step design. In addition, the data frequently have some underlying structure
that the algorithm can exploit, and to build truly flexible and powerful
randomized iterative algorithms we need to learn how to use this information
efficiently. The general goal of this project is to advance the understanding of
how the data-aware and task-adaptive exploration stage can inform the design of
the iterative steps of stochastic algorithms to guide them toward a particular
learning task. Examples of such learning tasks include corruption removal,
exploration of external knowledge, data regularization, or search for multiple
solutions. In addition to the scientific impact, this project will contribute to
the broad dissemination of the scientific knowledge via the talks, events
organization, and open-sourced codes, and provides student support and research
training opportunities.

This project aims to create a range of flexible data- and task-augmented
randomized iterative methods. A crucial component of the work is to develop new
relevant mathematical tools for proving the convergence properties of such
algorithms. The theoretical analysis of the algorithms involves methods of high-
dimensional probability and geometry, numerical analysis and linear algebra, as
well as optimization and random matrix theory. Moreover, it motivates developing
supporting results of independent interest, such as novel spectral bounds for
structured random matrices, high-dimensional concentration of measure estimates,
and new geometric and probabilistic approaches for tighter control of stochastic
iterates. The planned byproducts of this project include new corruptions-robust
variants of the algorithms widely used in compressed sensing, low-rank tensor
fitting, and first-order stochastic optimization; new linear solvers augmented
with side knowledge as well as their applications to finding multiple solutions
to partial and ordinary differential equations; and data-aware iterative
algorithms for more regular sampling and partial matrix scaling algorithms with
application to finding local irregularities in the data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.