* 2309735
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Hazard, Lithosphere Hydration, and Double-Verging Structure of the Puerto Rico Subduction Zone: A Seismic Reflection and Refraction Perspective
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shuoshuo Han, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 144,774.00

The Puerto Rico Trench (PRT) poses major earthquake and tsunami hazards.
Tsunamis generated at this subduction zone may also impact the U.S. East Coast.
This project supports land and sea seismic experiments across the PRT and Puerto
Rico. The experiments will define the detailed seismic structure of the PRT,
advance our understanding of the PRT, and improve hazard assessment. The project
consists of: (1) Three wide-angle seismic reflection/refraction profiles using
ocean bottom seismometers (OBS); (2) Seven multichannel seismic (MCS) reflection
profiles, two parallel to and inland from the trench, and five across the
trench. (3) An array of 100 short-period land nodal seismometers deployed across
the Puerto Rico island. The project will provide support for training several
graduate students and an early career scientist, as well as research
opportunities for faculty and students at a minority serving institution.

This project supports an active-source seismic experiment across the Puerto
Rico Trench (PRT), its outer rise, and across the Puerto Rico island arc. The
PRT is a highly oblique subduction zone, where old Atlantic plate subducts under
the Caribbean plate at a slow rate. The PRT is associated with anomalous and
unexplained characteristics, such as the widest trench (below 6,000 m), the
lowest gravity anomaly on Earth, and anomalous subsidence of the north coast of
Puerto Rico. This project will acquire, analyze, and interpret multiple types of
data: Three wide-angle seismic reflection/refraction profiles across the PRT
with OBSs, with one of the lines extending to south of the Puerto Rico island
and including an array of land nodal seismometers deployed across the Puerto
Rico island; seven MCS reflection profiles, two parallel and five perpendicular
to the PRT axis; and multibeam bathymetry, 3.5 kHz sub-bottom profiler, gravity,
and magnetics. The experiments are designed to address three key questions: (1)
What is the shallow geometry of the subducting slab and its lateral continuity
along the 500-km section of the trench? (2) What are the degree and spatial
extent of hydration of the Atlantic lithosphere entering the Puerto Rico Trench?
(3) Does oceanic bivergent thrust system represent double-sided subduction or a
crustal retro-wedge of one-sided subduction? The integrated seismic experiments,
together with the other ancillary geophysical datasets, will produce two-
dimensional seismic reflection images, P-wave and S-wave travel-time tomography
2-D models, and gravity-derived density models of the study region. These
results are expected to significantly advance our understanding of the above
scientific questions and assessment of the PRT seismic and tsunami hazard.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.