* 2309331
* RUI: Quantum State Control for Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Hilary Hurst, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Advances in quantum sensing, communications, and quantum simulation offer a new
way forward for technology, surpassing the limitations of present-day devices.
The true advantages of quantum technologies - such as enhanced sensing - can
only be realized in systems with a high degree of quantum entanglement.
Entanglement is a fundamental property of quantum systems that enables
information to be stored across spatially separated quantum systems. This
project seeks to understand new ways of controlling these fragile systems, thus
making entanglement more useful and robust. The project will achieve this
research goal by theoretically exploring new types of measurement models, called
‘weak measurements’ in a variety of physical systems. The project serves the
national interest by contributing to the progress of science and the development
of new technologies based on quantum many-body physics. This award will provide
resources to support several undergraduate research assistants from the diverse
student body of San José State University. Undergraduate students will engage
with the research aims, building research skills in the theory of atomic,
molecular, and optical systems, scientific computing, analytical modeling and
data analysis.

The predominant approach toward creating highly entangled systems has been
isolation: remove all environmental disturbances and protect the system as much
as possible. Although successful, this approach is hard to scale up. This
research program instead manipulates quantum systems via weak measurement and
feedback to engineer new quantum states of ultracold atoms, moving beyond
fragile, highly isolated systems to more robust many-body quantum simulators.
Weak measurement enables an observer to extract some information about a quantum
system while only partially disturbing it, but there is little understanding of
how this process affects ultracold atomic systems with their own internal
dynamics. Furthermore, feedback control has scarcely been implemented in the
many-particle context. This proposal theoretically investigates ‘quantum state
control’ protocols for ultracold atoms, starting with spinor Bose-Einstein
condensates (BEC) and extending to systems beyond mean-field theory. Ultracold
atoms are an ideal platform for this research because they are highly
controllable and well suited to weak measurement and feedback control.
Incorporating measurement and feedback into the quantum control theory toolbox
for ultracold atomic systems would be a transformative advance forward in AMO
theory. The project extends theoretical work by the PI via three research aims:
(1) to demonstrate dynamical creation of new magnetic phenomena in spinor BECs,
(2) to extend quantum feedback control beyond mean-field to fermionic lattice
systems, and (3) to study the potential of weak measurement and feedback for
entanglement generation. Each aim focuses on a different one-dimensional
physical system united by a common theoretical framework for quantum control in
ultracold atomic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.