* 2309964
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Particle Astrophysics with the Hyper-Kamiokande Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Camillo Mariani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Hyper-Kamiokande is a particle physics detector that is constructed 600m
underground in the Kamioka mine In Hida City, Japan. The detector consists of a
68m diameter and 71m high water tank surrounded by 20,000 50cm diameter photo-
sensors which detect the light emissions of particles traversing the water. Its
primary purpose is to study neutrinos, elementary particles without electric
charge that interact only weakly with detector materials, thus requiring a large
detector mass. Hyper-Kamiokande’s mass of 260,000 metric tons makes it the
largest detector of this type that has been built so far: the target mass
available for neutrino measurement of Hyper-Kamiokande will be more than ten
times the equivalent mass of Super-Kamiokande, its predecessor. Hyper-Kamiokande
will observe neutrinos in a wide energy range from a variety of natural and man-
made sources such as astrophysical neutrinos (e.g. from the sun or stellar
explosions known as supernovae), atmospheric neutrinos, and in addition,
neutrinos from a beam produced by a particle accelerator at a distance of 295km.
Neutrinos are ideal messengers to understand astrophysical phenomena as they are
not influenced by electromagnetic forces. Hyper-Kamiokande will therefore serve
as an astrophysical neutrino observatory, but it will also study the nature of
the neutrino particle itself and will search for the extremely rare decays of
protons (or neutrons). This project is to focus upon the astrophysical neutrinos
including those of lower energy that may result in new discoveries. A large set
of activities included within the participating universities focusing on
students in K-12 and at the undergraduate level will provide these students with
the opportunity to engage in a world class experiment involving a broad
international collaboration.

To realize the astrophysical potential of Hyper-Kamiokande, the project will
focus on work to optimize triggering, calibration and reconstruction of neutrino
interactions, in particular at the lowest detectable energies. Hyper-Kamiokande
will measure neutrino oscillations of atmospheric neutrinos, solar neutrinos,
and other cosmic neutrinos. These measurements are in addition to accelerator
beam measurements. The motivation for also pursuing these “natural” cosmic
neutrinos remains strong, as they will significantly contribute to the
determination of the “mass ordering” of neutrinos and support and complement CP-
violation searches and other beam-related neutrino measurements. Given enough
running time, the detection of a neutrino burst from a core-collapse galactic
supernova is assured. Such a burst will consist of tens of thousands of neutrino
interactions within about ten seconds. Not only will the neutrino energy
spectra, time distribution, and flavor composition directly give access to the
explosion mechanism and other astrophysical data, but will also explore neutrino
properties that cannot be studied any other way: in particular, neutrino-
neutrino interactions may play a role. This will test the standard model of
particle interactions in regimes otherwise inaccessible. Hyper-Kamiokande
promises to give cosmic insights substantially advanced from our current
understanding.

The award is aligned with the NSF Big Idea of Windows on the Universe: the Era
of Multi-messenger Astrophysics as it coordinates the use of multi-messengers
observations utilizing cosmic neutrinos and providing alerts to the larger
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.