* 2309335
* Equitable and Effective Teaching in Undergraduate STEM Education:  A Framework for Institutions, Educators, and Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Kerry Brenner, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 469,115.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing common language
and a framework to catalyze and guide implementation of equitable and effective
teaching in postsecondary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) courses and programs. The project intends produce a National Academies
report that outlines principles of evidence-based approaches to teaching that
center and promote equity. The report plans to also provide recommendations to
institutional leaders, department chairs, and individual educators on how to
foster implementation of these approaches. This guidance will include attention
to the needs and constraints of the full variety of institution types that
provide postsecondary STEM education. The project plans to draw on multiple
forms of evidence to consider the learning experiences of all demographic groups
and the intersection of multiple identities, especially those who are not well
served by current practices. The study intends to integrate related lines of
inquiry on how people learn, classroom practices, identity, and belonging with
disciplinary based education research on teaching in the STEM fields, knowledge
of the structure of higher education, and evidence on system change.

The project hopes to advance understanding of the latest research on teaching
and learning in postsecondary STEM education and to guide improvements at scale.
It will be conducted according to the consensus study format of the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The Board on Science Education
in collaboration with the Board on Higher Education and the Workforce will
convene an expert committee to conduct a consensus study to: 1) develop an
evidence-based framework for equitable and effective teaching in undergraduate
STEM education that takes into account different teaching contexts, modalities
and types of institutions; and, 2) outline the strategies and resources needed
for institutions and developers of post-secondary courses and learning
experiences to effectively implement the framework. The study plans to address
issues ranging across levels of the system that include classroom, department,
institutional, as well as state and national policy. In particular institutional
and departmental policies and practices that can facilitate adoption of more
equitable and effective approaches will be explored, including those related to
professional development, incentives, and advancement. During the course of the
project, extensive outreach will be carried out to gather input from
stakeholders and to cultivate relationships that will foster uptake and
implementation of the ideas recommended in the final report. In addition,
following its release, the report will be distributed widely, shared at
professional conferences, and used to develop playbooks with targeted foci on
various types of institutions, modalities, or other themes identified during the
project. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.