* 2309434
* Electron Densities and Electron Correlations by X-Ray Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Peter Weber, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2026
* USD 528,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Peter M. Weber of Brown
University is using x-ray scattering techniques to observe how electrons orbit
the atomic nuclei of molecules. Electron orbitals are the places where electrons
are preferentially located and have distinct shapes that depend upon the
arrangement of the nuclei and the electron energy. In molecules with more than
one electron, repulsions between the electrons affect the orbital shape. In
short, the motion of an electron depends upon the motion of all the other
electrons, giving rise to correlations in electron motion that profoundly affect
all molecular properties. For example, when molecules absorb light, an electron
is promoted to a higher energy state and the distributions and correlations
change, resulting in a multitude of photochemical phenomena. Observing these
changes are difficult though, given the speed with which electrons move.
Professor Weber and his students will use time-resolved x-ray scattering methods
to measure precise excited state molecular structures, electron density
distributions and electron-electron pair correlations that are central to
molecular properties. Their discoveries could lead to new benchmarks that aid
the continued development of quantum chemistry computer programs. Since quantum
chemistry calculations are used throughout the molecular sciences, the project
could have far-reaching ramifications and impact in many related fields. The
project will train students in advanced experimental methodologies and complex
computer simulations.

Time-resolved X-ray scattering experiments will be conducted at the Linac
Coherent Light Source X-Ray Free Electron Laser of SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory. Femtosecond laser pulses will be used to excite molecules to excited
electronic states. After a short time-delay, an ultrashort x-ray pulse from the
free electron laser is scattered off the molecules. The measured scattering
signals are compared to theoretical ones derived from computed electron density
distributions and correlations. The project will extend the x-ray methods used
to determine molecular structures and electron densities of ground states to the
excited state and include electron-electron correlations. The studies will focus
on a selection of model systems with different p-electron characters and
electron correlations. Codes for simulating scattering patterns directly from
computational methods and an iterative refinement process have been developed
and will be applied. The experimentally measured densities, correlations and
structures are compared to the results of high-level computational chemistry
methods and serve as benchmarks for the quantum chemistry calculations. The
studies will improve our understanding of molecular structures and chemical
reactivity, which in turn determines many chemical and material properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.