* 2309211
* WOU-MMA: Gravitational Radiation and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,075,500.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Since
2019, NSF's Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) has been
regularly detecting gravitational waves (GWs) (ripples in space and time)
emitted by the collision of compact objects that are billions of light-years
from Earth. Most of these objects have been black holes, others have been
neutron stars. From the GWs, scientists can measure properties (locations,
masses, spins) of the objects and learn about how they might have formed and how
they warp space and time as they collide; for neutron stars, the collision also
produces gamma-rays and other electromagnetic radiation, and together with the
GWs this teaches scientists how matter behaves at ultra-high densities and how
some chemical elements were formed. But these studies require comparing the
detected GWs with detailed predictions of the waves. The predictions are made
using the equations of General Relativity, written down by Einstein in 1915 but
unsolvable (for colliding compact objects) until about 2005 with the development
of advanced methods and powerful supercomputers. This project supports
theoretical work designed to underpin and improve LIGO's ability to extract from
observed GWs the rich information that the waves carry, and to improve the
interpretation of LIGO events with electromagnetic counterparts. This includes
the improvement and use of the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC), currently the most
accurate computer code for solving Einstein's equations for black hole binaries.
SpEC will be used to carry out numerical solutions of black-hole collisions to
further develop a public catalog of GW predictions for the purpose of analyzing
LIGO data. In addition, a next-generation public computer code SpECTRE, under
development, will be used to predict GWs from two colliding neutron stars, from
a black hole colliding with a neutron star, and from supernova explosions. This
program will also serve as a training ground for young physicists and
astrophysicists. The group members will reach out to the general public through
lectures, interactive web pages, and YouTube videos.

By combining analytical techniques and numerical simulations with the Spectral
Einstein Code (SpEC), the team will: (i) improved gravitational waveforms for
Binary Black Holes (BBH) will be generated for use in LIGO data analysis in
poorly-explored regions of the BBH parameter space, and will be used to produce
surrogate models that are improved in accuracy, parameter-space coverage, and
included physics (e.g. eccentricity, gravitational memory); and (ii) the
dynamical behavior of highly curved spacetime will be explored via analytic,
perturbative, and numerical approaches, which will include studies of
quasinormal mode excitations and nonlinearities in ringdowns, and investigations
of beyond-Einstein theories of gravitation and testing them using LIGO
observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.