* 2309468
* Travel Support for Broadening Participation of Researchers in the REMADE Institute Circular Economy Tech Summit and Conference; Washington, DC; 20-21 March 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Nabil Nasr, SUSTAINABLE MANUFACTURING INNOVATION ALLIANCE CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides students and young faculty from underrepresented or
underserved groups in STEM education with travel support to attend and
participate in the REMADE Institute Circular Economy Tech Summit and Conference.
REMADEâ€™s mission is to foster manufacturing technologies that reduce embodied
energy and decrease emissions. The conference aims to provide a forum to share
leading-edge research on technologies that accelerate the US's transition to a
Circular Economy. In addition, the conference offers participants an opportunity
to showcase their scientific accomplishments, interact with peers and colleagues
from academia, government labs, and industry, extend their network, and foster
new collaborations within the broader advanced manufacturing community.
Consistent with NSF's goal to broaden the participation of groups
underrepresented in science and engineering, the REMADE Institute preferentially
allocates travel funds to underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities. This approach promotes greater diversity in STEM fields and
benefits the nation by educating and training a skilled workforce better
prepared to provide transformative solutions to overcome challenges in their
chosen fields. The conference meets the national priorities of advancing
environmental quality and achieving diversity, equity and inclusion.

The REMADE Institute anticipates conference attendance benefits the students and
young faculty's professional, scientific and technical development. The
conference provides attendees with a broader view of the material lifecycle and
discusses the different product lifecycle stages - design, manufacturing,
remanufacturing, recycling and upcycling - that are critical to understanding
the achievement of a circular economy. Attendees also gain a system-level
perspective necessary to identify cross-cutting research opportunities. The
conference, organized into different technology tracks, includes talks by
leading domestic and international speakers discussing their latest research on
topics such as building a sustainable circular economy, systems analysis, design
for circularity, pathways to achieve net-zero emissions in manufacturing and
materials production, remanufacturing, and recycling. In addition, students and
young faculty are able to enhance their communication skills through oral and
poster presentations and in-depth discussions of their work with their peers.
This interactive experience significantly broadens the education and training of
students and young faculty from underrepresented groups, increase their
enthusiasm for the research topic, acquaint them with expectations for
scientific careers, and expose them to new approaches and opportunities for
innovative research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.