* 2309020
* RUI: Investigating Gravitational Waves and Extreme Mass-Ratio Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Thomas Osburn, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 188,470.00

This award supports theoretical investigations of the gravitational waves (GWs)
emitted when a stellar mass compact object, such as a neutron star or black
hole, inspirals into a supermassive black hole. These extreme mass-ratio
inspirals (EMRIs) are important astronomical sources of GWs that will be
observed by the upcoming Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) detector,
which is under cooperative development by NASA and the European Space Agency.
This project involves pursuit of a new approach to mathematical modeling that is
able to achieve improved realism in a way that avoids technical hindrances
encountered in prior work. Accurate EMRI models implemented through this award
will enable LISA observations to reveal the inner workings of gravitational
interactions like never before. This work involves direct training of
quantitative technical skills for undergraduate student researchers, which are
highly transferable to STEM related careers in other sectors. This award
supports a synergistic physics education research project that will
simultaneously improve upper-level undergraduate physics instruction and provide
a testing ground to research new mathematical modeling techniques. The research
objective of this award is to determine how relativistic two-body interactions
influence the dynamics of EMRIs utilizing a new approach to self-force (SF)
calculations recently discovered by the PI’s research group. Two-body
interactions governing EMRIs are accurately dissected by applying black hole
perturbation theory (BHPT) to expand the gravitational field and associated SF
exerted on the secondary body up to an appropriate order in powers of the small
mass-ratio. The new approach pursued by this project involves computation of
Kerr metric perturbations by solving elliptic partial differential equations
(PDEs), which avoids previously encountered numerical instabilities in Lorenz
gauge self-force calculations. Those instabilities are avoided by entering the
frequency domain, where the field equations involve only r and theta derivatives
and are solved numerically. This project will research and implement the novel
elliptic PDE SF method to calculate the 1st order Lorenz gauge Kerr
gravitational SF, which opens a pathway to begin exploring the needed 2nd-order
Kerr SF. Completion of this project will enhance fundamental understanding of
gravitational physics and EMRI dynamics in ways that will assist GW data
analysis and reveal the foundations of strong-field gravity with unprecedented
precision.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.