* 2309320
* WoU-MMA: Multi-Messenger Gravitational Lensing with Asymmetric Lenses and Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Kesden, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 299,842.00

This award is concerned with three spectacular predictions of Einstein’s theory
of general relativity: black holes (BHs), gravitational waves (GWs) and
gravitational lensing. When massive compact objects such as BHs rapidly orbit
each other and merge due to the huge gravitational force between them, they
create ripples in space-time – GWs. These GWs are detected on earth as tiny
changes in the lengths of the arms of a detector such as LIGO. The masses,
spins, and orbital parameters of the BHs determine the observed frequency and
amplitude of the GW signal as a function of time. Since the first detection by
the LIGO collaboration in 2015, more than 90 binary compact-object mergers have
been observed. This has opened an exciting new window on the Universe that
complements what is seen using telescopes that capture electromagnetic (EM)
waves such as optical light. When GWs or EM waves pass through the Universe they
can be deflected and focused by intervening massive objects very close to their
path. Although this strong gravitational lensing phenomenon has not yet been
identified for GW sources, it is expected to split GW signals into multiple
magnified copies, each taking a slightly different path to the observer. An EM
analog of this strong lensing process, as seen on HST or JWST images, are the
distant galaxies stretched into eye-catching arcs by foreground galaxy cluster
lenses. Lensing signatures depend on the gravity of the intervening lens, making
it an essential tool to weigh and study dark matter. With the increasing
sensitivity of ground-based GW detectors and the advent of space-based detectors
like LISA, GW sources will be seen to vast distances where the chance of an
intervening lens is considerable. This award will increase our understanding of
the properties and gravity of BHs across cosmic history, and the distribution of
dark matter in intervening lenses. It will provide new theoretical models of
strong lensing of GWs. The award will also facilitate several educational and
outreach activities of benefit to society, such as an extension of the
interactive VIGOR (Virtual Interaction with Gravitational Waves to Observe
Relativity) simulation of binary black holes, development of curriculum
materials for local high schools and undergraduate classes, and engagement with
museums. Graduate and undergraduate students will be immersed in the research,
inspiring and training the next generation of scientists for academia and
industry.

Increasing numbers of high-redshift GW events will be observed in the future,
and a significant fraction of these sources will experience strong gravitational
lensing. Most current research assumes axisymmetry in both the binary black hole
(BBH) sources about their orbital angular momentum and in the lens models about
the optical axis passing from the observer through the lens. These assumptions
will be relaxed in three interrelated projects. (1) Lensing of extreme-mass-
ratio inspirals (EMRIs) in which the orbital angular momentum is generically
misaligned with the supermassive black hole (SMBH) spin, and where lensing could
be misinterpreted as deviations from general relativity. (2) Lensing
amplification factors for more realistic lens models that include embedded SMBHs
at galactic centers, cored density profiles, and asymmetry in either the lens
galaxy or an external shear. (3) Synergies between EM observations of source
galaxies or transients, and GW sources. Simultaneously characterizing precession
and lensing in GW sources is critical for their use as probes of both
astrophysics and gravity. More realistic asymmetric lens models are also
essential for real data analysis, as axisymmetric models qualitatively fail to
account for additional images in the geometric-optics limit and employing more
complicated wave-optics is essential over much of the source plane. Most BBH
mergers will probably lack transient EM counterparts, so multi-messenger studies
correlating GW and EM surveys will be required to identify host galaxies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.