* 2309541
* Conference: Building Bridges to Use-Inspired Research and Science-Informed Practices
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Jennifer Forbey, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 542,762.00

Building stronger connections among academic, private, and government
communities is needed to translate basic science research into solutions that
benefit society and to help fulfill the vision of the National Science
Foundation to lead the world in science innovation. However, awareness of the
reciprocal benefits of strong partnerships among science communities is lacking,
and shared interests, community needs, and barriers to functional partnerships
are not well defined. To overcome these gaps, a workshop will be held to develop
recommendations on strengthening science community partnerships, and building
pathways that speed the translation of research to innovations and enhance and
expand inclusive and experiential training opportunities to prepare a diverse
and globally competitive workforce. The workshop, led by two EPSCoR
Jurisdictions (Idaho and Hawai’i), will consist of a series of national events
facilitated by KnowInnovations: two free virtual Pre-Workshop MicroLabs for an
unlimited number of participants and an In-Person Workshop for 120 selected
participants representing diverse groups and organizations. Participants of the
workshop will co-create the structures and processes that will inform how
diverse organizations can support and collaborate on use-inspired research. The
products of the workshops will include white papers that highlight opportunities
and challenges for expanding use-inspired research and building partnerships
that will lead to the translation of basic biological research into societal
impact.

To maintain global leadership in science innovation, new processes are needed
to improve collaborations among academic, private, and government science
communities to facilitate the translation of basic research to innovation and to
better inform evidence-based practices. The current and next generation of
researchers lack clear support pathways and training opportunities for careers
in use-inspired research and science-informed practices. To find solutions, a
workshop will be held that will build new connections among the three key
science communities. The workshop, led by two EPSCoR Jurisdictions: Idaho and
Hawai’i, will inform and recruit researchers nationally to new opportunities for
use-inspired research and training, and future careers where science-informed
practices can be implemented to balance the social, ecological, and economic
needs of diverse communities. The workshop goals are to build awareness of the
benefits of reciprocal partnerships, to identify shared interests, needs, and
barriers, to develop recommendations for new structures and processes to
accelerate use-inspired research, and to expand training opportunities for early
career researchers. This workshop is for individuals in any organization at any
career stage who wants to engage in use-inspired research, translation and
partnership building. The workshop is also for participants from academic,
government, and private organizations who want their science needs to be more
broadly understood and incorporated into research priorities.

This project is jointly funded by the Directorate of Biological Sciences, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Directorate for Technology, Innovation, and Partnerships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.