* 2309048
* Computational studies of P-type ATPase ion pumps
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Benoit Roux, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2027
* USD 900,000.00

The sodium-potassium and the calcium pump are proteins acting like “molecular
machines”. They use the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) as a source
of energy to perform work and actively transport ions across the biological
membrane. These pumps are extremely important for life. For example, the sodium-
potassium pump restores the concentration of those ions needed for all the cells
in our body and almost 30% of a human's ATP is consumed by this protein. The
goal of the proposal is to elucidate the general fundamental principles
governing the function of such ion pump at the atomic level using theory and
computer simulations. Understanding the general principle governing the
mechanism of an ATP-driven ion pump addresses fundamental questions from the
point of view of molecular structure. This multidisciplinary research project,
at the nexus of biology, physics, chemistry, and computations, offers a great
opportunity to capture the imagination and interest of high school students.
Outreach activities will seek to disseminate and communicate education
opportunities about quantitative biology and physics to underrepresented Chicago
Public Schools high school students via the Collegiate Scholars Program (CSP) to
encourage college enrollment.

The overarching goal of this proposal is to elucidate the general fundamental
principles governing the function of P-type ATPase membrane-bound ion pumps at
the atomic level using theory, molecular dynamics simulations, and methods from
computational sciences. P-type ATPases form a large superfamily of integral
membrane proteins named for their ability to exploit the hydrolysis of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) as a source of chemical free energy to actively transport
substrates against their electrochemical potential gradient across a biological
membrane. The research plan is designed to answer a number of compelling
biological questions about the general principles governing the function of
these pumps. Our work focuses on two paradigmatic systems—the sodium-potassium,
and the calcium pump, ideal for studying the fundamental principles governing
the function of P-type ATPases. A transformative computational methodology,
integrating theory, algorithms, simulation methods, machine-learning techniques
and computational sciences will be generated to address major biological
questions about complex biomolecular machines. The work will serve as a roadmap
for future efforts aimed at quantitatively characterizing the function of other
ATP-driven “biomolecular machines” and will help in the design of bioinspired
artificial pumps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.