* 2309550
* CAREER: Towards Secure and Usable IoT Authentication Under Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Qiang Zeng, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2027
* USD 198,909.00

The booming development of Internet of Things (IoT) makes ever-growing impacts
on various industries and daily lives. IoT authentication, which authenticates
the legitimacy of a user and/or an IoT device, is among the most fundamental and
critical IoT security problems. Existing approaches often suffer from insecurity
(e.g., Bluetooth based proximity proving can be exploited by wireless attacks)
or poor usability (e.g., requiring user interfaces or sensors unavailable on
most IoT devices). The research advances secure and usable IoT authentication
under constraints. Unlike many prior works that build authentication on
proximity, which can be exploited by wireless attacks, the project's novelty is
based on physical operations that cannot be spoofed by an attacker. The
project's broader significance and importance are as follows. 1) The research
can help people in rural areas or with disabilities have equal rights of access
to modern techniques, such as drone delivery, without relying on special user-
side hardware. 2) The research can make IoT pairing and authentication much
easier and more secure, and the results have wide applications to smart health,
forensics, and continuous security monitoring. 3) The PI will conduct outreach
and educational activities that aim to increase awareness of cybersecurity in
the K-12 community and broaden the participation of students from
underrepresented groups.

The project seeks to improve IoT authentication and deliver novel approaches,
algorithms, techniques, and systems through the following thrusts. Thrust 1:
Authentication for UI-Constrained Devices. A protocol that supports mutual
authentication, over an insecure wireless channel, to establish trust between a
UI-constrained device and the user to support authentication for heterogeneous
IoT devices. Thrust 2: Authentication for Distance-Constrained Devices. A highly
usable approach enables secure authentication between an IoT device and the user
even when they are multiple meters apart, which has applications ranging from
drone delivery to ride sharing. Thrust 3: Authentication for Operation-
Constrained Devices. For traditional objects retrofitted with zero-UI sensor
nodes, AI-assisted implicit authentication enables recognizing a user without
requiring any explicit authentication operations. In sum, the research seeks to
substantially advance IoT authentication and foster a variety of IoT
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.