* 2309064
* Launching the Cosmic Explorer Conceptual Design
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Matthew Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,112,975.00

Gravitational-wave astronomy has opened a new window on the universe. A century
after Einstein predicted gravitational waves, the NSF Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) rewarded decades of investment with direct
observations of gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron stars.
Cosmic Explorer, a concept for a next-generation gravitational-wave observatory
in the United States, is a proposed project to push the reach of gravitational-
wave astronomy to the edge of the observable universe. This grant will enable
the first steps in the design process for this Cosmic Explorer observatory, by
establishing a Cosmic Explorer Project Office and coordinating all the domestic
and international partners. Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion for the totality of
the Project will be a focus of this grant.

The overarching objective of the planned work is to initiate the design process
for Cosmic Explorer. The observatory concept will be developed in collaboration
with the separately funded work on subsystems and on the site search efforts. By
providing a central hub for coordinating all Cosmic Explorer-related activity,
this effort will consolidate the conceptual design, and advance it to the point
that engineering and design contracts can be issued to solidify the Project
Execution Plan. This will provide all CE-related research efforts with
centralized resources for communication, coordination, documentation, training,
and promotion of equity, diversity and inclusion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.