* 2309082
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Unprecedented Hurricane Ian Nutrient and Organic Matter Inputs to Southwest Florida Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Ming Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 87,296.00

Many coastal systems are facing the threats of continuing development and
climate change, including an increased intensity of extreme weather events such
as hurricanes. Such storms are now wetter than in prior years because warmer
atmospheres hold more moisture. Thus, they release more rainfall and deliver
more nutrients and organic matter to coastal areas. This, in turn, leads to
phytoplankton blooms with potential for regional “dead zones” or areas with
little or no dissolved oxygen. Hurricane Ian, a category 4 hurricane which hit
southwest Florida in late September 2022, resulted in immense nutrient and
organic carbon inputs to the coastal estuaries and southwest Florida shelf
waters and presents an opportunity to examine the effects of a major storm
disturbance on a coastal system that is under increasing coastal nutrient
stress. The objective of this RAPID project is to examine carbon and nutrient
cycling along a gradient of stations from the estuary to low-nutrient shelf
waters to determine the rate of change and recovery in this system and the
relationship of large hurricane inputs to hypoxia, anoxia, and ocean
acidification. These data are being used to develop a regional model to predict
the impact of future hurricanes on ocean acidification, phytoplankton blooms,
and local hypoxia and anoxia. This study leverages ongoing monitoring programs
funded by state and federal management agencies, as well as NSF-supported
programs for undergraduate students. It provides partial support for training of
postdoctoral investigators and a graduate student. Outreach will include
presentations to elementary and high school students.

In September 2022, southwest Florida experienced a direct hit from category-4
Hurricane Ian, resulting in extensive watershed flooding and nutrient- and
dissolved-organic-matter-laden estuarine plumes extending more than 50 miles
onto the shallow oligotrophic west Florida shelf (WFS). The massive terrestrial
organic carbon and nutrient inputs to the southwest Florida coastal and shelf
region may be priming this oligotrophic system for extensive phytoplankton
blooms, as well as significant changes in carbon chemistry and nutrient cycling
that could lead to longer-term regional hypoxia and anoxia. In this RAPID
project, the investigators are measuring a suite of carbon and nutrient
parameters, as well as carbon and nutrient cycling, at stations in Charlotte
Harbor and the adjacent inner WFS system in December 2022, February 2023, and
September 2023. The objectives are to assess: 1) a timescale of system responses
from shorter (weeks to months) to 1-year impacts post-hurricane; 2) how nutrient
availability and forms influence hypoxia; and 3) how hurricane-driven inputs
influence carbonate chemistry in this system, specifically the connection
between acidification and hypoxia. The investigators are using new data
collected in this study and monitoring data from regional state and federal
programs in a coupled hydrodynamic-biogeochemical model to understand conditions
on the WFS. Hindcast simulations and modeling experiments are assessing how
large inputs of nutrients and organic matter affect phytoplankton, oxygen
conditions, and carbon chemistry. Modeling experiments are exploring how storms
of varying wind and precipitation intensity affect the WFS and estuaries,
identifying the tipping point at which the WFS switches from episodic to
persistent hypoxia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.