* 2309561
* Collaborative Research: A longitudinal approach to examining perception-production links in second language speech sound learning.
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Charlie Nagle, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2024
* USD 124,539.00

One of the main challenges of learning another language is learning how to
pronounce the constituent sounds. For adult learners, the native language acts
like a filter, which may prevent them from perceiving the sounds of the new
language correctly. If they don’t perceive those sounds correctly, they may not
produce them correctly. These pronunciation problems can affect learners’
ability to understand the new language and their ability to communicate in it.
For example, when they listen to the new language, they may struggle to
distinguish similar words and when they speak it, they may produce words that
listeners don’t understand. Researchers know that perceiving sounds accurately
is a prerequisite for producing them accurately, but little is known about how
sound perception and sound production develop and influence one another.
Understanding how these skills develop and interact is a necessary first step
toward developing better models of pronunciation learning and better training
procedures that can help students learn new languages more quickly and
effectively.

In this project, the investigators examine how the relationship between the
ability to differentiate and produce sounds in a new language develops over
time. This will be accomplished by training participants on sound perception,
sound production, or both. Performance in both skills will be measured at
multiple time points throughout training to investigate how performance in each
area changes over time and how the relationship between them evolves.
Participants’ ability to apply the knowledge they learned to new words and to
words spoken in a new voice will also be tested, as a means of investigating how
different types of training help second language learners deal with variability
in speech. The results will lay the foundation for developing a more
comprehensive model of second language sound learning. Additionally, findings
will provide insight into how pronunciation instruction can be optimized to help
learners perceive and produce the sounds and words of other languages
accurately, forming the basis for effective second language communication.

This project is jointly funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.