* 2309539
* Topologically Frustrated Polymer Dynamics and Phase Behavior of Polyzwitterions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Large molecules capable of carrying electrical charges are ubiquitous ever since
life began on Earth. Such macromolecules are also vital in formulating
environmentally friendly materials to guard global sustainability. However,
experiments during the past century have shown that these molecules behave in
mysterious ways that are difficult to understand and predict. These charged
macromolecules in any system do not function alone, but all of them work
together in collaborative manners. A fundamental understanding of such large
scale cooperativity among many molecules is one of the grand challenges in
physical and biological sciences. Towards mitigating this challenge, the PI will
formulate a fundamental understanding of how electrically charged macromolecules
move around in crowded electrolyte solutions, and how to facilitate them to form
desirable structures toward novel water-based materials for societal benefits.
In addition, the proposed activities include strong support of diversity and
training a new generation of scholars and enable their future participation in
industries on water-based materials and maintenance of global sustainability.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The PI proposes experiments and theoretical developments to investigate
hierarchical structure and dynamics of charged macromolecules, topologically
frustrated non-diffusive dynamical state, coacervate gel composites, and
assembly and phase diagrams for polyzwitterions, by combining light scattering,
neutron scattering, fluorescence spectroscopy, fluorescence microscopy,
impedance spectroscopy, rheology, single molecule electrophoresis, statistical
mechanics, field theory, and several multi-scale simulation techniques.
Specifically, the proposal addresses (a) the nature and origin of the newly
discovered topologically frustrated dynamical state of polymers, and its
transition into the other conventional dynamical modes, such as the Rouse-Zimm
and reptation, (b) non-equilibrium forces to control formation of coacervate gel
composites, and (c) dipolar interactions to understand assembly and phase
behaviors of polyzwitterions. This project is aimed at understanding the
intricate behaviors of charged macromolecular systems, and discovering new
conceptual models for structure, dynamics, and transport in aqueous charged
polymer systems. A fundamental understanding of the behavior of this important
class of materials will help to design novel water-based polymeric materials to
secure global sustainability with enhanced benefits to society. Training of
graduate students and postdocs in this challenging research area is also an
important component of the proposed activity. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.