* 2309210
* WoU-MMA: Aspects of Numerical Relativity and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Elias Most, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational wave (GW) events of binary neutron star (NS) mergers are exciting
sources for multi-messenger astronomy and astrophysics (MMA). With one such
event (GW170817) already detected and several more anticipated over the next
observing run of LIGO next year, one of the important questions of modern
gravitational theory and MMA is to connect all the available channels of
information to the underlying physics probed in the system. Specific questions
include: What is the dense matter equation of state (EoS)? When and how are
transients produced by merging NS? What is the general outcome of a NS-NS
merger? Those can only be fully answered by novel insights from numerical
relativity (NR) simulations of the merger and post-merger, which need to
consider all the relevant (small-scale) microphysics associated with hot dense
matter, magnetic fields, and weak-interaction physics. This award will make
significant advances in the modeling of small-scale physics in NS-NS mergers.
This project will also produce animations and movies of numerical simulations
for public outreach. These will be made available to educators and the public
via dedicated web pages, social media channels. In addition, graduate and
undergraduate students supported by this project will receive extensive
professional and educational training.

This award will push the frontier in our understanding of the impact of
realistic small-scale microphysics on the production of EM counterparts,
relativistic outflow launching, and the outcome of NS-NS mergers. This will
enable a novel class of NR simulations with significantly improved predictive
power for the interpretation of GW events and their MMA aspects. Modeling small-
scale dissipative effects (viscosities and heat conductivity) in relativistic
fluids with magnetic fields in strong gravity, is also of fundamental interest
to the gravitational, nuclear, and astrophysics communities. This project will
develop a new cyberinfrastructure, a public simulation code for dissipative
general-relativistic magnetohydrodynamics coupled with dynamic gravity, and
study its applications to the post-merger stage of NS-NS coalescence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.