* 2309328
* CAREER: Spatiotemporal organization of cytokinetic events
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Maitreyi Das, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2025
* USD 519,121.00

Cells employ multiple processes to grow and proliferate. Most cellular processes
are highly complex, involving multiple steps that have to be precisely regulated
both in time and within the correct region. Inability to organize these steps
often leads to cell death. It is not clear how cells sense and signal these
different steps during complex processes to ensure proper function. This project
will investigate the complex multi-step process of cytokinesis, the final step
in cell division. During cytokinesis, a series of steps ensures that a mother
cell splits into two intact daughter cells. Using Schizosaccharomyces pombe, or
fission yeast, as a model system, signaling patterns that organize different
cytokinetic steps will be researched. Preliminary data show that different
signaling proteins crosstalk to properly organize these steps. In this project
the molecular mechanism of such a crosstalk and how it organizes cytokinetic
steps will be investigated. The project will lead to an understanding of the
principles that allow cells to sense and signal complex processes. These
principles are applicable to higher organisms given that most of the signaling
pathways investigated are highly conserved. This project will also involve the
design of lab-based cell biology courses for high school and undergraduate
students. The principal investigator, a high school science teacher, and a
graduate student will be involved in developing the lab-based course. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will also be trained in conducting
research. Students will be trained in experimental design, analysis and
interpretation and their critical thinking capabilities will be honed. Under-
represented undergraduate and high school students will participate in this
project through the Educational Advancement Program and Upward Bound program
respectively. All the trainees will be trained to present their research at
national or international meetings.

Cytokinesis, the final step in division, is a universal process in all
eukaryotes in which a cell physically separates into two daughters after nuclear
division. Successful completion of cytokinesis requires multiple steps that are
sequentially coordinated. Disruption of the proper order of these steps can
impair the genetic integrity of the progeny, lead to cell separation failure, or
cause cell lysis. The goal of this project is to mechanistically define how
different cytokinetic steps are spatiotemporally organized. Previous research
showed the small GTPase Cdc42 to be required for initiation of septum formation
during cytokinesis in fission yeast. Preliminary data show that Cdc42, crosstalk
with other RHO GTPases, Rho1 and Rho4, to organize distinct cytokinetic events.
Cdc42-Rho crosstalk has also been reported in wound healing, cell migration, and
cell polarization. However, it is not known how crosstalk between different
pathways coordinate multiple steps during cellular processes. This project will
use cytokinesis as a paradigm to mechanistically define crosstalk between
GTPases and explain how this enables coordination of complex multi-step
processes. The project will involve interdisciplinary approaches with live cell
4D microscopy, molecular nano-traps, electron microscopy, and mathematical
modeling. The project will also develop inquiry-driven cell biology lab courses
to train future scientists in their quest to investigate the rules of life.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.