* 2309100
* VISCOSITY PATHS:  Assessing the Effect of Realistic Cooling Rates  on the Evolution of Lava Flow Rheology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Arianna Soldati, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Teasdale
* 07/31/2026
* USD 384,585.00

Lava flows are by far the most common form of volcanic activity. With more than
1 billion people worldwide living near an active volcano, it is imperative to
accurately forecast lava flow hazard. While lava flows rarely kill people, they
routinely destroy houses and infrastructure, sometimes causing millions of
dollars of damage in a single event. In order to mitigate this hazard, this
project seeks to understand how lava flows advance. The advance of lava flows
largely depends on how they transition from being mainly liquid at eruption to
fully solid as they flow away from the vent and cool down. This project will
reproduce realistic lava flow cooling paths through laboratory experiments, and
measure how lava ability to deform and move changes throughout the process.
Further, the team will develop a learning unit on lava flow motion specifically
tailored to the unique needs of the ever-growing homeschooling community, thus
advancing NSFâ€™s goal of promoting access to STEM learning and training for all
citizens.

Each quantum of lava within a flow is subject to a unique cooling history, which
results in varying crystal assemblages and textures, and ultimately rheology,
for any given lava flow in both space and time. State-of-the-art rheological
experiments assume either isothermal conditions or constant cooling rates.
However, natural lava flows experience much more nuanced cooling histories. The
overarching goal of this proposal is to experimentally determine how the
crystallization and thus rheology of basaltic lava evolve when subjected to
realistic cooling curves. The product will be a detailed, physics-based
rheological evolution map of a channelized basaltic lava flow. Because of the
key role played by rheology in controlling lava flow advance speed and dynamics,
this deliverable will provide the community with a key tool to improve our
ability to forecast lava flow emplacement, and to potentially mitigate damage to
infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.