* 2309687
* Robust and Efficient Numerical Methods for Wave Equations in the Time Domain: Nonlinear and Multiscale Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Thomas Hagstrom, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 390,000.00

The project aims to develop fast and reliable algorithms for simulating waves,
capable of exploiting current and future computing technology and of treating a
wide range of mathematical models of physical systems. Wave phenomena are
important in almost all areas of the physical sciences and engineering. They are
central to sensing and imaging applications, to the modeling of potential
natural disasters such as earthquakes, and to humanity's quest to understand the
universe. In the longer term, the algorithms developed will be incorporated into
software to promote their broad use. Besides contributions to basic tools for
solving comprehensive models of wave physics, the project will result in the
training of three graduate students in computational science, supported in part
as funded research assistants, and in the further development of
transdisciplinary programs in research and education which involve computation
as an important component.

The main challenges to computational technique posed by problems in wave theory
are rooted in the multiple temporal and spatial scales which typically occur.
The fundamental fact that a wave propagates over many wavelengths without
significant attenuation leads to the requirement that numerical methods must
have minimal dispersion and dissipation errors and that the computational domain
must be limited using accurate approximate radiation boundary conditions. In
addition, the waves may interact with complex geometrical objects with their own
inherent length scales. The project will address all of these issues. Building
on previous success in developing optimal rational approximations to radiation
boundary conditions for linear hyperbolic problems in uniform media, reduced
order modeling algorithms will be used to construct effective methods for
problems with Coulomb potentials, in periodic media, in multiscale media, and
for Schrodinger-type equations. The investigator will improve the efficiency of
their discretization methods, which are robust, due to energy stability, have
arbitrary convergence orders for smooth solutions, and are capable of treating
general second-order hyperbolic systems arising from action principles.
Specifically, the research will develop higher order local time-stepping schemes
to more efficiently treat locally refined and hybrid meshes and will exercise
their methods on interesting physical problems, including gravitational and
topological waves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.