* 2309475
* Exploring Coupled Physical, Biological and Chemical Processes that Control Lead Fate and Transport through Plastic Plumbing Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Maryam Salehi, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 11/30/2024
* USD 198,285.00

Lead contamination in drinking water is a serious public health concern in the
United States. Because even low levels of lead exposure can cause neurological
damage and learning disabilities in children, the U.S. EPA has set the maximum
contaminant level goal for lead in drinking water at zero. Lead in drinking
water originates predominantly from the corrosion of lead-bearing pipes and
plumbing fixtures. Plastic pipes are increasingly being utilized to replace
aging water pipes to minimize and eliminate lead contamination. Despite the
commonly held assumption that plastic water distribution pipes are inert, recent
research has established that plastic pipes can react with lead in water.
However, the mechanisms of lead sorption onto and release from plastic pipes are
poorly understood. The goal of this research is to advance our understanding of
the sorption and release of lead by plastic water distribution pipes. To achieve
this goal, the research team will characterize the extent, rate, and mechanisms
of lead sorption and release from high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and
crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) pipes into drinking water. Successful completion
of this project will further our understanding of the risk posed by lead and
help minimize the release of lead in drinking water. Further benefits to society
will be achieved through STEM education and training at the college level and
through outreach to K-12 students, thus increasing the scientific literacy of
the nation.

The formation and growth of bacterial biofilms in drinking water distribution
systems is a major health concern. While significant research has been devoted
to the effect of biofilms on the release of lead via corrosion of metallic water
pipes, the impact of biofilms on lead sorption and release by plastic water
pipes has largely been overlooked. This issue is concerning in light of the fact
that plastic pipes may be more susceptible to biofilm development than metallic
pipes. The goal of this research is to investigate the physical, chemical, and
biological mechanisms of lead sorption and release by HDPE and PEX plastic water
distribution systems. To achieve this goal, the research team will: i)
investigate the role of biofilm structure and water flow on lead sorption extent
and kinetics onto HDPE and PEX pipes; ii) examine the role of biofilm structure
on lead desorption and release from plastic pipes under varying water chemical
composition and flow conditions; and iii) combine genomic assays with
bioinformatics and machine learning to identify biomarker genes that could be
used to detect lead contamination signatures via the evaluation of microbial
gene expression profiles in water pipe biofilms. Successful completion of this
research will address significant gaps in our knowledge on the role plastic
pipes play in lead sorption. This new knowledge will help inform efforts to
control lead deposition onto and release from drinking water distribution pipes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.