* 2309630
* BRITE Pivot: Quantum Computing and Machine Learning for Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Iman Borazjani, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2026
* USD 530,513.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award will fund research that accelerates the
discovery of solutions to grand challenges involving interactions between fluids
and solids, with applications to aquatic habitat restoration, optimized energy
efficiency of turbine generators, and the study and treatment of heart disease,
thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity,
welfare, and health. Understanding the physics of fluid-structure interactions
is a critical prerequisite for such progress. Advanced computational tools play
an important role but are limited by resource and time constraints, even on
existing supercomputers. This project will address these limitations by
developing new computational tools that rely on state-of-the-art machine
learning and quantum computing techniques and that also anticipate
implementation on future generations of quantum computers. Quantum computing is
still five to ten years away from a practical gate-based digital quantum
computer but has shown promise for handling probabilistic rather than
deterministic problems already on available quantum computers and by inspiring
new algorithms for classical computers. Machine learning has revolutionized many
industries such as image/speech recognition and is expected to have a great
impact on scientific computing. This research is integrated with activities that
aim to increase interest in science, technology, engineering, and math among the
public and students, including through accessible online videos, new curricular
content, and integration of undergraduate students in interdisciplinary
research.

This research aims to make fundamental contributions to the computational study
of turbulent fluid-structure interactions by pivoting from classical approaches
to new computing concepts, namely quantum computing and machine learning,
enabling significant improvements in computational speed and efficiency for both
forward and inverse problems. Consistent with the probabilistic perspectives
that underpin both quantum computing and machine learning, a key concept of this
research is reformulating traditional fluid-structure interaction problems into
probabilistic ones. To this end, this project will extend the filtered density
function approach for turbulence modeling to large-eddy simulations of particle-
turbulence interactions, develop scientific machine learning techniques for
inverse discovery of closure terms and forward and inverse prediction of fluid-
structure interactions for energy harvesting applications, and develop quantum-
ready and quantum-inspired algorithms for mixing applications. These
developments will help the principal investigator gain expertise in novel
research tools that have the potential to lead to significant advancement of
fundamental knowledge and enable application to problems as diverse as
cardiovascular flows, bioinspired flow control and sensing, or control of
biomimetic aquatic robots.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.