* 2309280
* AMO Physics in Cryogenic Matrices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jonathan Weinstein, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 192,723.00

Atoms and molecules have been used to create some of the world's most sensitive
sensors, due to their favorable quantum properties. Prior work has shown that
atoms trapped in “cryogenic matrices” — frozen gasses such as solid neon and
hydrogen — preserve many of these crucial quantum properties, and that it is
possible to isolate and interact with single atoms in such solids. In this
project, the research team will (1) continue to investigate the properties of
atoms and molecules in these cryogenic solids and (2) use them to develop
single-atom quantum sensors. This has the potential to not only advance this
particular field, but also to develop new sensing tools for other fields of
physics, chemistry, and biology. The undergraduate and graduate students working
on the project will be trained in experimental techniques with wide
applicability in experimental science, particularly in quantum information
science.

The project has two primary goals. The first is to measure the nuclear spin
coherence of ensembles of molecules implanted in solid parahydrogen. These
measurements will shed light on the motion of the molecules within the “quantum
solid” of parahydrogen. Moreover, if the nuclear spin coherence is favorable,
this system will be of use in precision-measurement experiments for improving
our understanding of fundamental physics, such as the search for a permanent
electric dipole. The second is to use a single rubidium atom implanted in solid
neon as a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) sensor capable of measure the NMR
signal of a single nuclear spin. If successful, this would give scientists the
capability of performing NMR measurements of single molecules, a long-sought
goal. Additionally, this would be a crucial first step towards developing new
methods to image the structure of a single molecule, a potentially
transformative technology for chemistry and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.