* 2309363
* Spectroscopy of Dense Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gabriel Cecchini, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 157,643.00

Positronium is a hydrogen-like atom where, instead of a proton, the positively
charged particle is a positron, the anti-particle of the electron. Unlike
ordinary hydrogen atoms, positronium atoms spontaneously decay â€“ the electron
and positron annihilate and the energy, originally in the form of mass, is
converted into gamma rays. The primary work of this research team of faculty,
students and a post-doc will be to produce a high-density gas of positronium and
cool it to produce the first positronium superfluid, known as a Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC). Such condensates have been studied for other atoms and exhibit
a rich range of behaviors, but new experimental techniques will be required to
observe Bose condensation in positronium. Scientifically interesting in its own
right, if a condensate of positronium can be produced, the fact that positronium
atoms decay to gamma rays opens the possibility of creating a gamma ray laser.
Positronium in sufficient quantities and at low temperatures is predicted to
exhibit stimulated annihilation, in which one annihilation gamma ray photon
induces the emission of others of exactly the same direction and energy, the
essential activity required for all types of laser action. The second goal of
the project is therefore to obtain evidence for this stimulated annihilation to
open the way for the first highly penetrating annihilation gamma ray lasers.
Students will be involved in all aspects of this research and will learn
important laboratory techniques widely applicable in physics. Besides the
scientific interest in the phenomena, long term possible benefits from a gamma
ray laser include medical applications to radiography and radiation therapy,
defense and other uses of high power gamma ray beams, and the possibility of
gamma ray laser ignition of fusion for clean, low cost electric power generating
plants.

The principal goals of the project are to (1) produce and observe a Bose-
Einstein condensate of positronium and (2) to obtain evidence for the stimulated
emission of its two-photon annihilation radiation. The project will use an
existing slow positron beam and magnetic trap system that produces nanosecond
pulses of about 100 million 30% spin-polarized positrons. The positrons will be
extracted from the confining magnetic field of the trap and focused in a 200
micron diameter spot on a thin metal film that efficiently emits slow positrons.
These will be accelerated and focused to a 5 micron spot onto a target
containing cavities within which high density positronium will be formed and
thermalize to low temperatures. The positronium temperature will be measured as
a function of time by the angular correlation of the annihilation photon pairs
using an existing detector. The presence of a condensate will be inferred from
its sub-thermal apparent temperature. Various cavity geometries will be used to
achieve the required high positronium densities and sufficiently cold
positronium temperatures around 10 K. Having made the first positronium Bose-
Einstein condensate, a search will be made for the stimulated emission of its
annihilation gamma rays. Besides enabling the production of the first gamma ray
lasers, this work will open the way for other topics involving high density
positrons, including the first production and studies of the positronium
positive ion (the bound state of two positrons and one electron), formation of a
positronium atom laser beam, and production of Bose-Einstein condensed
positronium bubbles in superfluid helium-4.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.