* 2309905
* Conference: Keeping the Fire Alive: Fostering a Sustainable Community in the Combustion Sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Patton Allison, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 01/31/2024
* USD 31,580.00

This proposal is to support three outreach activities held during the U.S.
National Combustion Meeting, March 19–22, 2023, at Texas A&M University. These
activities include an Early Career Workshop for Combustion Researchers, a
Mentorship Mixer, and a Women in Combustion Luncheon. The goal of these
activities is to bring together a community of early-career combustion
researchers and develop action committees to encourage early-career
participation in the combustion research community. In the U.S., nearly 70% of
energy conversion is accomplished by combustion—hence, advancement in combustion
science is crucial to U.S. energy security and society. Workshop participants
will develop four high-priority items, including public outreach, building
productive and inclusive research group cultures, and education and communities
of practice, and navigating research challenges in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic. Workshop findings will be documented in a report that will be
disseminated to the wider technical community.

Combustion is a key technology for power generation, and this will remain the
same for decades to come. However, the combustion research community is facing
various technical and non-technical challenges. The participants will identify
challenges, educate the early-career researchers about these challenges, and
discuss possible solutions. Discussion around technical issues will include
brainstorming of novel, possibly cross-disciplinary research areas for future
work. On the other hand, various non-technical issues will also be discussed,
including communication with the public and policymakers and attracting and
retaining talented researchers from diverse backgrounds. Results of this
workshop are expected to help build a more productive combustion research
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.