* 2309348
* RUI: Double Photoionization to Probe Electron Correlation Many-Electron Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Frank Yip, California Maritime Academy
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 151,880.00

Electron correlation is a fundamental phenomena which greatly impacts the
behavior and structure of all matter. Many decades of research have led to
accurate ways of accounting for the dynamics of electrons in the simplest atoms
and molecules and have elucidated the impacts of ejecting two electrons by a
single photon in purely two electron systems. The goal of this project is to
examine the correlated electron dynamics within fundamental molecules with more
than two electrons. This work will advance the basic science of understanding
this process, which is currently most complete in purely two-electron molecules,
to chemically relevant species, e.g. ethylene and water. Correlated electron
interactions are fundamental to the organization and structure of matter at the
atomic level and continue to be of vital importance to study and better
understand. Broader consequences of a more complete understanding of electron
correlation in molecules with more than two electrons would impact many other
fields of study, including chemistry, atomic and molecular physics, molecular
biology, and material science.

Double photoionization (DPI) of molecules involving second-row atoms is a long-
term goal of theory and this work seeks to advance these capabilities, in
particular to support recent experimental observations via coincidence momentum
imaging spectroscopy (e.g., COLTRIMS) measuring the double ionization of
ethylene and water molecules that can observe the body-frame angular
distributions via a kinematically complete reconstruction of the ionic fragments
after Coulomb explosion. Both molecular targets provide a significantly more
complicated molecule to compare new theoretical calculations with these
measurements at the level of what presently exists for H2. The removal of two
electrons from an atom or molecule by photon(s) necessarily requires a correct
description of electron correlation and serves as a direct probe of this
phenomenon. The development and expansion of theoretical calculations dedicated
to double ionization previously employed for studying this process in the
simplest molecule, H2 and most recently Li2, will be expanded to consider multi-
electron polyatomic molecules as targets, in order to better understand the
broader consequences of electron correlation in fundamental molecules containing
second-row atoms possessing many more electrons. A fuller understanding and
detailed description of the effects of highly correlated electron dynamics,
particularly in the continuum, is a long-term goal of the atomic and molecular
physics research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.