* 2309760
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: Operationalizing AI/Machine Learning for Cybersecurity Training
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Houbing Song, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2024
* USD 176,000.00

The interplay between AI and cybersecurity introduces new opportunities and
challenges in the cybersecurity of AI as well as AI for cybersecurity. However,
operations and configurations of AI cyberinfrastructure (CI) with a security
mindset are rarely covered in the typical AI curriculum. To fill this gap, this
project intends to develop hands-on training materials and provide mentored
training for current and future research workforce in engineering and science-
related disciplines. By transforming and integrating training materials into a
course curriculum, this project aims to train potential cyberinfrastructure
professionals in the CI community at large to handle AI with and for
cybersecurity. This project has the potential to develop the research workforce
in operating AI cyberinfrastructure with a security mindset to meet the national
and economical needs and priorities of CI advancement.

This projectâ€™s goal is to broaden the adoption of advanced cyberinfrastructure
through training. This project develops a holistic technical approach for
cybertraining: to identify, apply, and evaluate AI techniques which are
inextricably related to well-defined operational cybersecurity challenges. The
project intends to develop a Docker-based training platform that simulates and
pre-configures a variety of scenarios to support hands-on AI cyberinfrastructure
operations in the context of cybersecurity. Three levels of projects
(exploratory, core, and advanced) are designed and integrated into the platform
to help researchers and educators customize and develop into different education
and training environments. The project democratizes the access and adoption of
advanced AI cyberinfrastructure, while integrating cyberinfrastructure skills
with the security mindset to foster inter-disciplinary and inter-institutional
research collaborations. In addition to the dissemination through publications
and social media, the outcomes from this project have the potential to benefit
the greater cyberinfrastructure community and beyond, through the training and
the sharing of the "AI for and with cybersecurity" course curriculum.

This project is jointly funded by OAC and the CyberCorps program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.