* 2309944
* MOLLER Source and Beam Control for Parity Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Caryn Palatchi, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 147,000.00

The upcoming MOLLER experiment is designed to probe fundamental interactions
with unprecedented sensitivity to discover new physics beyond the Standard
Model. MOLLER is an extremely precise experiment in which a high energy electron
beam will be directed at electrons contained in a liquid hydrogen target. The
electrons in the beam will be polarized in one direction and then flipped 180
degrees. By comparing the rate that electrons scatter with one polarization
direction to the other, the experiment is sensitive to new particles that might
exist beyond the Standard Model. This award supports research that is essential
for achieving the required polarization and flipping of that polarization. A
complementary research component is to develop a detailed design for the
proposed COIN experiment that will investigate the strange quark content of
protons. This research program will focus on simulations with the aim of
developing detailed designs for the COIN experiment. This program will educate
both high school students and undergraduates in fundamental laser laboratory
skills and train postdoc and graduate students to become world experts in parity
experiment beam control. The PI is committed to supporting the education of
future scientists and creating and sustaining a positive, inclusive, safe, and
professional research and training environment. The PI intends to support
undergraduate participation in research, including an undergraduate or high
school student from an underrepresented group. The PI intends to have members of
the research group participate in outreach programs at IU Physics.

The aim of the upcoming MOLLER experiment at Jefferson Laboratory, a national
accelerator facility, is to probe electroweak interactions with unprecedented
sensitivity reach at both low and high energy scales to discover new beyond the
Standard Model dynamics. MOLLER is an extremely precise parity violating
electron scattering (PVES) experiment searching for new neutral currents in
electron-electron scattering. This research program is essential for the
achieving parity quality beam for MOLLER to meet its stringent systematic
uncertainty goals arising from beam asymmetries. The main thrust of the research
in this project is electron beam control for the upcoming MOLLER experiment.
This effort will involve beam studies at Jefferson Lab, polarized source
efforts, and management of beam asymmetries during MOLLER Run 1. Additional
complementary efforts include efforts on the proposed COIN experiment. The COIN
experiment is a proposed experiment at Jefferson Laboratory to search for a
nonzero strange form factor of the proton at 2.5 (GeV/c)2 via a measurement of
the parity-violating asymmetry (PVA) in elastic longitudinally polarized beam
electron-proton scattering. Research goals include devoting simulation efforts
towards development of a detailed design for the proposed COIN experiment at
Jefferson Laboratory to search for a nonzero strange form factor of the proton,
building on expertise in parity violation to work through experimental details
of the measurement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.