* 2309491
* A New Computational Framework for Superior Image Reconstruction in Limited Data Quantitative Photoacoustic Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Souvik Roy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 190,000.00

Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the USA, behind heart disease. In
2023, over 600,000 cancer deaths are projected to occur in the USA. One of the
primary factors behind the high death rate for cancer patients is the late
diagnosis of cancer, since most cancers do not present early symptoms. Thus,
there is an unmet need to develop fast and effective targeted therapies for
treating cancer patients. For this purpose, biomedical imaging is a crucial
component for establishing clinical protocols in cancer by helping obtain
important anatomical, structural, and functional information of cancer formation
and spread. In particular hybrid imaging methods, which use physics of coupled
waves, provide quantitative information of cancerous tissues to guide better
diagnosis, staging, and treatment planning. One such hybrid imaging method is
quantitative photoacoustic tomography (QPAT) that uses short-pulse near infrared
light and ultrasound propagation data to reconstruct high-fidelity optical
properties, like light absorption and scattering profiles, in cancerous tissues.
However, several practical challenges, like lack of adequate datasets and
uncertainty of sound speed in tissues, limit the quality of reconstructions with
existing computational methods in quantitative photoacoustic tomography. This
project brings together a novel combination of theoretical and computational
methods in mathematical game theory and statistical sensitivity analysis to
tackle the aforementioned challenges and provide high quality reconstructions in
QPAT. As a result, it will help facilitate accurate targeted imaging of
cancerous tissues and improve clinical outcomes, thereby contributing to one of
the strategic goals of USA Heath and Human Services to “Safeguard and Improve
National and Global Health Conditions and Outcomes”. Furthermore, this project
will provide a unique interdisciplinary research and training experience for
undergraduate and graduate students, especially from underrepresented groups,
and will facilitate interdisciplinary collaboration between mathematicians,
statisticians, and radiologists in the field of biomedical imaging.

The scientific goal of this project is to build a new class of accurate, fast,
stable and robust non-linear reconstruction schemes for solving limited data
hybrid imaging problems arising in QPAT. For achieving this goal, the specific
research objectives are to (1) develop a new gradient-free Nash games
computational scheme for data completion and identification of unknown sound
speed and optical energy density in photoacoustic tomography; (2) build a new
gradient-free optimization scheme for reconstruction of optical parameters with
high contrast and resolution; and (3) use statistical sensitivity analysis to
stabilize and calibrate the Nash algorithm for obtaining a stable reconstruction
method in QPAT. The computational framework will be validated using real-time
photoacoustic data of mice specimens. The project also aims at providing a new
paradigm in computational methods for limited data inverse problems that yields
computationally inexpensive, stable and superior reconstructions in comparison
to existing computational frameworks, and thus will be beneficial for effective
detection of cancers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.