* 2309240
* Gravitational-Wave Astronomy and Astrophysics at Syracuse University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 60,000.00

Gravitational-wave astronomy has given humanity a completely new way to observe
the universe. The National Science Foundation’s Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) now routinely detects astrophysical
sources of gravitational waves. Science now has an observatory that will allow
us to peer into the cores of exploding stars, probe the interiors of neutron
stars, and explore the extreme physics of colliding black holes. The discovery
of the binary neutron star merger GW170817 was accompanied by light across the
electromagnetic spectrum and inaugurated the use of gravity as an instrument of
multi-messenger astronomy. The dramatic breakthroughs made by LIGO and Virgo are
only the beginning of our exploration of the gravitational-wave sky. Advanced
LIGO is joined by Advanced Virgo, KAGRA, and eventually there will be the next-
generation observatories, Cosmic Explorer and Einstein Telescope. New algorithms
are required to achieve the full scientific potential of the growing global
observatory network. This award will support the development of new
gravitational-wave search algorithms that will lay the foundation for the next
generation and open a window to the discovery of new classes of merging
binaries. Developing these algorithms will also equip students with the skills
needed to enhance the competitiveness of the U.S. STEM workforce.

This research investigates multi-detector coherent search algorithms that take
advantage of Bayesian tools developed for gravitational-wave astronomy. The
optimal approach to detect gravitational-wave sources is a fully Bayesian
analysis that can coherently combine gravitational-wave data from multiple
detectors and accurately model both gravitational-wave signals and detector
noise which may contain non-Gaussian transient noise, aka ’glitches’. Currently
employed searches employ heuristics that approximate the optimal approach and
enable them to be tractable on available computing resources. While this has
been an effective strategy for the early era of gravitational-wave astronomy,
these approaches sacrifice sensitivity and flexibility. Algorithms will be
explored that enable efficient hierarchical analysis of gravitational-wave data
and rapid Bayesian evidence estimation. This approach reduces the barriers
between searching for sources and the estimation of source parameters, enabling
the reuse of research in either regime into the modeling of glitches, detector
nonstationarity, and overlapping signals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.