* 2309589
* Neuron-to-Neuron Interface: Optically Connected Neurons Between the Brains of Two Zebrafish
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Eunjung Jung, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2026
* USD 337,422.00

Telepathy, as portrayed in science fiction, refers to the imagined ability to
communicate mentally with another person or animal, without relying on our
physical senses like seeing, hearing, touching, or smelling. The idea of
telepathy in science fiction can be brought to life through a brain-to-brain
interface. This interface allows the direct transfer of brain signals from one
person's or animal's brain to another's using implanted electrodes. Brain-to-
brain communication has the potential to be a groundbreaking form of
communication that not only avoids unintended interference or miscommunication
but also helps us gain a deeper understanding of how the brain sends signals and
improves brain functions. However, brain-to-brain interfaces that utilize
implanted electrodes encounter challenges in accurately transmitting neural
information. This is because the electrodes collect and transmit signals from
multiple neurons together, rather than capturing and delivering signals from
individual neurons separately. This project seeks to develop a new and
innovative approach to brain communication. It involves connecting individual
neurons between the brains of two zebrafish larvae using special genetic
biomolecules. This innovative approach will be referred to as a neuron-to-neuron
interface. A successfully developed neuron-to-neuron interface has the potential
to advance our understanding of the brain's functionality and explore
possibilities for improving its performance. This research could lead to
exciting new discoveries about the brain and how we communicate with each other.
This research will be integrated into interactive education opportunities
through summer workshops and seminars for underrepresented minority students and
families in secondary schools. It will also include educational projects
designed to engage undergraduate students in the fields of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math.

The proposed research aims to develop a novel neuron-to-neuron interface that
connects individual neurons between the brains of two zebrafish larvae and apply
the interface to improve brain functions. To build the neuron-to-neuron
connection, genetically encoded neural activity indicators and optogenetic
actuators will be implemented to monitor and control individual neuron activity
in zebrafish larvae. The proposed interface will allow individual neural signals
to be transmitted from a sender to a receiver and, as a result, will produce
synchronized behavioral outputs in both the sender and receiver fish. The
proposed system will be applied to examine restoration and augmentation of brain
functions. Specific project tasks will include: (1) create a sender and a
receiver fish by expressing genetically encoded neural activity indicator and
optogenetic actuators at target neurons, (2) build an integrated platform that
transmits neural signals from a sender to a receiver fish, and (3) apply the
neuron-to-neuron interface to rehabilitate and augment neural functions in a
receiver fish. The research approach will combine biological and technical
elements including a sender fish where individual M-neuron signals are collected
from, a receiver fish where corresponding M-neuron signals are delivered to, and
a real-time signal transmission between the sender and receiver fish. This
innovative platform will provide researchers with a unique tool to study neural
signaling and communication mechanisms, which can be applied to assess medical
interventions and therapeutics to alleviate brain disorders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.