* 2309341
* Engineering Quantum Fluctuation Phenomena in Nanoscale Quantum Optical Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Kanu Sinha, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Nanoscale quantum optical systems enhance the efficacy of light-matter
interactions by confining light in small regions. Such systems are integral to a
myriad of emerging quantum technological applications: from building single-
photon devices and storing and transmitting quantum information over long
distances, to facilitating precision tests of fundamental physics. Thus, with
growing efforts to miniaturize quantum systems, both with the fundamental
motivation to explore quantum phenomena at nanoscales and also with the
practical goal of developing modular on-chip architectures, atom-surface
interactions at nanoscales become a central facet of developing novel quantum
systems. However, when interfacing atoms at nanoscales from photonic structures,
the ever-present quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field critically
limit the ability to trap and control atoms. This work will develop ways to
engineer such quantum fluctuation phenomena – forces, dissipation and
decoherence – by leveraging the collective behavior of atomic systems and the
ability to manipulate atoms with lasers. Overcoming these critical challenges in
the design of nanoscale quantum systems will enable novel functionalities for
quantum devices. In addition to the research goals, the PI will train a diverse
undergraduate and graduate student workforce at the exciting intersection of
Quantum Science and Engineering. As a part of the educational efforts, the PI
will develop a multidisciplinary senior level course on Quantum Optics and
Quantum Information, engaging students from a diverse array of Science and
Engineering majors. This research will build a driven-dissipative Open Quantum
Systems approach to engineering quantum fluctuation phenomena – Casimir-Polder
forces, dissipation and decoherence – in collective atomic systems near surfaces
with the goal to achieve better control and coherence of nanoscale quantum
optical systems. The proposed program will build and advance new tools to
control quantum fluctuation phenomena, with four main thrusts: (1) Realizing
well-controlled and coherent atomic systems at distances of 10-100 nanometers
from surfaces by developing near-surface trapping and cooling schemes; (2)
Extending the framework of Casimir Physics and macroscopic QED to study
fluctuation phenomena with objects that can be prepared in quantum
superpositions, entangled or collective states and driven externally; (3)
Guiding experiments on high-precision measurements of Casimir-Polder forces with
atomic diffraction via nanogratings for creating repulsive drive induced
Casimir-Polder forces and manipulating Casimir-Polder forces using collective
effects; and (4) Mitigating fluctuation-induced decoherence in experiments with
levitated dielectric nanospheres, to realize macroscopic quantum superpositions
and correlated states of levitated nanoparticles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.