* 2309377
* Collaborative Research: Standard: Enhancing Internships with Professional Ethics Training: Cultivating an Ethical Engineer Identity
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Grisselle Centeno, Florida Southern College
* Continuing Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2024
* USD 133,708.00

This award supports a research project to develop a novel pedagogical approach
to the professional formation of engineers that merges engineering ethics
training in an academic setting with engineering internships in an industry
setting. The project will promote the development of strong ethical sensitivity
and reasoning skills within students (i.e. ethical competence), and it will
promote the establishment of ethical competence as a core competence associated
with the engineer identity. The research team will also develop an instrument to
measure the proposed ethical component of the engineer identity. The extant
literature provides little information regarding the development of engineering
ethics as a component of the engineer identity or strategies to measure it. In
addition, very little of the related literature incorporates ethics in relation
to engineer identity in any way. The proposed research directly addresses these
significant and problematic gaps by assessing the effects of integrating
professional ethics education into student internships on students' development
of an ethical engineer identity. During the last year of the award, the research
team will lead workshops to train faculty at both the Florida Polytechnic
University and the University of South Florida, on how to conduct the ethics
workshops themselves, enabling the sustainability of the pedagogical model and
promoting transferability of the intervention to other diverse institutions.

This project proposes to address the following pair of research questions. To
what extent do students' pre-existing attitudes, values, and goals related to
ethics and perceptions of the ethical responsibility of engineers change with
involvement in professional engineering ethics training? How might instruction
in professional engineering ethics, coupled with a co-curricular internship
experience, enhance development of the ethical component of a student's
professional engineer identity? To address these questions, the researchers will
engage in a multi-method study with engineering students at the Florida
Polytechnic University, which has a very structured, compulsory internship
program ideally suited for the proposed intervention. The intervention involves
enhanced student internships, with workshops focused on critical analyses of
ethical case studies immediately prior to the internship experience. Post
internship, they will measure the collective impact on students' ethical
engineer identity using qualitative content analysis of student essays and
online surveys. The results of this project will contribute to engineering
ethics pedagogy and develops additional ethics measures for engineer identity
research. The project will explicitly expand the intervention to engineering
students at neighboring University of South Florida, a much larger metropolitan
research-oriented university without a formal internship program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.