* 2309559
* Integrated Multiphase Blood Flow Modeling and Experiments Towards Predicting Microvascular Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Walter Murfee, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This award aims to advance current understanding of how new blood vessels grow
in the body. Such growth is central to many processes in health and disease,
from embryonic development and natural changes and repairs as the body ages, to
diabetes, heart disease, and tumor growth in cancer. Despite the importance,
little is currently known about the three-dimensional biophysical mechanisms
driving new vessel growth in real environments. To address this need, this
project will develop new data-driven models within an in-house state-of-the-art
simulation platform, integrating high-fidelity biophysical simulation with high-
resolution imaging of real blood vessel networks undergoing growth and
adaptation. Analyses will be performed to elucidate characteristics of the fluid
dynamics and biophysics underlying this growth behavior at a new level of
detail, towards enabling predictive models. This project will provide the
research community with new data-driven models and studies which integrate
concepts across disciplines, and provide opportunities to engage the local
community, and foster mentorship and education of students at various levels.

The growth of new blood vessels off existing vessels, or angiogenesis, occurs in
the microcirculation where vessel diameters are similar in size to the
individual red blood cells which comprise blood. While it is known that fluid
dynamics and shear stresses drive vascular function, current understanding of
angiogenic hemodynamics is based on reduced-order approaches which neglect
essential three-dimensional cell-scale details of blood flow. Angiogenic vessel
networks and new vessel sprouts have uniquely complex three-dimensional
geometries through which red blood cells flow and squeeze. Wall shear stress
patterns due to these considerations are largely unknown, along with other
tissue-side factors and coupled interactions expected to influence angiogenic
behavior. The goals of this project include discovering shear stress patterns
which emerge in real angiogenic vessel networks through high-fidelity red blood
cell-resolved fluid simulations, elucidating the fluid mechanics within new
vessel sprouts and connections to growth patterns, and developing a new three-
dimensional dynamic multiphysics sprout model which couples porous media tissue
transport with microvascular hemodynamics to enable vessel growth through
tissue. Potential contributions resulting from this work include helping to
predict tumor growth patterns and guiding new treatment approaches, or enabling
earlier identification of problems during embryonic development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.