* 2309192
* RUI:  Strong-Field Control of Intramolecular Dynamics in Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Eric Wells, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 73,695.00

Atoms can absorb energy from light, a process that excites their electrons. When
molecules, which are composed of multiple atoms, absorb light in a similar
manner, the absorbed energy can quickly be transferred away from the electrons
and cause the atoms within the molecule to move. The molecules can vibrate by
stretching or bending, or the atoms in the molecule can rotate about each other.
This sort of behavior is a key step in processes such as vision or
photosynthesis, and understanding how this energy transfer is accomplished can
help design more efficient collection of light or to construct light-activated
molecular switches. At an extreme level, intense, ultrashort laser pulses can
manipulate transient molecular structure directly. Stated another way, the
precise application of a laser pulse can be thought of as a light-based reagent
that alters a chemical process in a desired manner. For these reasons, this
basic research explores how the excitation of electrons in molecules by light
leads to changes in transient molecular structure and seeks ways of controlling
those processes. These studies are done with undergraduate students, which
provides motivation for further scientific education and therefore helps develop
a highly skilled workforce.

This research uses momentum imaging schemes to measure the structural evolution
of molecules following the application of intense, ultrafast laser pulses.
Photoelectron circular dichroism is a sensitive probe of chiral structure in
molecules and one part of this research aims to use these signals to probe
laser-induced transitions from achiral to chiral structures. Coincidence ion
momentum imaging can identify specific dynamic processes in molecules, and
multi-particle cumulant analysis can increase the data acquisition rate by
orders of magnitude over traditional coincidence analysis. Developing this
detection approach is the second main goal of this research. Both detection
schemes can then be linked to ultrafast laser pulse shaping and used to explore
coherent control of molecular dynamics, either through open- or closed-loop
control schemes. These studies explore fundamental questions about electronic to
nuclear coupling in molecules and how these processes might be controlled.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.