* 2309708
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Sampling and Optimization under Global Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* William Perkins, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,703.00

Sampling from complex, high dimensional probability distributions and optimizing
high dimensional functions are two central computational tasks, with
applications in machine learning, statistics, physics, and many other fields,
both industrial and scientific. A widespread and very useful framework for
studying both of these tasks is provided by probabilistic graphical models. This
framework originates in statistical physics, and physical intuition has guided
both the development of algorithms and the understanding of computational
complexity. A common setting in both practical and scientific applications is
the imposition of global constraints on a graphical model; examples including
fixing the number of interacting particles in a system, fixing magnetization in
a mathematical model of a magnet, or fixing the sizes of a partition of
elements. A rigorous understanding of the performance of algorithms in this
setting is still largely absent. The goal of this project is to develop new
techniques in algorithms and complexity to understand how global constraints
influence the tractability of these sampling and optimization problems. Guided
by insights from statistical physics, this research project will develop new
algorithms and study the limits of algorithmic approaches. The project also
involves the training of graduate students in interdisciplinary research and a
high-school outreach program.

The main research goal of the project is to build a robust theory of sampling
and optimization in the presence of global constraints in several algorithmic
contexts: computational thresholds for approximate counting and sampling; Markov
chain mixing times; and the structure of optimization problems on random graphs.
Preliminary work shows that imposing a global constraint on a Markov random
field can transform the behavior and complexity of the associated sampling and
optimization problems. Specific problems the project focuses on include the
determination of computational thresholds for the antiferromagnetic Ising model
at fixed magnetization on bounded degree graphs; proving optimal mixing time
bounds for conservative dynamics like the Kawasaki dynamics; and understanding
the limiting values of optimization problems on sparse random graphs. The
approach is guided by intuition from statistical physics, a field that provides
a natural language and suite of techniques for analyzing graphical models and a
wealth of examples of different phenomena that result from imposing global
constraints.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.