* 2309950
* Investigations in Proton-Proton Collisions at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2026
* USD 840,000.00

The ATLAS experiment operates at the highest energy collider in the world, the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland. The
high energy collisions allow probes of the smallest distance scales and the
recreation of the environment of the early universe. The LHC is both a discovery
and a precision machine probing the standard model. The greatest discovery (so
far) at the LHC has been the detection of the Higgs boson and the detailed
measurement of its properties. The Michigan State University high energy physics
group has been a member of the ATLAS collaboration since 1994 and has
participated in the construction of many of the detector’s components and
electronic systems. They have been involved in many physics analyses, including
measurements of the Higgs boson, and other standard model final states, as well
as searches for physics beyond the standard model that may result in a
fundamental understanding of many of the open questions remaining in our
understanding of the universe. These include why there is more matter than anti-
matter and why gravity is so weak compared to the other forces. In addition to
the physics goals, multiple education and outreach activities that target
schoolchildren of various ages as well as the general public are planned.

The work proposed in this award will improve the precision of standard model
measurements, particularly those relating to the Higgs boson, the Z boson, and
top quark production, in addition to fully exploring the parameter space of
possible new physics. The scientific analyses can be broadly grouped into five
general categories: the search for new, heavy resonances; the study of Higgs
boson production and decay; the precision differential cross-section
measurements of high mass Drell-Yan; the physics of top quarks; and the study of
strong interactions, especially jet production in association with bosons and
heavy quarks. With this award, the Run-2 analyses will be completed and extended
using the data from Run-3, and important detector upgrades will be carried out
as needed for ATLAS to collect data in the high luminosity era.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.