* 2309321
* Comparative Study of the High Harmonic Spectra of Transition Metal Compounds
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xi Chu, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 186,099.00

Advancements in laser technology have opened new frontiers in the study of high
harmonic generation (HHG), a phenomenon where intense laser light interacting
with materials produces higher frequencies of light. This project aims to
harness HHG to better understand the chemistry of transition metal compounds,
which are essential in various chemical processes and have extensive industrial
applications. Transition metal compounds have intriguing properties, partly due
to their complex electronic structures. By exploring the HHG spectra of
transition metal compounds, this research contributes to advancing our
understanding of these materials, which can have wide-ranging implications for
innovations in chemistry and materials science. Additionally, this project
includes educational components that will serve the national interest by
training the next generation of scientists. It integrates cutting-edge research
into classrooms and actively engages undergraduate students, providing them with
invaluable experience. Through collaborations with local schools, this project
also seeks to inspire younger students and foster a community-wide appreciation
for science.

This project focuses on examining the HHG spectra of transition metal compounds
containing carbonyl, cyanide, and chloride groups. The study employs time-
dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations to investigate several
compounds such as Ni(CO)4, V(CO)6, Ni(CN)2, Ni(CN)4^3-, and NiCl4^2-. The
analyses will encompass understanding the variations in the HHG spectra in terms
of the metal's properties, ligands, spin states, and coordination geometries.
Furthermore, the project will probe the deviations from the high harmonic cutoff
law, analyze resonance-enhanced high harmonic emissions below the ionization
potential, and explore charge transfer between the metal and ligands. This
comprehensive approach will help in understanding how the phase relations of
multiple electrons on different trajectories can deviate from the single-active-
electron (SAE) predictions in transition metal compounds. Moreover, it involves
systematic benchmarking and improvement of the TDDFT methods developed by the PI
and collaborators, which can further deepen insights into complex electronic
structures and multi-electron dynamics in transition metal compounds.

This project is jointly funded by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics
Theory Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.