* 2309084
* Hyperbolic Geometry and Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Anil Zenginoglu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 29,468.00

This award aims to improve the ability to compute gravitational waves and black
hole perturbations using hyperbolic geometry. Hyperbolic geometry plays a
crucial role in several scientific fields, including mathematics, physics,
biology, and machine learning. By exploiting the benefits of asymptotically
hyperbolic time surfaces, called hyperboloidal surfaces, we can efficiently
represent outgoing waves in an infinite domain, allowing us to access the
gravitational wave flux far away from its sources and avoid the outer boundary
treatment of finite computational grids. This award will contribute to the
broader understanding of the interactions between wave propagation and
hyperbolic geometry and provide applications to improve the solution of
fundamental problems in science and engineering. Additionally, it will support
the education and training of a highly interdisciplinary student and promote
public scientific literacy through outreach efforts, including a summer school
on wave propagation.

The hyperboloidal compactification technique maps infinite domains to finite
regions using scri-fixing and Penrose compactification, thereby translating
global problems into local ones. This technique significantly benefits the
numerical and analytical treatment of spacetime perturbations and gravitational
waves. The award activity will be divided into five subprojects to investigate
the applications of hyperboloidal surfaces with different focuses and risk
profiles. The first three subprojects focus on (i) broadening the range of
applications of the method in black hole perturbation theory, (ii) providing
detailed numerical analysis, and (iii) implementing hyperboloidal
compactification for scattering problems in unbounded domains. The fourth
subproject will experiment with bending up time surfaces to improve the
computational efficiency of existing codes for nonlinear Einstein equations. The
fifth subproject will explore the application of hyperboloidal surfaces to
quantum fields in black hole spacetimes. The potential contributions of the
project include improving the numerical and analytical treatment of spacetime
perturbations and gravitational waves, providing rigorous guidelines for the
choices of free parameters, and opening up new directions for future research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.