* 2309667
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Fairness for Emerging Infrastructure Systems with High Operational Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yu Yang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 290,549.00

This collaborative research project will advance national equity and welfare by
developing diverse fairness measures to support policy-making for emerging
infrastructure systems with disadvantaged populations involved. Emerging
infrastructure systems, such as shared e-scooter systems, are increasingly
impacting existing civil infrastructures like public transit, but it remains
unclear how to systematically and reliably quantify fairness in such systems due
to high operational dynamics. This award will contribute to a deeper and more
comprehensive understanding of the role of fairness and the associated tradeoffs
that arise when considering fairness in the design and operations of these
emerging infrastructure systems. The research findings will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate courses to educate students on the challenges of
measuring and promoting fairness in civil infrastructures amid the impact of
emerging technologies. Moreover, the project team will prepare educational
material based on the findings for the Successful Transition and Enhanced
Preparation for Undergraduates Program at the University of Florida and the High
School Virtual Summer Research Program at the Stevens Institute of Technology to
attract high school graduates, particularly women and minorities.

This project aims to create a novel framework for designing diverse fairness
measures that can effectively evaluate fairness in emerging infrastructure
systems where conflicting interests from stakeholders and inherent complex
dynamics pose unique challenges. The framework will use multi-level utility
functions to qualify the positive and negative impacts of an emerging system on
various population groups. These utility evaluations will be mapped to a
fairness value by a social welfare function that combines multiple fairness
perspectives. Additionally, the project will develop new optimization models for
addressing operational dynamics to preserve fairness and effective exact
solution methods, such as a customized Benders decomposition method based on
theoretical analysis and a specialized generation and selection procedure for
high-quality Benders cuts. A data-driven approach will be employed to construct
an uncertainty set to compute a robust estimation of the price of fairness for
any given fairness level under a specific fairness measure. A case study on
shared micro-mobility systems and extensive experiments using publicly available
real-world data will be conducted to analyze the tradeoffs and provide insights
for policy-making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.