* 2309898
* Collaborative Research: Biocatalytic Alcoholysis of PET in Nonaqueous Solvents for Polymer Recycling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joel Kaar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 378,682.00

With the accumulation of plastics in the environment being one of the most
pressing societal challenges today, the development of methods to improve
plastics recycling continues to grow in importance. A major challenge to
plastics recycling is developing processes that are cost effective and yield
polymers with properties that are identical to or better than those of the
original plastic. While the use of biological catalysts for polymer recycling
and upcycling has generated significant interest, research has been restricted
to reactions that take place in water. Due to the limitations of water as a
medium for such reactions, new approaches that improve the efficiency and
conversion of plastic waste using biologically based methods are needed. The
overall aim of this work is to explore the use of natural enzymes to deconstruct
common single-use plastics such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET – commonly
used in clothing fibers and liquid/food containers) in the absence of bulk
water. This work will specifically leverage the dramatically improved properties
of enzymes in “dry” environments, including the ability to catalyze a range of
reactions that are not possible in aqueous media. This research will investigate
enzymes that potentially can degrade PET in new ways that facilitate the
repolymerization of the reaction products, which is critical for recycling. This
effort will lead to a detailed understanding of the reaction parameters that
impact enzyme efficiency in converting PET waste into useful, recycled plastics
building blocks. This research will broaden participation in STEM research by
engaging a diverse group of undergraduate and high school students in this
research program. Participants will be recruited through a variety of programs,
including the Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training (SMART) and STEM
Routes programs at CU Boulder and Miami University. Moreover, meaningful
teaching modules will be developed that can be incorporated into K-12 curricula
on the biodegradation of materials and biocatalysis.

The objective of this proposal is to develop a novel biocatalytic process for
the deconstruction of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastics based on the
alcoholysis of ester bonds in the polymer backbone by lipase. Of specific
interest is correlating the kinetics of PET alcoholysis with the thermodynamics
of the depolymerization reaction as well as the solvent properties, which enable
the rate of alcoholysis to be fine-tuned. A major advantage of this approach
over the hydrolysis of PET is that the use of nonaqueous media may promote
swelling of the polymer, thereby increasing plasticity of the polymer chains.
This in turn will increase the accessibility of the ester linkages in the
polymer backbone and thus may significantly enhance the rate of biocatalytic
conversion. Additionally, the use of nonaqueous solvents over water increases
the ease of separation of the reaction products and can enhance the
thermostability of the enzymes. These advantages potentially will eliminate the
need for the high reaction temperatures as well as energy intensive pretreatment
steps, such as melt extrusion and microgrinding, used in current PET recycling
approaches. This work will specifically test the hypothesis that esterases can
catalyze the alcoholysis of PET in nonaqueous media, and that the rate of
alcoholysis can be controlled by varying the thermodynamic equilibrium water
activity of the reaction as well as the solvent properties and choice of alcohol
as the nucleophile. These studies will use lipase, including cutinase, as a
model esterase since it is already well established that lipases can catalyze
alcoholysis reactions in anhydrous media and bind to PET. Additionally, to
correlate the kinetics of PET alcoholysis with the thermodynamics of the
reaction, water activity will be controlled using salt hydrates. Finally, as
part of this effort, rational strategies will be developed to reduce diffusional
limitations of lipase in nonaqueous solvents, including ion pairing with
surfactants. While this effort will focus on PET recycling, the proposed
approach may be applicable in recycling of other synthetic polyesters. Moreover,
the fundamental understanding of depolymerization reaction mechanisms developed
by this this research program also may lead to new ways to chemically modify
polyesters to improve their utility and recyclability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.