* 2309683
* Large-Scale Models and Algorithms in Diffeomorphic Shape and Image Registration
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 340,128.00

Data in various fields including medical imaging, computer vision or physics
often have geometric properties that are essential for their understanding, and
these types of data are increasing in sample size, volume per sample and
modalities. An example of such data sets, and a special focus of this project,
are images resulting from new acquisition techniques that render biological
tissues at the micron scale while providing high-dimensional information on each
cell contained in the tissue. The analysis of geometric data has seen
considerable progress in the recent past with, in particular, the mathematical
formulation of the notion of shape space and the design of associated
computational methods. However, these methods do not scale yet to the massive
data size that are associated with the new modalities. This project, which
focuses on shape and image data, develops new data science approaches inspired
by recent advances over the past decade and develops new models to handle multi-
scale representations. Shape analysis provides major elements for the
understanding of biological and medical data, and becomes increasingly relevant
with the refinement of data acquisition technology. It has been extensively
applied in the context of brain diseases or dysfunction, such as schizophrenia,
depression, ADHD, autism, Huntington or Alzheimer. This project will extend the
range of tools available for such studies, allowing for the analysis of datasets
captured at finer resolution, accommodating recently introduced modalities, and
enabling statistical investigations working at multiple scales.

The project develops new concepts and models for shape analysis through
diffeomorphic mapping. It describes three main research themes: introducing new
approaches for multiscale analysis, developing randomized optimization
strategies for the large deformation diffeomorphic metric mapping algorithm, and
investigating registration methods for images that may have discontinuities or
singularities. The proposed work involves a combination of theoretical analyses,
numerical developments, and experimental exploration. The multiscale models
studied in the first theme provide an appealing and previously unexplored
paradigm, with notable challenges, especially on the numerical side. Results are
expected to significantly impact statistical shape analysis by providing an
enriched decomposition of shape changes, and enabling the separation of various
effects affecting the data when they occur at different scales. The second theme
revisits some of the bases underlying diffeomorphic registration to allow for
randomized implementations using stochastic gradient descent. Image varifolds,
studied in the third theme, have the ability to model shapes carrying spatial
information and enable new data modalities to be handled by registration
methods. The project will create algorithms, with numerical representation
adapted to these modalities, and explore cross-modality registration. The
project will support the education of a graduate student and summer internships
for undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.