* 2309932
* RESEARCH-PGR: Atomic Numbers: Identifying the conserved genes driving element accumulation in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Ivan Baxter, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2027
* USD 653,251.00

Elements are building blocks of matter that cannot be chemically interconverted.
Their acquisition and utilization are essential for all life. Yet, many genes
involved in the process of element acquisition are unknown. The hypothesis
tested in this proposal is that genes underlying element acquisition can be
detected by using their evolutionary conservation. This research uses plant
genetic datasets from five diverse species (the model plant Arabidopsis, maize,
sorghum, soybean, and rice) to identify genes in conserved regions of genomes
that direct elemental accumulation. Mutants in these genes in Arabidopsis, maize
and sorghum will be identified and characterized to determine the mechanisms of
element accumulation. Comparing the results of the characterization experiments
to the predictions will enable refinement of the comparative approach. The
approach will also be extended to utilize data from different environments in
each species permitting exploration of interactions between genes and
environments in any organism. This approach is extendable to all species that
can be sequenced, including other crops. Knowledge of the mechanisms of
elemental homeostasis is critical to understanding plant adaptation and
necessary to reduce fertilizer requirements in crops. To expand the community of
scientists, we will integrate our bioinformatics and genetics research into
undergraduate classrooms, bring undergraduates into the lab, conduct after-
school activities for middle schoolers, and produce a podcast for scientific
trainees and the research community.

Elemental acquisition and utilization are fundamental to metabolism in all
cellular life. Plants change their metabolism and physiology to accommodate
many-fold differences in element availability. Previous work used genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) of elemental accumulation across five species and
determined that, more often than expected, orthologous genes are present within
confidence intervals of these quantitative trait loci. To validate the
predictions of gene function, this project will analyze loss-of-function alleles
from sequence-indexed mutant populations of Arabidopsis, sorghum, and maize for
effects on elemental profiles. Among the orthologs in the GWAS experiments are
genes likely involved in elemental transport and transcriptional regulators of
this process. This project will explore the biology of a subset of candidate
genes to determine the aspects of cell biology and gene expression they control.
The project will carry out mechanistic investigations of these genes consistent
with their functional annotation (e.g., transcription factor; transporter). The
orthologous approach not only permits the combining of multiple GWAS experiments
across species, but also can create lists of orthologs affecting environmentally
contingent or population-specific variation. The project will extend the method
to incorporate experiments across multiple environments and multiple population
types into the orthology-based approach. This will extend the approach to permit
future exploration of gene-by-environment interactions in elemental homeostasis
and improve the accurate identification of causative genes from quantitative
genetic experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.