* 2309626
* Novel Numerical Methods  for Nonlinear Stochastic PDEs and High Dimensional Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiaobing Feng, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 123,285.00

Many scientific, engineering, and industrial applications involve random
effects. Incorporating uncertainties into mathematical models becomes
indispensable in order to develop more accurate and robust mathematical models
from biological, engineering, and physical applications, which makes it
necessary to consider stochastic partial differential equations as they are the
most commonly encountered stochastic models from applications. To seek solutions
of those equations require accurate, efficient, and robust computational methods
and algorithms, the demand for such methods and algorithms has never been
greater. The current approaches for solving stochastic partial differential
equations face considerable challenges at large scales, in the meantime, such
stochastic models become more complicated as more difficult nonlinearity and
noise are considered. The existing numerical approaches are not efficient to
solve those problems, which in turn calls for new ideas and approaches. With
rapid developments in nontraditional applied sciences such as mathematical
finance, image processing, economics, and data science, there is an ever-
increasing demand for efficient numerical methods for solving challenging high-
dimensional problems such as computing integration and solving partial
differential equations. The traditional grid-based methods are hampered by the
infamous curse of dimensionality in which the amount of required computations
for solving a problem grows exponentially in the dimension. The primary goal of
this research project is to develop novel and efficient numerical methods to
address those challenges. The project consists of two integral parts. Part I
focuses on developing and analyzing efficient numerical methods for solving
several nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations which arise from
various scientific and engineering applications such as materials science, fluid
and quantum mechanics, and optimal control. Part II will be devoted to
developing novel numerical methods for high-dimensional computation with a focus
on problems of high-dimensional numerical integration and high-dimensional
partial differential equations. The overreaching vision of this project is to
develop a framework for constructing and analyzing numerical methods for general
nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations and to develop new
approaches and enabling methods for overcoming the curse of dimensionality
challenge for high-dimensional computation. The project will include training of
graduate students.

This research project develops advanced numerical methods for nonlinear
stochastic partial differential equations and high-dimensional computation. Such
a timely and advanced project is of great interest to the STEM community as the
anticipated numerical methods and algorithms will provide much-needed enabling
tools for tackling challenging problems described mathematically by stochastic
partial differential equations or involved with high-dimensional computation
from many scientific, engineering, and industrial applications as well as AI,
machine learning, and data science. This research project is also expected to
have a lasting impact on the advancement of numerical stochastic partial
differential equations and high-dimensional computation. Moreover, the project
will provide a valuable opportunity and resource to train Ph.D. graduate
students and to help them to develop necessary applied and computational
mathematics as well as AI, machine learning, and data science knowledge and
skills so that they can pursue successful careers in either academia or industry
in the near future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.