* 2309519
* Towards Harmonic Analysis in Wasserstein Space: Low-Dimensional Structures, Learning, and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Shuchin Aeron, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 07/31/2026
* USD 98,231.00

Developing efficient methods for statistical and computational data analysis is
an essential task in the 21st century. This project will leverage structures in
large, high-dimensional data which has the potential to transform a range of
scientific areas including image processing, natural language processing, and
computational social sciences. Data will be modeled as probability measures in
order to develop tractable and data-efficient machine learning methods that
crucially leverage intrinsic geometric properties of the data (e.g., shapes in
images and semantics in text documents). The focus is on theoretical foundations
and scalable algorithms that compete with state-of-the-art black box methods
while retaining a high degree of interpretability. Beyond the core focus on
mathematics, data science, and machine learning, these frameworks and algorithms
have immediate applications to geoscience and geography. The new data analysis
tools developed will allow the investigators to address long-standing open
problems in these fields, which will provide important sources of validation
data. A major component of this project is training both PhD students and
undergraduates in research at the intersection of mathematics, data science, and
computing.

Specifically, the focus of the project is on fundamental problems of (1)
modeling with and computing in intrinsically low-dimensional sets of probability
measures and (2) the learnability and expressivity of these low-dimensional
sets. The investigators treat data as measures in Wasserstein space and propose
to develop analogues of low-dimensional models in the classical vector space
setting by allowing for efficient synthesis and analysis of observed measures
with respect to a set of reference distributions. The focus is on two major
problems pertaining to low-dimensional structures in Wasserstein space. First,
what is the "correct" model for intrinsically low-dimensional subsets of
Wasserstein space, and how can they be computed? The investigators propose to
mimic notions of low-dimensional subspace (exact and approximate), by proposing
three models that leverage the geometric properties of Wasserstein space, as
well as recent computational advances in entropic regularization. The goal for
these three models is to efficiently encode (analyze) measures by their
coefficients in these low-dimensional subsets of Wasserstein space, and also
decode (synthesize). The focus is on efficiency from both a statistical (e.g.,
estimating given samples from the measures) and computational (e.g., designing
algorithms with sub-cubic complexity) perspective. Second, what are the
efficient, computable, and expressive representational systems in Wasserstein
space? The investigators propose to tackle the data-driven problem of, given
observed probability measures, how to identify and learn a small number of
reference measures that can represent them efficiently. In parallel, the
investigators will study the fundamental problem of what systems are expressive
enough to represent typical elements of Wasserstein space. This provides the
crucial connection between the computational algorithms and an embryonic theory
of harmonic analysis in Wasserstein space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.