* 2309322
* Compressible Turbulence from Quantum to Classical
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Forbes, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

A deep understanding of turbulence is required to enable fusion as a source of
energy, improve supersonic flight, and explain the formation of elements like
gold from supernovae and colliding neutron stars. Despite its importance, many
aspects of turbulence are still not well understood, in part due to the
difficulty of performing experiments: for example, studying supersonic flow
requires expensive wind tunnels, and neutron stars can only indirectly be
measured. While efforts are underway to study these systems through NSF funded
programs like LIGO, recent advances in cold-atom technology provide a new
platform to create turbulence in table-top experiments. For example, superfluid
cold atoms have a very low speed of sound, enabling hypersonic flow, and are
highly tunable, allowing them to directly model aspects of neutron stars. This
project will establish a connection between quantum turbulence in these table-
top experiments and important applications that complement ongoing efforts in
nuclear physics, nuclear astrophysics, and classical turbulence. The outcomes
will not only progress science, but will identify unique quantum features that
can be used to advance quantum technologies with future societal benefit similar
to how previous advances in cold atom technology produced the precision clocks
that enable GPS.

This project will explore the relationship between quantum and classical
hydrodynamics, addressing questions about the microscopic origins of turbulence,
and how the macroscopic hydrodynamics needed to model neutron stars etc. emerge
from microscopic physics. Specifically, it will explore how these macroscopic
theories emerge after coarse-graining quantum systems, answering questions like:
Are the emergent theories classical (i.e. do they flow to a Navier-Stokes-like
fixed-point?) or do they retain unique quantum effects that can be exploited for
new applications? Methods will be developed for detecting and characterizing
quantum turbulence in spite of destructive imaging, and will be validated in
close collaboration with experimental groups, exploring new quantum phenomena
along the way. These validated methods will then be used to advance nuclear
physics such as the origin of pulsar glitches. These investigations require high
performance computing and sophisticated data analysis techniques, which will
result in open source tools, broadly impacting a variety of related fields, and
provide students with the skills needed for successful careers in science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.