* 2309538
* Discovering How Stress Induced Histomorphogenesis Effects the Long-term Leaching from an Implanted Medical Device using Phase Field Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Martin Tanaka, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 199,824.00

This project will use computer simulations to better understand the effects of a
medical implant on the surrounding tissue. Many people benefit from implanted
medical devices to restore body function caused by injury, disease, cancer, or
aging. Plastics and other polymers are commonly used in hip implants, knee
implants, and coatings around these devices. This could cause harm if
potentially hazardous chemicals within them leach into the body. Existing
computer simulations can be used to predict the amount of material released from
a device for short-term exposure. However, these models cannot accurately
capture long-term exposure because they do not consider changes in the tissue
that occur during the healing process. This award supports fundamental research
to provide knowledge needed to generate computer simulations that account for
tissue changes near an implanted device. Outcomes include developing a better
understanding of how these changes impact tissue permeability and may contribute
to the assessment of the risk posed by medical devices. In addition, this
research will further enhance our understanding of transport properties in
biological tissue, support three high priority regulatory science projects, and
provide undergraduates with funded research opportunities.

Phase field modeling is a powerful technique that can be used to model
heterogeneous materials that change phase over space and time. The
characteristics of an individual element are identified by field parameters that
enable individual elements to evolve over time, giving a single model the
ability to effectively capture complex time-dependent behavior. It was selected
for this study because of its ability to model the transformation of tissue from
regular preimplantation phenotypes to fibrous and avascular tissue associated
with the foreign body capsule. Because the element characteristics are
controlled by the field and not permanently associated with specific elements,
the boundary location between different tissue phenotypes can move as healing
progresses and a single-phase field model can capture both the
histomorphological changes and the biotransport properties of the system through
the entire duration of the healing process. This work will be the first
application of phase field modeling to characterize the evolution of the complex
heterogeneous tissue structure surrounding an implanted medical device.
Furthermore, it will also be the first model that quantifies the release of
leachable chemicals by an implant through heterogeneous tissues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.