* 2309069
* The Making of a University Hub for Basic Cultural Anthropological Research Related to Cultural and Biodiversity Conservation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2024,08/31/2026
* Rui Diogo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 458,076.00

No group is immune to ecological crises but indigenous, rural, and minority
communities are often the ones that suffer most. The project addresses
inequities during crises in two ways: 1) by focusing on 'other others',
particularly on indigenous communities of the higher Himalayas, that are now
confronting major environmental problems; and 2) by including undergraduate and
graduate students who will conduct research, outreach activities, and workshops.
In this sense, the project further develops long-term synergies between
communities and international institutions of higher learning, including
stakeholders that study cultural anthropological and biodiversity conservation.

The research triangulates a variety of scientific fields including the
behavioral and social sciences. It studies the Traditional Ecological Knowledge
hypothesis (TEK) by focusing on four interconnected yet separate objectives to
determine (1) whether some forms of market incorporation could develop without
eroding local ecological knowledge; (2) whether religious beliefs are associated
with the conservation of the physical environment; (3) the extent to which
individual socio-cultural and demographic traits affect TEK; and finally (4)
whether the selection of knowledge sharing is based on social cues. The study
involves several highly innovative elements, such as being one of the first in-
depth examinations of cultural norms, cosmology, and beliefs to integrate
cutting-edge statistical modeling and social network studies with more
qualitative, traditional cultural approaches to explore how the learning process
change over time.

The project is funded with co-funding support from the HBCU-Excellence in
Research Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.