* 2309634
* Quantum Gravity, Horizons, and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Theodore Jacobson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 551,273.00

The grant will support research projects on several aspects of gravitational
physics where curved spacetime plays a key role. One group of topics pertains to
the outstanding fundamental problem of understanding the quantum nature of
spacetime. Specifically, research will be carried out pursuant to the nature of
quantum states of spacetime. Much of this work focuses on the peculiar role of
event horizons, since that is thought to be a promising window on the mysteries
of quantum gravity. Other work will be directed at probing the validity of
Einstein's theory of gravity by exploring the theoretical and observational
consequences of certain modifications of that theory, particularly as that
affects the behavior of black holes. A different component of the research will
address questions about the behavior of magnetized plasma around astrophysical
bodies like neutron stars and black holes, taking into account the effects of
curved spacetime. This work could contribute to a better understanding of
observations of these objects and their surroundings made with radio telescopes.
Finally, in collaboration with an experimental atomic quantum fluid research
group, research will be directed at exploring and exploiting the analogy between
physics of quantum fluids and fields in curved spacetime, such as in the
expanding universe. The results of the proposed research will be disseminated
through written articles, as well as seminars, conference talks, and colloquia,
and will contribute to our understanding of fundamental questions, as well as to
observations and experiments in a more interdisciplinary fashion. The PI will
provide instruction and mentoring to graduate and undergraduate students,
regarding scientific research, writing, and verbal communication. The PI will
design and implement instruction in a University of Maryland summer programs for
rising 9th graders and for high school girls interested in physics. All of these
activities will contribute to technical training and scientific literacy, as
well as understanding and appreciation of the insights of physics.

The main areas of work concern: 1) path integral methods for computing horizon
entropy in quantum gravity ensembles, 2) non-perturbative reduced phase space
quantization of a compact domain in 2+1-dimensional gravity, 3) the origin of
outgoing black hole modes, 4) analog quantum field theory in a Bose-Einstein
condensate, 5) general relativistic treatment of magnetic helicity around black
holes and neutron stars, and 6) black hole horizons in Lorentz-violating gravity
theories. Under 1), one project will study the relation between the
nonperturbative path integral approach and the recent semiclassical analysis
using algebraic quantum field theory, and another will interrogate the role of
the near-horizon imaginary time evolution method in computing horizon entropy
with an otherwise real spacetime path integral. Under 2) the aim is to further
understand the operators and states in the algebraic quantization found
previously, including their implications for entropy and Hamiltonian (time
evolution). One approach to this will be to determine the relation to the
alternative, covariant phase space approach, and to the so-called corner
symmetry algebra, on which much work has been done by others. Further, we may
extend the treatment to allow for conical singularities, handles, or a black
hole in the spatial domain. Under 3) an attempt will be made to improve
understanding of the relation between gravitational anomalies and Hawking
radiation, and its connection to the puzzle of the origin of the outgoing black
hole modes. Additionally, an attempt will be made to use perturbative quantum
gravity to characterize the expected quenching of correlations between points,
one of which is near a horizon. Projects under 4) will design and interpret
analog quantum field theory measurements of the quantized phonon field, working
together with the Maryland Bose-Einstein condensate group. Projects under 5)
will formulate the general relativistic theory of energy minimization at fixed
magnetic helicity in ideal plasmas, as well as of relative helicity in domains
like black holes and neutron stars with boundaries allowing for helicity
injection. Projects under 6) will probe the nature of black hole horizons with
non-stationary horizon generators, to better understand how the horizon
structure and the possibility of its curvature singularities in the infinite
past or future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.