* 2309212
* WOU-MMA:Support for LIGO Scientific Collaboration Core Functions in the Era of Gravitational-Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Patrick Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,100,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
NSF Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) consists of two
large-scale interferometric detectors one located near Hanford, Washington, and
one near Livingston, Louisiana. The LIGO detectors have been, and continue to
be, the most sensitive instruments of their kind in the world. The LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC) is a self-governing collaboration using
gravitational wave detectors to explore the fundamental physics of gravity and
observe the universe, as a multi-messenger astronomical tool of discovery. The
LSC works toward this goal through development, commissioning, and operation of
gravitational wave detectors; through the development and deployment of
techniques for gravitational wave observation; and through interpretation of
gravitational wave data. The LSC vision is to grow this field globally by
collaborating with similar collaborations such as Virgo and KAGRA as part of an
International Gravitational Wave Network (IGWN). The LSC funds core
collaboration functions via activities fees provided in proportion to authorship
by each member group. This NSF award pays the LSC activity fees for authors
based in the United States. The activity fees fund the LSC Fellows Program,
which enables junior collaboration members to make extended visits to the
detector locations. While there, they work with on-site mentors to improve the
instruments or to calibrate and vet the raw data. This award will be used to
train a new generation of physicists, expert in gravitational-wave science, and
in building and deploying complex scientific instruments, analyzing large data
sets, and communicating with the public.

The goal of directly detecting gravitational waves was realized in 2015 with the
detection of those waves originating from the binary black hole merger,
GW150914. In 2017 the detection of the binary neutron star merger GW170817 by
the LSC and Virgo inaugurated the modern era of multi-messenger gravitational-
wave astronomy. This award enables the LSC to carry out its scientific mission
of using gravitational waves to explore the fundamental physics of gravity by
also supporting: publication costs for collaboration papers, including costs to
provide open-access; travel costs for the LSC spokesperson and for members
engaged in LSC related service activities; computing services for hosting
identity and access management, and to support the collaborations’ use of
GitLab; an administrator to help run a collaboration with over 1,500 members.
Effective and efficient management of the LSC, increased participation by LSC
member institutions in on-site activities, and supporting computing tools and
infrastructure that facilitate easier collaboration among members all serve to
advance the LSC’s goal of establishing the field of gravitational-wave
astronomy. Developing a broad base of physicists that are trained in
gravitational-wave science and have first-hand experience at an observatory, are
keys to the successful evolution of the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.