* 2309500
* Conference: The 17th US-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Next-Generation Semiconductors and the Environmental Implications of Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ahmed Busnaina, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/29/2024
* USD 59,740.00

The Forum on Nanotechnology between the U.S. and Korea has been held annually
since 2003 in alternating countries, except during the COVID-19 pandemic. These
forums focus on enhancing research collaboration in the field of nanotechnology
among scientists and engineers from both countries. The joint forum facilitates
networking between the research communities and agencies of both countries,
promoting exchange of information and new opportunities for research
collaboration. The forum’s topics this year will be Next-Generation
Semiconductors and the Environmental Implications of Semiconductor
Manufacturing. One keynote speaker, seven senior presenters and seven early-
career presenters from the U.S. will participate with the same number of Korean
presenters. The organizing committee will emphasize diversity of the
participants. This forum will bring together a bi-national community of expert
researchers and innovators who are working at the leading edge of next-
generation semiconductors and environmentally benign semiconductor
manufacturing. The outcome of this forum will lead to milestones and vigorous
research collaboration between the U.S. and Korea in semiconductor technology
that can generate significant economic and social impact. The forum’s
proceedings and findings will be made available to a broad audience on Carnegie
Mellon’s website.

Semiconductor technology will be an important thrust area in economic
development, defense, and security for the U.S. and Korea over the next decade.
This forum will explore cost/performance gains using 3D integration through
monolithic and heterogenous integration and advanced packing processes to
continue Moore’s law. Further decreases in chip sizes will require novel
environment, health, and safety (EHS) solutions. Therefore, development of novel
devices that use nanotechnology to evaluate semiconductor fabrication chemistry
for toxicity, environmental fate, and behavioral characteristics will be
discussed. Cost effective methods that use nanotechnology with a multiscale
approach are needed to assure that wastewater effluents and air emissions have
minimal environmental impact. Ultra-pure water (UPW) is important in
semiconductor manufacturing and fabrication processes. Thus, novel reduction,
reuse, and recycling techniques for UPW in manufacturing and chemical mechanical
planarization in conjunction with EHS will also be discussed. The broader
impacts will include new recommended paradigms in semiconductor science,
environmentally benign manufacturing, and education, as well as new
collaborations in the semiconductor manufacturing research, especially among
early-career scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.