* 2309896
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence and Network Theory for Elections
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Bryant Avila, KCORE ANALYTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project promotes and enhances transparency in the democratic process. It
accomplishes this by developing a social awareness system that can detect,
understand, and predict opinion trends within a democratic society. Through the
development of cutting-edge artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, the project
contributes to scientific and technological knowledge by improving the
prediction of election results and societal opinion trends with high accuracy.
By employing machine learning, the project aims to surpass the limitations of
traditional polling methods and provide a real-time predictor of election
outcomes worldwide. The project will address the credibility of news on social
media serving to strengthen the resilience of the population against
misinformation. In addition, the project demonstrates a commitment to
inclusivity by actively seeking the participation of underrepresented
minorities.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to predict
global elections in real-time through the integration of artificial
intelligence, network theory, and big data science. By harnessing the power of
advanced machine learning models and analyzing vast amounts of publicly
expressed opinions on social media, the team offers accurate forecasts of
election outcomes. This approach has the potential to disrupt the conventional
polling industry, which faces growing uncertainties and challenges such as
declining response rates and inherent biases in sampling. The research
objectives entail tackling critical research and development challenges,
including predicting voter turnout, effectively sampling rural areas with
limited online coverage, filtering out bots and fake news sources, inferring the
preferences of undecided voters, adjusting sample weights on a state-by-state
basis, addressing the opinions of individuals not active on social media, and
mitigating social desirability bias (where respondents conceal their intention
to vote for controversial candidates). The anticipated technical results involve
the development of a transformative machine learning architecture built upon
Graph Neural Networks. The framework enables optimized resource allocation and
significantly improves the precision of predictions. Ultimately, the results
will empower decision-makers with reliable real-time information, facilitating
informed choices, and enhancing the resilience of the democratic process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.