* 2309090
* Broadening Participation Research Center: HBCU Center for Math Education and Research
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Timothy Glaude, Virginia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,194,250.00

Broadening Participation Research Centers provide support to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to conduct broadening participation research
and serve as national hubs for the rigorous study and broad dissemination of the
critical theories, structures and pedagogies, as well as culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. This project seeks to increase the number of
African American and underrepresented minority students in STEM and math
teachers' pipelines by broadening participation research and providing high-
impact practices as math tutors for those majoring in STEM and education
disciplines. Using the Algebra Project and the Southern Initiative Algebra
Project (SIAP) pedagogies, in-service math teachers, pre-service teachers, and
STEM college students will implement SIAP's PK-16 Model in several K-12 public
school districts in three regions of the United States. Students are provided
mentoring as they participate in developmental studies of how students develop
and maintain proficiency in math, manage biases associated with minorities in
math and science, and persist in STEM disciplines despite those biases. The
primary thrust of research will concentrate on the sources and underlying
factors governing college studentsâ€™ success and persistence in STEM and
education.

Guided by the phenomenological variant of ecological systems and communities of
practice theories, which focus on contexts, support, adaptive and maladaptive
coping, and the developments of emergent identities undergirding academic
performance, the project uses mixed methods (e.g., focus groups, interviews,
surveys, type and levels of support, academic records, standardized math scores,
attendance records, etc.) to study how African American and underrepresented
minority students become proficient math learners, manage biases (including
racial, gender, and economic) and persist in STEM disciplines. HBCU college
students will be engaged in broadening participation research as field
researchers involved in quantitative and qualitative data collection associated
with the aforementioned survey research and focus groups. Students will be
engaged in both high-impact tutoring practices while being involved in citizen
science and action research as they will simultaneously exemplify a form of
community engagement representing both their university and the community
intervention undergirded by SIAP's design team (i.e., their community and site
development team). A robust external evaluation will monitor and assess progress
on all objectives, providing both formative and summative assessment of all
Center activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.