* 2309267
* Collaborative Research: Cosmic Explorer Optical Design
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Lisa Barsotti, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 172,314.00

The US has played a leading role in the global effort toward the observation of
gravitational waves for several decades, resulting in the Nobel Physics Prize in
2017 for the first detection of waves from a binary black hole merger by the
Advanced LIGO detectors, and many more astrophysical revelations since. Cosmic
Explorer is the means by which the US will maintain that leadership in the
decades to come. The Cosmic Explorer concept for a next-generation gravitational
wave observatory seeks to answer fundamental questions about our universe such
as: How did black holes form throughout cosmic time? What is the physics of
extreme matter? What is the true nature of strong gravity? This project supports
the conceptual design of the laser interferometers that will enable the Cosmic
Explorer gravitational wave detectors to achieve cosmological range and
exquisite fidelity in their observations. The team assembled for this award
brings to bear decades of relevant experience and will build on the lessons
learned from Advanced LIGO, leveraging legacy and novel concepts and
technologies to produce a robust conceptual optical design. In the process of
producing this optical design, the award will also serve to develop the
workforce that will be essential for completing the further stages of design,
installation and commissioning of the Cosmic Explorer detectors. By putting
Cosmic Explorer more firmly on the path to actualization, this award will ensure
that gravitational wave science continues inspiring young scientists across the
country to fulfill their potential as the world-leading researchers of the
future.

At the heart of the Cosmic Explorer concept are 40-km and 20-km laser
interferometers operating with unprecedented strain sensitivity, an order of
magnitude greater than that of Advanced LIGO. The improved sensitivity is
primarily afforded by the increase in scale, as opposed to the implementation of
as-yet unverified technological advancements, thereby reducing technical risk.
Nonetheless, the increase in scale itself presents unique challenges for the
optical design of the Cosmic Explorer interferometers, such as decreased
frequency spacing of parasitic optical modes, control band-width limitations due
to the cavity delay, and tighter noise requirements for auxiliary degrees of
freedom at low frequencies. Moreover, with the design of an entirely new
facility comes the opportunity to develop the optical layout and the
infrastructure in parallel, minimizing facility constraints impact on instrument
performance, and therefore the achievable science. The work supported by this
award will produce a parametric conceptual optical design for the Cosmic
Explorer interferometers, informing all other detector subsystem requirements,
ahead of a conceptual design review anticipated to take place roughly five years
from the award start date. The optical design has been divided into four main
work-packages, each led by one of the four collaborating institutions: Core
Interferometer, Interferometer Sensing and Control, Laser Stabilization and Lock
Acquisition, and Readout and Quantum Enhancement. The tasks contained within
these work packages will be addressed using a range of analytical and numerical
simulation techniques and will be coordinated with the broader Cosmic Explorer
conceptual design through the Cosmic Explorer Systems Team.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.