* 2309782
* NSF-BSF: Computational Methods for Shape Space Analysis in Structural Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Joseph Kileel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 05/31/2026
* USD 144,314.00

Modern scientific applications require analyzing massive and complex datasets. A
prevalent situation is that each data point is itself geometrical (due to being
an image for example), while the totality of the dataset carries shape structure
as well (due to underlying motion for instance). Consider structural biology,
where experimental techniques known as cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray free
electron lasers can be used to capture hundreds of thousands of noisy images of
a protein of interest. Scientists then use software tools to reconstruct the
three-dimensional shape of the protein and its conformations, which are vital to
basic science and drug discovery. In this project new computational and
mathematical methods will be developed for analyzing image sets and volumetric
datasets which exhibit continuous variability. The project will provide graduate
student training, and opportunities for students in the US and Israel to
collaborate.

The first part of the research will integrate metrics from the field of optimal
transport with machine learning methods for dimensionality reduction and
clustering, in a way that is tailored towards the analysis of shape space
datasets. Graph-based methods will be combined with the Wasserstein metric with
emphases on noise robustness, sample and computational efficiency, and
interpretability in terms of geometric deformations. The second part of the
research will be to develop an algebraic framework for dealing with symmetries
in shape space datasets, such as rotational symmetries. Group representation
theory will be used within principal component analysis and graph-based learning
methods to achieve better efficiency than current approaches. This project will
produce rigorous mathematical algorithms with broad applicability, and
specialized software libraries for pressing scientific applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.