* 2309922
* Studying Quantum Chromodynamics at LHCb
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christine Aidala, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 06/30/2026
* USD 736,406.00

The protons and neutrons in the atomic nuclei of everyday matter are made of
subnuclear particles called quarks and gluons. The project supported by this
award will study how quarks and gluons scattered out of a proton or produced in
high-energy particle collisions subsequently form new bound states. Additional
measurements will investigate how strong nuclear charge, called color, flows
through proton-proton scattering processes, searching for a theoretically
predicted novel state of quarks and gluons that exhibit quantum correlations
across colliding protons. Data from the Large Hadron Collider at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) will be used to perform the research,
as part of the Large Hadron Collider Beauty (LHCb) experiment. The research
performed will advance our understanding of how strong force bound states such
as protons can be created, and the dynamics of their possible interactions. The
project supported by this award will furthermore train young scientists from
diverse backgrounds in nuclear physics. Training the next generation of nuclear
physicists is critical to maintain expertise relevant to the nation's energy and
defense needs and to continue advancing both applied and non-applied research in
nuclear physics and technology. Specifically, this award will enable mentored
research in nuclear physics on the LHCb experiment by a postdoctoral scholar and
five Ph.D. students, including one who is Latina American and another who is
African American. In the second year, a student from Mount Holyoke College, an
undergraduate institution for women, will perform summer research in nuclear
physics at the University of Michigan.

The PI’s group will study how high-energy color-charged quarks hadronize into
sprays of observable color-neutral bound states by performing a suite of
complementary measurements at LHCb. Specifically, the measurements will compare
charged hadron distributions in jets initiated predominantly by light versus
heavy quarks, including investigation of the predicted suppression of hadron
production with the mass of the quark; examine evidence for contributions from
string breaking versus quark coalescence models of hadronization via
measurements of baryon versus meson production as a function of event
multiplicity; and study spin-momentum correlations in hadronization by
measurement of spontaneous polarization of produced hyperons. The proposed
hadronization program will contribute toward the ultimate, long-term goal of
being able to predict statistically the fully correlated distributions of
particles from different flavor high-energy fragmenting quarks. Separate
measurements will explore the role of color flow in hadronic scattering
processes by searching for experimental evidence of transverse-momentum-
dependent factorization breaking and color entanglement. The specific
observables include correlated production of nearly back-to-back Z boson-hadron
and Z boson-jet pairs. The activities furthermore include contributions to the
commissioning and optimization of the U.S.-led Upstream Tracker silicon detector
upgrade for LHCb as well as its integration into the LHCb real-time-analysis
framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.