* 2309253
* Accurate Electronic and Vibrational Structure Calculations of Metal-Containing Small Molecules of Importance to Precision Measurement and Laser Cooling
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lan Cheng, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 435,732.00

The proposed research consists of computational studies to describe the complex
motions of electrons and nuclei in small metal-containing molecules that play
important roles in searching for new physics beyond the Standard Model and in
the emerging quantum information sciences. The proposed work on computational
techniques is focused on the development of new algorithms and computer programs
to elucidate the roles of subtle coupling between electronic states in laser
cooling of molecules to ultracold temperature. The proposed molecular
applications in close collaboration with experimental groups aim to provide
insights into molecules relevant to cutting-edge research in quantum sciences
and in searches for new physics.

The method-development work proposed here is focused on relativistic coupled-
cluster theory to enhance the treatment of nonadiabatic effects of importance to
laser cooling of molecules containing heavy atoms and to improve the ability to
calculate effective electric fields of importance to precision measurement of
the electronâ€™s electric dipole moment (eEDM). The proposed application work
consists of a thorough investigation of the intensity-borrowing mechanisms in
laser-coolable linear polyatomic molecules and predictions of properties for
metal-containing small molecules including RaOH, ThF+, and YbOH, in close
collaboration with experimental groups working on laser cooling and precision
spectroscopy of these molecules.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.