* 2309413
* CAREER: Next-generation of Wirelessly Powered Implantable Neuromodulation and Electrophysiological Recording System for Long-term Behavior Study of Freely-Moving Animals
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Ifana Mahbub, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/28/2026
* USD 376,594.00

Large-scale brain activity recording capability can improve understanding of the
brain and enable the development of cutting-edge brain-machine interface (BMI)
devices. However, for recording neural activities most research to-date still
relies on the bulky, rack-mount equipment that is wired to the animal’s head
stage. The goal of this research project is to develop a miniaturized
implantable wireless neural signal recording and wirelessly powered neural
stimulation systems for the next generation of neuroscience research. A
miniaturized integrated circuit (IC) chip will be developed that will have the
multi-channel recording capability with wireless power and data transmission
features. The system will be integrated on a flexible biocompatible substrate to
reduce the risk of infection and increase the longevity of the neural interface.
The proposed research will lead to a neural implant that can stimulate the
neuron and record the neural activities simultaneously, wirelessly, and over a
long period of time. These advancements will impact both neuroscience research
and neurology, revealing fundamental insights about chronic pain mitigation
without requiring any pain relief drugs and therapies for faster post-stroke
recovery. As a part of this project, an interactive design module will be
developed for the middle and high-school students to teach them the basics of
electrical engineering and neuroscience and mentor underrepresented high-school
students to spark their interest in pursuing advanced degrees in STEM fields.

The goal of the project is to develop a highly miniaturized fully implantable
tetherless wireless neural signal recording and power delivery system for the
next generation of neuromodulation. The specific objectives of the project are:
1) investigation of on-chip neural signal recording and stimulation systems that
are wirelessly connected via low-power, highly duty-cycled, and reconfigurable
Impulse-Radio Ultra-wideband (IR-UWB) radio links, 2) integration of
inductively-coupled wireless power transfer (WPT) system to power the brain
implants in freely-moving animals (e.g. mice or rats) inside a cage, and 3)
long-term behavior study and clinical validation of the proposed system in
animal models to find cures for disabilities such as chronic neuropathic pain
and post-stroke paralysis. Besides training underrepresented and minority
students, the project’s educational goal is to promote interdisciplinary STEM
education and research initiatives. The education components of the project
include the development of an interactive design module for the 6-12th grade
students to teach the basics of electrical engineering and neuroscience,
mentoring senior design capstone projects at the Northwest high school’s STEM
Academy, hosting international students to enhance their research experience,
and recruiting underrepresented high-school students to spark their interest in
pursuing advanced degrees in STEM fields. The proposed research work has several
exciting elements: First, the design of the front-end read-out circuit that is
immune to high DC offset, stimulation artifacts, external interferences, and
noise. Second, the integration of a novel multiple-coil WPT system to deliver
power efficiently to the mm-sized implants. Third, the investigation of bi-
directional data communication (>100 Mbps data rate uplink and >100 kbps
downlink) using IR-UWB radios from multiple freely-moving animals. Finally, the
assembly of the proposed system on a flexible, biocompatible polymer to easily
conform to the brain surface reducing the risk of infection. Collaboration with
the industrial partners such as Plexon Inc. and Yield Engineering will not only
have translational impacts on the research areas of brain-machine interfaces
(BMI), and neuroprosthetics but also help train the students to develop
interdisciplinary skill-sets and prepare them for next generation of the job
market.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.