* 2309939
* High Resolution Observations and Studies of Solar Eruptions Using the 1.6-meter Telescope in Big Bear
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2028
* USD 850,030.00

New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) has been operating Big Bear Solar
Observatory (BBSO) for more than two decades. The observatory has remained
highly productive – both in science output and in the development of state-of-
the-art instrumentation. This includes more than a hundred peer-reviewed
publications over the past four years, as well as operations of the Goode Solar
Telescope (GST) as a community facility and upgrading GST instrumentation to
meet the evolving scientific requirements of users in the U.S. and worldwide.
GST is one of the highest-resolution solar telescopes in the world. Owing to the
extended periods of stable excellent seeing at Big Bear Lake, GST with its high-
order adaptive optics (AO), routinely collects diffraction-limited spatial
resolution (~ 0".1, or 70 km on the solar surface) photometric, spectroscopic
and polarimetric data, with a high cadence (< 40 s), across the spectrum from
430 nm to 8.2 μm. This award supports five years of backbone support for BBSO
operations, science, and education activities. BBSO will continue operating GST
as a community facility. GST data and a substantial portion of the GST observing
time are open to any solar physicists in the US. GST data have been and will be
used in many Ph.D. theses. BBSO will continue supporting the NSF-REU program by
providing undergraduate students with hands-on experience in astronomical data
analysis, high-resolution observations, and instrument development. The graduate
student support will include involvement by members of underrepresented groups
in astrophysics and includes two summer schools at BBSO, to train graduate
students/postdocs/junior researchers on techniques in ground-based solar
physics. Over 30% of the team members on the project are female researchers.

GST will continue playing a crucial and irreplaceable role in high-resolution
solar physics to advance our understanding of the origin of space weather and
the fundamental nature of the solar atmosphere. GST is the only large-aperture
solar telescope that commonly experiences excellent seeing conditions lasting
many hours on a regular basis. During the upcoming maximum of Solar Cycle 25,
the period covered by the award, BBSO will obtain, analyze, and interpret a
wealth of high-resolution solar data. Using this resource, BBSO will develop and
apply analytical tools to attack a number of critical, leading-edge problems in
space weather research, with a particular focus on high-resolution observations
and studies of solar eruptions, including (1) Elementary Magnetic Reconnection,
(2) Flare Energetics in Lower Solar Atmosphere, (3) 3-D Magnetic Structure of
Flare Productive Active Regions, (4) Data-based Modeling to Understand Flare
Triggering, and (5) Small-scale Magnetic Flux Ropes and Associated Jets. Solar
eruptions are the key sources of space weather, impacting the daily life of
humans through effects on communication, transportation, power systems, national
defense, and space travel. Moreover, BBSO will work to enhance coordination with
NSF’s Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) in telescope operations,
instrumentation development and science. GST and DKIST are complementary in
instrument capabilities and discovery space. BBSO community users, who are
distributed across 61 universities, observatories, and institutes in 21
countries have been granted the majority of the GST observing time (> 80%). BBSO
actively supports coordinated campaign observations with NASA space, rocket and
balloon missions (e.g., Parker Solar Probe), and other large ground-based
facilities. BBSO now provides a permanent home to the NSF’s Synoptic Optical
Long-term Investigation of the Sun (SOLIS) facility built by the National Solar
Observatory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.