* 2309957
* RAPID: Storm layer deposition, contaminant deliver and dispersal from Hurricane Ian (Sept. 2022) along SW Florida estuaries and fringing mangroves
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Peng Lin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wanamaker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 63,180.00

This RAPID project will study how tropical storms disperse sediments and any
associated pollutants around impacted coastal bays. Specifically, it will study
the impacts of the storm surge and associated flood deposit left by Hurricane
Ian (September 2022) in Estero, Naples and Dollar Bay, Florida, and fringing
mangroves. The study will compare the impact of this storm on urbanized
estuaries vs. natural and wildlife areas. The project Broader Impacts include an
improved understanding of how tropical storms impact the sustainability of
fragile coastal systems in a rapidly changing climate regime. Educational
Broader Impacts include field and laboratory research experience for
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow.

The project will assess storm impacts by collecting sediment cores throughout
the navigable portions of the bay systems, as well as fringing mangrove systems.
Using a combination of visual observations, x-radiography of the cores and
physical sedimentology of the sediment within the cores, the storm layer
stratigraphy will be assessed. In addition, sediment samples will be analyzed
for Total Mercury and Persistent Organic Pollutants or POPs (such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)). A series of
maps will be generated showing the thickness of the storm layer, the mean grain
size of the associated sediment, and the contaminant loads for each of the
respective contaminants assessed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.