* 2309425
* Structure-Preserving Finite Element Methods for Incompressible Flow on Smooth Domains and Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Neilan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 338,526.00

This project will develop numerical methods for solving equations modeling
incompressible flow with applications such as predicting weather patterns,
designing aircraft, and simulating blood flow. The primary objective is to
design and analyze finite element methods (FEMs) that maintain key physical
properties at the discrete level, specifically the conservation of mass and
incompressibility of the fluid. Such FEMs possess several advantages over
existing methods, including superior accuracy, robustness with respect to model
parameters, and exact enforcement of multiple conservation laws. However, this
class of FEMs is limited in their ability to handle various equation types and
geometric domains. This research will overcome these limitations by developing
new robust FEMs for incompressible fluid models that can be applied to a wider
range of problems. It will focus on two main areas: improving existing FEMs for
fluid flow on smooth domains and developing new FEMs for fluid flow on surfaces.
The project will provide training opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students.

The research consists of two integrated components. The first focuses on
developing structure-preserving FEMs for the Navier-Stokes equations on smooth
domains. The investigator will use non-standard applications of divergence-
conforming diffeomorphisms to construct robust schemes, with a focus on high-
order schemes in two and three dimensions. The second component involves
applying these structure-preserving schemes towards surface partial differential
equation models of incompressible flow. The investigator will extend
isoparametric schemes for smooth Euclidean domains to construct divergence-free
surface FEMs based on standard nodal spaces that do not require extrinsic user-
defined stabilization/penalization terms. Additionally, the investigator will
extend the Finite Element Exterior Calculus framework to build discrete surface
Stokes complexes with respect to approximate geometries, which will provide
insight into the construction of robust FEMs based on the velocity-pressure
formulation and lead to primal discretizations for the surface stream function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.