* 2309847
* Conference: Workshop on Stochastic Analysis, Random Fields, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Shlomo Levental, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 41,076.00

The Workshop on Stochastic Analysis, Random Fields, and Applications (SARFA)
will be held at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, on 14-16
August 2023. The areas of stochastic analysis, stochastic partial differential
equations, random fields, and probability in Banach spaces have recently entered
a period of rapid growth, with significant new interactions among stochastic
analysis, stochastic processes, and many applications outside mathematics,
including physics, fluid mechanics, and finance. The primary goal of this
workshop is to bring together a diverse group of accomplished researchers,
early-career investigators, and graduate students in stochastic analysis,
stochastic partial differential equations, and random fields and to enable
participants to discuss their most recent significant progress in research with
others. The six scholars who will be the main speakers at the workshop SARFA
were chosen for their prominence as researchers in stochastic analysis, random
fields, and their applications. This workshop will also include two 90-minute
tutorial lectures intended for new researchers, delivered by an internationally
renowned expert in stochastic partial differential equations and random fields.

Financial support to attend the workshop SARFA will preferentially be given to
graduate students, postdocs, women, and other under-represented or marginalized
groups, as well as to early-career faculty who may not otherwise be able to
attend the workshop. The topics covered in this workshop include stochastic
analysis, stochastic partial differential equations, random fields, and their
applications to mathematical finance, statistics, and machine learning. More
information is available at the workshop webpage:
https://stt.natsci.msu.edu/events/sarfa2023/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.