* 2309195
* Probing Fundamental Physics with Gravitational Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,050,000.00

In modern physics nature is described by two theories. One is the “Standard
Model,” which describes all material properties with quantum particles; the
other is “General Relativity”, Einstein’s theory that describes gravitation.
Most physicists think that there must be a connection between these two
theories, but to date there is no experimental signature for such a connection.
Furthermore, the discoveries of dark matter and dark energy suggest that
gravitational phenomena exist that lie outside of General Relativity. The group
at the University of Washington specializes in measuring ultra-feeble forces to
search for unprecedentedly small deviations from gravity as described by General
Relativity. While observing any deviations from General Relativity would be a
revolutionary scientific discovery, it may also have consequences for future
technical applications of GPS or next-generation precision clocks. Furthermore,
using instruments developed for gravity measurement, the group will look for
signatures of dark matter. Technology and technical expertise developed by this
group has applications ranging from industrial metrology to earthquake
prediction to preparing the country’s STEM workforce.

Modern ideas for unifying gravity and particle physics, as well as the
observation of dark energy and dark matter, suggest that some aspects of gravity
remain undiscovered. The table-top experiments of the University of Washington
gravity laboratory (Eöt-Wash Group) provide a unique opportunity to search for
new physics at the intersection of General Relativity, cosmology, and particle
physics. The group is a leader in the ﬁeld of ultra-weak force detection through
technical expertise and innovation and by responding to the most relevant timely
and timeless physics questions. Specifically, the group will: 1) Test the
equivalence principle (EP): It is almost certain that any connection between
General Relativity and the Standard Model violates the EP. The group’s torsion
balances provided the most precise laboratory EP-tests. With highly increased
sensitivity through fused silica torsion fibers, a novel gravity gradient
measurement, an improved pendulum and better instrument control, new EP
measurements will be carried out that will be up to 15 times more sensitive than
the group’s previous measurements in constraining B-L couplings. Furthermore,
the EP-test’s generality and relevance to cosmology will be enhanced by probing
the EP involving hydrogen-rich test masses. 2) Test Newton's Inverse-Square Law
(ISL) at short distances: The group will use its expertise in measuring gravity
at short distances to build a new instrument and carry out measurements to test
gravity at distances as short as 20 µm. 3) Search for ultra-light dark matter
using torsion balances. 4) Advance the frontier of low-frequency ultra-small-
force technology: Innovative and challenging technology development has enabled
the group’s success. The group will further improve angle measurement and
develop interferometric and capacitive distance gauges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.