* 2309661
* Fast algorithms for high fidelity simulation of viscous suspension flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eduardo Corona, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 128,877.00

Particle suspensions are ubiquitous in nature; their study is featured in many
areas of fundamental science and technology. Simulating them helps us understand
properties of matter like jamming and phase transition, enables us to study of
spontaneous formation of biological structures like cell membranes and
cytoskeletons, and it allows us to design a vast array of smart materials, from
damping fluids in Kevlar and prosthesis to self-assembling nanomaterials.
However, the very properties that define these particle systems make them very
challenging to simulate, as we must accurately reproduce their behavior for long
periods of time. The overarching goal of this research project is to provide
transformative improvements to state-of-the-art solvers for the numerical
simulation of these particulate systems. By design, each of the contributions in
this project has, on its own, foreseeable broad impact in multiphysics
simulation and in numerical methods for scientific computing, and ultimately, in
advancing our scientific and technological capabilities by enabling simulation
methods to bridge the gap between theory and experiment. This project is
integrated with ongoing educational initiatives, including the development of
novel applied mathematics curricula and providing research opportunities for a
diverse group of students. The project will include training of graduate
students.

This research project involves the development of a fast simulation framework
for rigid particulate suspensions. This work is centered around the formulation
of long-range forces with Boundary Integral Methods and of short-ranged contact
forces employing optimization-based methods, as this is ideal to effectively
tackle the many-body interactions in dense particle systems. This framework
features three separate contributions aimed at unlocking the full potential of
this approach: (1) Fast singular and near-singular revaluation schemes to
resolve long-range particle interactions and analyze integral operators for
spheroidal, ellipsoidal and axis-symmetric geometries, enabling the study of a
wide array of particle systems and confining geometries, (2) Structured
preconditioners for boundary integral equations in evolving geometries
leveraging prior work on structured matrices and tensor train decompositions to
accelerate the solution of resulting linear systems of equations, and (3)
Systematic, robust and adaptive acceleration method for optimization-based
collision resolution using matrix-splitting schemes for viscous flow mobility
matrices, which may be adapted to most formulations for particulate suspensions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.