* 2309802
* Coupling PDE-Based Computational Inversion and Learning Via Weighted Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kui Ren, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 409,510.00

This project aims at developing a mathematically rigorous computational
framework to improve classical image reconstruction algorithms in several
application areas, such as medical imaging and seismic imaging. Through
intelligent utilization of the recent advances in deep learning techniques, the
investigator plans to implement and analyze novel computational inversion
methods that have the potential to be significantly more efficient than existing
image reconstruction methods. This project also involves an integrated
educational component that aims at training students at different levels. The
investigator intends to organize a reading group for junior researchers to work
on simplified problems from this project to enrich their research experiences.
Research internships on the topics of this project will be offered to
undergraduate students from the investigator's institution as well as some high
school students in its surrounding area.

The main technical novelty of the project lies in an efficient computational
coupling strategy that integrates offline and online reconstruction algorithms
to take their complementary advantages. The coupling is implemented with a
weighted optimization method, a general framework to approximate novel objective
functions such as those based on the Wasserstein metrics induced in optimal
transport theory. In a nutshell, the proposed weighted optimization methods make
it possible to reliably train neural networks to learn the dominant components
(when represented in an appropriate basis) of an inverse operator. This learned
approximate inverse is then utilized to improve model-based iterative inversion
schemes. Specifically, the primary proposed research efforts in this project
include three main components: (i) to develop a systematic understanding of the
stability property of different components of inverse operators and design
corresponding weighted optimization schemes to focus on such components in the
learning process; (ii) to develop a general computational framework to couple
the complementary benefits of learning and classical iterative reconstruction
methods; and (iii) to characterize the impact of learning uncertainty on the
reconstruction results from new data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.