* 2309859
* Microengineering of Organotypic and Vascularized Tumor Microenvironment Models for Mechanistic Studies of the Metastatic Cascade
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* JIn Park, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2026
* USD 487,795.00

Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States, causing over
half a million deaths each year. Although there have been improvements in
treatment and early detection, metastatic cancers remain very deadly. When
cancer cells spread to other parts of the body, they communicate with other
cells, blood vessels, and their surrounding tissue environment, known as the
"tumor microenvironment (TME)". Understanding this complex interaction between
tumor cells and their surroundings tissue is important for finding better ways
to treat and prevent cancer. Currently, most cancer research is performed using
animal models. However, animals are different from humans. Therefore, there is a
need for better experimental model systems that can mimic the human TME more
accurately. In this project, a team of experts in bioengineering and cancer
biology will work together to study how tumor cells interact with immune cells,
stromal cells, and the vascular system and to investigate the signals and
communication between these different cell types to identify new ways to block
the progression of cancer. In addition to their research goals, the team also
aims to educate and inspire the next generation of students in high school,
undergraduate, and graduate programs to learn about engineering, microfluidics,
and cancer biology. The four-fold educational and outreach objectives include:
(A) Developing a summer workshop for high school students; (B) Creating online
video modules to broadly disseminate the outcome of this study to the broader
community; (C) Organizing local symposium/seminar series to bring synergy among
cancer researchers; and (D) Promoting the involvement of students from
underrepresented groups.

This project aims to take a significant step forward in developing innovative ex
vivo models of the tumor microenvironment (TME) with 3D configurable layers,
utilizing tissue engineering, microfluidics, and biomaterials tools, to uncover
critical biological insights into the cellular and molecular fingerprints of
cancer cells during invasion and intravasation. The research objectives are two-
fold: the first Objective is to mechanistically understand how the biophysical
cues and signaling between stromal and immune cells contribute to the transition
of tumor cells into an invasive phenotype and the second Objective is to explore
how the coordinated function of stromal cells induces distinct pathway
signatures in tumor cells, ultimately leading to their intravasation (escape)
into the vascular system. This project represents a highly transformative
endeavor, as it brings together various scientific disciplines, including
microengineering, tissue engineering, 3D imaging, cancer cell biology, and
functional genomics. The proposed universal platform technology holds great
potential for application across multiple cancer types, due to its adaptable
architecture and incorporation of diverse cellular and matrix components,
allowing for targeted mechanistic studies and personalized therapeutic
investigations within the TME.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.