* 2309029
* MRSEC: Center for Materials Innovations at Michigan
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Ageeth Bol, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-technical Description: This Center for Materials Innovations at Michigan
will establish a transformative campus-wide ecosystem to accelerate the design,
discovery, and deployment of novel materials critical for the Industries of
Tomorrow, including advanced manufacturing, clean energy/sustainability,
artificial intelligence, and future semiconductors. Embedded in the ecosystem is
a long-term partnership between UM researchers and collaborators from industry,
academia, and national laboratories. Building upon the principles of the
Materials Genome Initiative, the interdisciplinary research groups combine
computational, statistical, theoretical, and experimental approaches to examine
processing-structure-property relationships in novel semiconductor
heterostructures for advanced quantum information processing and reconfigurable
polymers that are environmentally sustainable. The Center structure emphasizes
the integration of research and education, with an emphasis on
attracting/retaining the next generation of materials researchers: a diverse
body of researchers reflecting society at large. To build and maintain the
campus-wide ecosystem, the Center will work to engage all materials researchers
through a suite of activities aimed at broadening participation and enhancing
knowledge transfer. The Center is positioned to respond to emerging
opportunities through its Seed projects.

Technical Description: The Center for Materials Innovations at Michigan will
establish two interdisciplinary research groups. IRG1, "Endotaxial 2D Polytype
Heterostructures", will define a new class of materials wherein distinct
polytypes are synthesized within each other (endotaxy), to create robust, novel
quantum states at ultra-clean 2D interfaces. The approach consists of
computationally-driven prediction of endotaxial materials and their distinct
properties, followed by synthesis of endotaxial materials compatible with
nanoelectronics processing, discovery of novel quantum states, and demonstration
of endotaxial devices. These previously elusive quantum states are expected to
enable rapid progress in classical and quantum information processing. IRG2,
"Covalent Adaptable Networks (CAN) for Sustainable and Regulatable Functional
Materials", aims to discover and deploy new polymeric materials with highly
reactive crosslinker molecules forming reversible covalent bonds between chains,
imparting self-healing, reconfiguration, and recycling capabilities. The
approach consists of combining simulation-based and data-driven design of
crosslinker architectures with a revised viscoelasticity theory to predict the
responsiveness of CAN systems to thermal, mechanical, and photonic stimuli.
Synthesis, characterization, and analysis of application-specific performance
criteria for the most promising designs will result in new fundamental
understanding that enables the development of rapidly recyclable plastics,
recurrently self-healing structural composites, new additive manufacturing
routes, self-triggered mechanical metamaterials, and functional materials whose
properties can be regulated on demand.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.