* 2309577
* What Controls Kinetics in Organic Mixed Conductors for Neuromorphic Computing and Beyond?
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 540,712.00

Non-technical Description

Plastics that conduct both electrons and ions are important for many
applications, from sensors that measure brain activity to batteries that store
energy. One emerging application for these materials is in computers that can
mimic the learning ability of the human brain at the hardware level. Such
biologically inspired, or neuromorphic, computers could potentially replicate
the learning process and perform key tasks faster, and with lower energy
consumption, than today’s computers. Just as neurons in the brain can “learn”
over time through repeated activation, devices based on these conducting
plastics can change how easily they conduct electrons based on an input. One key
limitation in this field is understanding how ions and electrons move through
such materials together as a function of time. For example, it is not clear why
plastics can change very slowly to reach a high-conductance state, yet they
exhibit a rapid change when turned off to a low-conductance state. This project
investigates these properties using a range of different techniques that measure
how the electrical device performance is affected by the solid structure of the
materials, the device geometry, and the chemical properties of the system. The
scientific knowledge from this project will enable better understanding of how
polymers and other materials can be designed for better next-generation
computing devices. The project also extends the principal investigator’s role in
education by developing new outreach materials and by supporting local
organizations that help first-generation college students to achieve scientific
careers.

Technical Description

The scientific goal of this project is to better understand the
structure/function relationships that govern the performance of organic
semiconductors in neuromorphic computing devices. Organic mixed ionic-electronic
conductors (OMIECs), typically conjugated polymers, are well-suited to these
systems because they can efficiently accommodate ions, resulting in tunable
changes in conductance state. This property makes them amenable to applications
where controlled “learning” via a voltage-induced conductance change is desired,
as in hardware-based artificial neural networks. However, it is currently
unclear how different chemical and morphological properties of OMIECs control
ion transport kinetics, hysteresis, and non-linear response. A successful
neuromorphic device should be able to change conductance quickly with long-lived
state retention, and either linear or highly non-linear response depending on
the application. This project explores the interconnected factors of kinetics,
non-linearity, and geometric scaling by 1) investigating kinetics of ion
injection and expulsion using different polymer and counterion combinations; 2)
probing non-linearity due to active layer and gate electrode composition; and 3)
testing how kinetics and non-linear responses in OMIECs translate to transport
measurements in transistors to relate geometric scaling in the device
architecture with neuromorphic function. To accomplish these goals, this project
combines spectroelectrochemistry, electrical scanning probe microscopy, time-
resolved optical microscopy, and electrochemical transistor device measurements
to provide insight into how characteristic length scales in OMIECs and local
structure affect the measure transport properties and neuromorphic device
functionality. The research activity here provides important insight into how
the various chemical and morphological factors are interrelated, while also
providing guidance for the rational design of better conjugated polymers and
other materials for neuromorphic applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.