* 2309995
* CAREER: Bio-inspired Manufacturing of High Strength, High Toughness Metal-Graphene Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dong Lin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 482,813.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on research in the
manufacturing of bio-inspired metal-graphene composites that have both high
strength and high toughness. Due to their light weight and high strength, metal
matrix composites are increasingly used in automotive, aerospace, electronics
packaging and thermal management applications. Attaining both high strength and
high toughness is an essential requirement for many structural applications.
However, it is a significant challenge for metal matrix composites to have both.
Nature-evolved, damage-tolerant materials such as nacre, bone and wood are both
strong and tough because of their hierarchical composite structure. Unlike bone
and wood, which have complex microstructures, nacre exhibits superior mechanical
properties with a simple composite microstructure. The toughness of nacre is
three orders of magnitude higher than that of its main constituent aragonite
owing to its hierarchical “brick-and-mortar” microstructure. This project
investigates a novel manufacturing technique to engineer nacre- or bio-inspired
three-dimensional metal-graphene composites. This research develops
computational and experimental capabilities to understand the strengthening and
toughening mechanisms in these materials. This project greatly impacts the metal
matrix composites industry. The research is complemented by an educational and
outreach program involving curriculum development, research training and
engaging K-12 students and the general public.

The goal of this research is to manufacture next-generation, damage-tolerant
metal matrix composites for mission-critical applications. The research plan is
to understand the evolution of the “brick-and-mortar” microstructure in three-
dimensional metal-graphene composites as a function of manufacturing process
parameters. The fabrication of the “brick-and-mortar” structure involves
assembling sucrose-coated copper platelets in a three-dimensional structure,
converting sucrose into a graphene network by chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
and consolidating the assembly by hot pressing into a composite. An objective of
this project is to study the strengthening and toughening mechanisms of strain
hardening, deformation twinning, crack deflection and crack bridging as
functions of the “brick-and-mortar” microstructure, i.e., copper platelet
diameter and thickness, and thickness of the continuous graphene film. The
fundamental understanding of the strengthening and toughening mechanisms through
molecular dynamics simulations and mechanical testing guides the manufacture of
nacre-inspired metal-graphene composite structures. The correlation between
processing, microstructure and properties establishes the rational design of the
metal-matrix manufacturing process. The bio-inspired composite manufacturing
technique can be extended to other metal-graphene composites, e.g., using
aluminum, magnesium, nickel, titanium, and their alloys as metal matrices. This
project allows the PI to advance the knowledge base in computational modeling
and metal matrix composites and establishes his long-term career in advanced
manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.