* 2309039
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal - The diversification of retinal ganglion cells: A combined transcriptomic, genome engineering and imaging approach
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Karthik Shekhar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Forlano
* 10/31/2028
* USD 732,806.00

The brain contains a multitude of types of neuronal cells that assemble into
elaborate circuits that underlie sensation, perception, and behavior. A
fundamental question in neuroscience is how the developing brain generates such
an impressive array of diverse neuronal types. Specifically, the grand challenge
is to determine the networks of genes whose activity restricts immature
“precursor” neurons to adopt specific terminal fates. The neural retina, which
is an outpost of the brain residing in the back of the eye, is an ideal system
for addressing this question due to its experimental accessibility and well-
defined census of neuronal diversity in several species. Pioneering studies
beginning in the 1980s used the then available experimental tools in frogs,
rodents and fish to gain valuable insights into the process by which retinal
cells become restricted to broadly defined “classes”. However, some retinal
classes contain several (20-50) distinct neuronal types, and how cells commit to
specific types within a class is unknown, and cannot be studied using classical
tools. This project brings together an experimental neuroscientist and
computational researcher to address this question combining several recently
developed technologies to study the process of cell-type specification in the
retina of the zebrafish in unprecedented detail. The approaches developed in
this work will be useful for understanding neuronal development and maturation
in other brain regions and species, and pinpoint the genes whose dysregulation
may lead to developmental abnormalities.

The project will combine high-throughput single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-
seq), advanced computational methods, genome engineering and live imaging to
understand how ~35-50 types of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), the output neurons
of the eye, emerge in the developing and growing zebrafish retina. By leveraging
the experimental advantages of zebrafish, which permits direct live imaging of
developing cells in vivo, the researchers will study how postmitotic neuronal
differentiation unfolds at a level of detail that is not possible in mice, the
most commonly used vertebrate model. We will map the transcriptional landscapes
of differentiating RGCs using snRNA-seq profiles collected at six developmental
stages of zebrafish,and use computational methods to reconstruct lineage
relationships among transcriptional clusters across development. To test
predictions from genomic analysis, the researchers will label molecularly
defined immature RGCs by CRISPR/Cas9-based genome engineering and image them to
visualize their initial differentiation and transdifferentiation from embryonic
stages into adulthood. Taken together, the efforts will lead to new insights
into the patterning of a complex neurobiological system.

This project is funded jointly by the Neural Systems Cluster in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the
Directorate for Engineering. A companion project is being funded by the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.