* 2309238
* Ultrafast Strong-Field Control of Coherence and Entanglement in Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Philip Bucksbaum, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,715,000.00

The Bucksbaum groupâ€™s research focuses on investigating and controlling the
rapid motion of the electrons and atoms that are inside molecules. They apply
precise external forces using laser pulses of atomic-strength and durations
short enough to interrupt and guide the particle movements. The main objective
is to understand and control the behavior of these particles, whose movements
are essential for molecular chemistry, and also important in biomedicine, fuel
production, and energy storage. Special quantum features of this internal
motion, including tunneling, coherence, and entanglement, contribute to key
aspects of photosynthesis, photovoltaic energy conversion, and battery
performance. By studying simple molecules like water, the researchers can
explore the fascinating properties of quantum physics on extremely short time
scales using powerful laser fields. The knowledge gained from this research can
also have implications for interactions involving water and small organics that
are influenced by light in atmospheric and oceanic chemistry.

Protons and electrons play crucial roles in many physical and chemical
processes. By using intense femtosecond focused and shaped laser fields, these
researchers can measure and manipulate particle motion on femtosecond and sub-
femtosecond time scales, to map out and alter the pathways of molecular changes.
The study of proton and electron motion on this natural time scale is at the
forefront of quantum control science and has the potential to advance knowledge
and applications in physics, chemistry, and biology. Understanding the pathways
of motion within molecules is challenging because all the constituents can move
simultaneously and influence one another. This complex behavior exists in a
high-dimensional phase space, making it difficult to visualize and filled with
special points where chemical changes occur, such as bond formation or enhanced
ionization. Quantum mechanics further complicates this by introducing new
properties, such as particles behaving like waves and occupying multiple states
simultaneously, akin to "Schrodinger Cats." Strong lasers can detect and control
matter at these special points, to enhance chemical changes, create coherence or
entanglement, and even discover entirely new reaction pathways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.