* 2309808
* Collaborative Research: SPARC: Conducting Collaborative Research and Leveraging Resources to Advance Spatial Archaeometry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Claire Terhune, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 248,135.00

The Spatial Archaeometry Research Collaborations (SPARC) Program, led by faculty
at the University of Arkansas’ Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST)
and Dartmouth’s Spatial Archaeometry Lab (SPARCL), work to promote the use of
geospatial technologies in archaeological research. A suite of emerging
technologies, including aerial and satellite imaging, large-array terrestrial
geophysics, multi-sensor drone-based mapping, and 3D visualization are rapidly
transforming how archaeologists discover, document, and interpret the human
past. However, the high costs of instrumentation and software combined with the
technical expertise these technologies require create significant hurdles for
researchers, preventing their widespread integration into archaeological
investigations. The SPARC program seeks to bridge these funding and expertise
gaps by making the equipment, software, and experienced staff at CAST and SPARCL
available to archaeological research projects through a competitive, peer-
reviewed application process. SPARC provides a proven model for democratizing
access to a variety of specialist skills and technologies that collectively are
transforming archaeological research. In addition, the SPARC program plays an
important role in advancing educational and outreach initiatives through
classroom programming and instructional tutorials, in-person workshops at
national conferences, open-access online webinars, and research residencies at
Dartmouth or University of Arkansas. The SPARC program also supports diversity,
equity and inclusion initiatives by expanding access to technologies,
particularly for historically underrepresented scholars, early career
researchers, and scholars at less well-resourced or minority serving
institutions (MSIs).

The innovative application of emerging geospatial technologies in archaeological
research has assumed an ever-growing importance in recent years, as conventional
modes of archaeological investigation face increasing challenges. Geopolitics
and conflict make fieldwork in many parts of the world impossible, concerns for
Indigenous, descendant, and other stakeholder communities raise ethical issues
with traditional archaeological excavations, and the contemporary funding
landscape often inhibits the sorts of large-scale, long-term fieldwork that has
been a mainstay of archaeological practice for generations. Spatial archaeometry
offers the ability to explore the archaeological record in new ways, using
methods and approaches that are non-invasive, non-destructive, and easily
replicable, yet also produce robust insights not achievable through traditional
modes of investigation. Moreover, the close collaboration of technical experts
with archaeologists working in many different world regions and focusing on a
wide range of periods helps to facilitate technological and methodological
innovation, as researchers work together to develop creative solutions to
challenging problems in data collection and analysis. The frequently
transformative results produced through SPARC-supported projects, essentially
pilot studies in spatial archaeometric research, are often the basis for longer-
term investigations and ongoing collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.