* 2309810
* Optimization-based Implicit Deep Learning, Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Samy Wu Fung, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 95,575.00

The past decade has seen remarkable success in deep learning. However, a
significant challenge in today's era is to ensure interpretability and
reliability in these models. In various applications, deep neural networks
(DNNs) need to provide guarantees on their outputs, such as maintaining a self-
driving car within its lane. On the other hand, many of these tasks can be
formulated as optimization problems, where optimization algorithms offer
interpretable and reliable solutions. Unfortunately, these models do not
leverage data and thus fall short of state-of-the-art deep learning models. This
research will address enhancing interpretability and reliability in deep
learning methods and improve public safety when such learning methods are
applied. In addition, the project will provide valuable educational
opportunities for students involved. Participants will gain knowledge in inverse
problems, optimization, and machine learning, which are transferable skills
applicable in academia, government, and industry. The project aims to develop a
framework that combines the interpretability and reliability of optimization
algorithms with the design and training of DNNs. The primary focus is on
implicit networks, a type of DNNs that determines their outputs implicitly
through fixed point or optimality conditions, rather than a fixed number of
computations like traditional DNNs with a set number of layers. This integration
of optimization algorithms into implicit networks is referred to as implicit
learning-to-optimize (L2O) networks. Implicit L2O networks have the potential to
overcome the limitations of traditional DNNs, including their lack of
reliability and interpretability. However, training and designing implicit L2O
models present additional challenges that hinder their widespread adoption. To
address these challenges, the research aims to develop a universal implicit L2O
framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.