* 2309853
* FAI: Using Machine Learning to Address Structural Bias in Personnel Selection
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Nan Zhang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 531,833.00

Today, personnel selection practitioners in the United States are primarily
guided by two streams of knowledge: 1) the development on the legal front
pertaining to employment opportunities, and 2) the accumulation of findings in
social, behavioral, and economic sciences that guide the accepted professional
practices in personnel selection. The recent literature on fairness in machine
learning offers a third stream of knowledge that practitioners can readily tap
into when designing their personnel selection systems, yet a lack of integration
between the machine learning literature and the two conventional streams of
knowledge leaves a considerable gap preventing their effective integration. This
research project focuses on bridging the gap to establish machine learning as
the third pillar for the design of personnel selection systems in human resource
management. The outcomes of the project inform policy makers and technology
developers the factors important to the fairness of personnel selection. It also
facilitates discussions about the use of machine learning in human resource
management, by better connecting the empirical research of personnel selection
with the technical design of fair machine learning algorithms.

The research in the project is rooted in the substantive bodies of
multidisciplinary knowledge it integrates to enable fair personnel selection in
the current legal structure. Specifically, the project develops a theoretical
framework demonstrating how different design characteristics of a personnel
selection system, from predictor selection to staging designs, influence and
shape the Pareto front (in terms of tradeoff between selection validity and
fairness) achievable under the prevailing employment opportunity laws. The
findings from the theoretical framework speak to the importance of alignment
between the design characteristics of a personnel selection system and the
machine learning algorithms used within. Consequently, a key component of the
project is a series of research tasks that combine theory development,
algorithmic design, system implementation, and empirical research to properly
situate the machine learning techniques within the current legal and industrial
environments for personnel selection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.