* 2309043
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Centers (MRSEC) UPENN
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Eric Stach, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT The Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter
(LRSM) at the University of Pennsylvania is a center of excellence for materials
research and education. It facilitates collaboration between researchers from
different disciplines – physics, chemistry, engineering, and biology – to
advance transformative scientific projects and solve societal challenges. One
research effort takes inspiration from the brain’s ability to learn, designing
new materials that can adapt to their surroundings and complex stimuli.
Potential applications range from making flexible materials that can deflect the
energy of a hammer blow to creating soft robots that can perform complex tasks.
These advances will result in the design of new materials with properties not
found in naturally occurring systems, enabling entirely new technologies. A
second research effort takes advantage of how materials naturally separate into
distinct phases like oil and water. The research team leverages the physics of
demixing to manipulate the assembly of proteins, cells, and other soft materials
to engineer living matter. Potential applications include new avenues for
partitioning and controlled release of key molecules inside cells, akin to drug
delivery, and creating new tissue-like materials, thereby significantly
advancing synthetic biology, biotechnology, and medicine. The LRSM educates and
inspires the next generation of materials scientists and engineers, broadening
participation in the materials research enterprise. The LRSM offers programs and
activities for students at all levels, from elementary school to graduate
school, and provides professional training at the post-doctoral level. These
activities include summer camps and workshops that introduce students to the
exciting world of materials science through hands-on experiments and
demonstrations, research opportunities and mentorship that allows students to
participate in scientific projects and learn from experts in the field, and
outreach events and online resources that highlight the diversity and impact of
materials science to the broader public. The LRSM also provides access to state-
of-the-art facilities and equipment for materials research, allowing researchers
at Penn, regional and national universities, government laboratories, and
industries to advance their own research activities.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT IRG-1: Learning Metamaterials (NSF Big Ideas: Understanding
the Rules of Life, Harnessing the Data Revolution) develops and exploits
learning strategies that mimic how the brain uses local rules to change its
structure to create and destroy synapses for distributed and robust learning.
The research team advances and applies local adaptive learning to create novel
microfluidic metamaterials and soft robots, understand how biopolymer networks
function in vivo, and develop mechanical metamaterials with functional and
complex deformation and stress redistribution behavior. Research activity also
advances the theory of learning by exploring new learning strategies that
capitalize on the role of dynamics and non-linearities. IRG-2: Bioinspired
Engineering of Condensed Protein Mesophases and Cell Collectives (NSF Big Ideas:
Understanding the Rules of Life) discovers Rules of Life for condensed
mesophases composed of polypeptide or cellular building blocks and uses these
principles to engineer the structure and dynamics of synthetic biomaterials over
micron to centimeter length scales. The research team understands and utilizes
phase partitioning to create structural organization over multiple length scales
in living matter, including how macromolecules can be segregated into
biochemical compartments in cells and how cells can segregate from one another
in tissues. LRSM is a national leader in developing a competitive and diverse
science and engineering workforce in demand by academia, government, and
industry. It provides a wide range of education, outreach, and human resource
development programs that target people at all levels, with emphasis on
underrepresented minorities, women, persons with disabilities, and first-
generation/low-income students, from K-16 to Ph.D. students, post-docs,
teachers, scientists in academia, industry, & government, and the general
public. LRSM will curate and share its research, education, and outreach data.
In addition, the LRSM provides unique interdisciplinary training for doctoral
students and post-doctoral researchers in critical fields for US technological
competitiveness. It develops and facilitates the use of unique scientific
experimental facilities by the local, regional, and national scientific
community. The discoveries and understanding generated by the IRGs & Seeds will
provide fundamentally new ways to harness active learning to build novel
metamaterials and will exploit the thermodynamics and kinetics of phase
partitioning to synthesize biomaterials with unprecedented control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.