* 2309480
* Testing Mechanistic Models to Explain How Variation in Host Susceptibility Arises and Why It Shifts Across Thermal Gradients.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Nathan Wolf, Alaska Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,992,368.00

Shifting environmental conditions resulting from climate change have the
potential to alter established ecological interactions, including the dynamics
between pathogens and hosts. As a result, developing a thorough understanding of
both the mechanisms that drive host-pathogen dynamics and the influence of
environmental conditions on these mechanisms is of paramount importance to
predicting and preparing for the effects of future environmental change. This
work tests novel hypotheses about the general mechanisms by which temperature
influences pathogen susceptibility in Pacific herring, an ecologically and
economically important marine forage fish. Hypotheses are being tested by
fitting mathematical models to laboratory and field-collected data that evaluate
the responses of herring and cold- and warm-water adapted pathogens across
thermal gradients. The foundational information resulting from this work
increases predictive capacities to assess the effects of a changing climate on
the long-term stability of host-pathogen interactions and to build links between
fundamental evolutionary processes and disease ecology. Further, results inform
fisheries managers about impacts of increased water temperatures on herring
epizootics; thereby allowing for a more nuanced use of disease information in
herring stock assessment models and contributing to sustainable aquatic resource
management. Beyond the study’s relevance to fisheries, the broader impacts focus
on creating and evaluating multi-lingual outreach materials that educate high
school and university students on how climate and disease interact to affect
agricultural and wildlife species. The investigators are also developing a
simple, interactive web application for managers to explore the model.

The distribution of susceptibility in a host population determines short- and
long-term epidemic characteristics. However, little is known about the
mechanisms that generate variation in susceptibility, and current theory assumes
that the distribution of susceptibility is fixed across environmental
conditions. Our capacity to understand and predict epidemic outcomes under
climate change is therefore limited. The central hypothesis of this proposal
seeks to test this assumption by positing that the variation in pathogen
susceptibility arises as a stochastic process defined by the relative
performance of host and pathogen traits under a given temperature condition.
Alternatively, variation in susceptibility may be explained by genetic variation
in the thermal reaction norms of host susceptibility. These hypotheses are
tested using warm- and cold-water adapted pathogens in Pacific herring and will
involve the use of mathematical models to link the within-host infection
dynamics to among-host transmission dynamics. Developed theory is being further
scrutinized against experimental data obtained from laboratory and field
epizootic experiments. By rigorously testing theory against collected data, this
project provides insights into general mechanisms that generate variation in
disease susceptibility and quantifies the roles that thermal gradients play in
shaping susceptibility distributions. As a result, this project has the
potential to provide new approaches to assess the consequences of a changing
climate on the long-term stability of host-pathogen interactions. Furthermore,
by describing the interplay between the distribution of susceptibility and
temperature, this project identifies basic mechanistic processes that could be
the foci of disease mitigation under climate change.

This Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases project is jointly funded by
the Biological Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.