* 2309583
* Conference: Nature-based Solutions for Resilient Communities: Preparing Students to Address Grand Challenges in Ecological Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Mauricio Arias, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The primary objective of NSF partial support of this conference is to deepen
student engagement and ownership in the Ecological Engineering discipline. NSF
will be used primarily to support student activities at the 2023 annual meeting
of the American Ecological Engineering Society (AEES) at the University of South
Florida (USF) in Tampa, Florida. It is expected that 80 - 125 students will
attend, and they will be directly exposed to state-of-the-art research, emerging
dialogue about the role of diversity equity and inclusion in the engineering
practice, and to an internationally recognized network of ecological engineers
to inspire their development and careers in Ecological Engineering. This
conference will provide critical student-targeted opportunities, including need-
based housing scholarships, career development sessions, networking social
events, a poster competition, and a diversity, inclusion, and environmental
justice working session.

Ecological Engineering has been defined as "the design of sustainable ecosystems
that integrate human society with the natural environment for the benefit of
both". Ecological Engineering incorporates the disciplines of ecology and
engineering to solve environmental problems and to design, build, and restore
systems that provide long-term economic, environmental, and social benefits. As
a field that seeks to integrate knowledge from across diverse fields to address
today's challenges, Ecological Engineering is an example of Growing Convergence
Research, one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. Conference support from NSF will allow more
students to attend the conference, especially students from diverse backgrounds,
and will permit more students to participate in the student design competition,
network with professionals in the field, and be a part of the career and Justice
Equity Diversity and Inclusion panel that will take place. By providing students
with accommodation scholarships, career development sessions, presentation
opportunities, Justice Equity Diversity and Inclusion engagement, and
professional networking opportunities, this conference will directly contribute
to Broadening Participation in STEM. Moreover, the conference theme is "Nature-
based Solutions for Resilient Communities", and it is anticipated that this
topic will provide a profound opportunity for students to learn how the field is
critical to addressing some of the society's most pressing issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.