* 2309186
* Investigations of Quantum Effects Related to Black Holes and the Early Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Paul Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 182,011.00

This award will study black hole evaporation during an inflationary phase in the
very early universe. A particular focus will be to determine possible effects
that black hole radiation from that time period could have on the cosmic
background radiation. If there are potentially observable effects, then these
could provide information about the existence of primordial black holes during
inflation. Hawking’s original calculation of black hole evaporation gave
information about how black holes evaporate at late times after the black hole
forms. A detailed study will be made of quantum effects that occur at early and
intermediate times in the black hole formation process in a simple model of
black hole formation. The results may provide insight into the important
question of what happens to the information when a black hole is created. Analog
black holes are systems that can be studied in the laboratory and mimic one or
more aspects of real black holes. Analog black holes have been made from Bose-
Einstein condensates that consist of Rubidium atoms that have been cooled to
very low temperatures. Theoretical calculations, similar in nature to those for
real black holes, will be made and used to predict the values for certain
quantities for these analog black holes that have been measured in the
laboratory. If the agreement is found with the experimental data, then that will
provide evidence that predictions made by Hawking and others relating to quantum
effects in real black holes are correct. The semiclassical approximation in
gravity provides a bridge between Einstein’s theory of gravity, general
relativity, and a fully quantum theory of gravity. It has been used to study
particle production in the early universe as well as black hole evaporation. The
validity of the semiclassical approximation will be investigated for two
different early universe scenarios. One is for simple models in which the
Universe first contracts to a minimum size and then begins expanding. The other
is particle production in an important model of inflation called Starobinsky
inflation. The particle production occurs after inflation is over and fills the
Universe back up with matter and radiation. Two or three graduate students will
participate in various aspects of the research. The project will include
undergraduate students, continuing a long history of the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students in numerical and analytical research
techniques and co-authorship on publications. Results will be disseminated to
the research community through publications and presentations at national and/or
international meetings.

The research will address black hole evaporation, observable effects in Bose-
Einstein condensates which can serve as black hole analogs, and early universe
cosmology. Specifically, it will investigate questions related to whether
observable effects could arise from primordial black hole evaporation during
inflation, the information about how a black hole forms, the correspondence
between theoretical and experimental results related to quantum effects in
analog black hole systems, and the validity of the semi-classical approximation
in the early universe. For black hole evaporation during inflation, one goal is
to determine the effects it could have on the cosmic background radiation. Other
quantum effects related to primordial black holes will also be investigated.
Black hole evaporation will also be studied in the case that a spherically
symmetric shell of radiation collapses to form a black hole. Objectives include
gaining insight into the question of what happens to the information about how a
black hole forms and to check the accuracy of similar calculations in two
dimensional dilaton theories of gravity. Bose-Einstein condensates that can
serve as analog black holes have been studied in the laboratory. The goal of the
research in this area is to determine whether certain experimental results for
Bose-Einstein condensates which can serve as analog black holes are in
quantitative agreement with predictions resulting from quantum field theory in
curved space calculations in the analog spacetimes. The semiclassical
approximation has been used to study important effects in the early universe
such as reheating after inflation. One goal of the research is to determine
whether the semiclassical approximation is valid in certain models in which the
universe contracts to a minimum size and then expands and in the post-inflation
era of a well-known model of inflation, sometimes called Starobinsky inflation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.