* 2309937
* A Bottom Up Approach to New Physics in Flavor Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Alakabha Datta, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Alakabha Datta at the
University of Mississippi.

One of the main goals of particle physics research is to test our present
understanding of the fundamental constituents of matter and their interactions
through very high precision experiments. In the process, physicists hope to find
the limit at which our present theories break down and have to be replaced by
new physical laws. In the future, it is possible that these new laws will be
exploited to develop novel technologies. As a result, this kind of research
advances the national interest not only by increasing our understanding of how
nature works at the most fundamental level but also potentially by providing
solutions to the nation's technological needs over the long term. As part of his
research, Professor Datta will analyze data from various ongoing experimental
facilities in order to rigorously test our present understanding of fundamental
physics, as encapsulated within the so-called Standard Model. Professor Datta
will also test various models of new physics beyond the Standard Model with data
from different high precision experiments. This project will also have
significant broader impacts. It will provide education and training to a
graduate student. In particular, the graduate student will learn new research
techniques and also learn to effectively communicate their research results via
written publications and oral presentations. Professor Datta and his student
will also give lectures on their research results at various research
institutions and in public forums. Finally, Professor Datta will develop special
courses on the new developments in the field based on his research.

At a technical level, Professor Datta and his group will explore clean ways to
look for physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics in various
precision flavor experiments. With the historic discovery of a new particle, the
Higgs boson, by the Large Hadron Collider experiment, it is expected that many
new particles may be found in the near future. Information on the couplings and
other properties of these particles can be indirectly obtained from precision
measurements in low energy flavor experiments. It is also likely that new
physics not easily accessible at high-energy collider experiments may be probed
by analyzing data from precision flavor physics measurements at low energies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.