* 2309447
* SBIR Phase II:  A high throughput microfluidic platform to accelerate biomanufacturing transitions in biologics development
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Konstantinos Tsioris, ONECYTE BIOTECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 988,939.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is accelerating the manufacturing of and access to newly
developed therapeutics and vaccines. To address global health problems,
effective and safe new biologics such as therapeutics and vaccines will need to
be manufactured at unprecedented large scales and short times. Accelerating
access to new biologics for potentially billions of individuals will be critical
for healthcare and the global economy. The solutions will be manifold, and
realizing productive and robust manufacturing for these candidate preventative
and therapeutic medicines in a short period of time remains a key challenge to
transition discoveries from the lab to the clinic. The innovations proposed in
this project could significantly accelerate drug development and biologics
manufacturing by shortening the biologics development times up to six months.
Vaccine and drug developers would succeed faster and fail faster, enabling
accelerated transitions of discoveries for new therapeutics to the clinic and
beyond by addressing critical steps in manufacturing. Improving transitions
should also let developers test a higher number of compounds, thereby increasing
the performance and potentially reducing the side effects of these drugs.

This project aids in the manufacturing of novel therapeutics and vaccines.
Manufacturing of biologics starts with a high-performing clonal cell-line,
derived (by definition) from a single cell. Developing such a cell line today
takes up to six months due to the iterative screening and testing needed to
assure quality and performance. This essential step in any biologic
manufacturing transition is critical time lost in the fight against disease.
This project enables drug developers to select a high-performing cell clone in
one day, compared to many months by using a proprietary, single-cell, proteomics
platform at an unprecedented throughput rather than having to go through
lengthy, iterative selection, clonal expansion and analytics. The scope of the
research is focused on addressing the remaining critical technical hurdles
before deploying the technology for commercial use. Specifically, a systematic
and statistical approach will be used to implement necessary alternative
materials and processes. The goal of the project will be implementing the
developed processes with biotechnology industry partners to accelerate vaccine
and therapeutic development and manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.