* 2309403
* FET/SHF: Small: Reinforcement learning and transformer inspired smart photonics inverse design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* L. Jay Guo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The field of optics and photonics has transformed our lives with such modern
technologies as optical communications, solar energy sources, space telescopes
and high-resolution photolithography. For a long time, human experts had to
perform optical design manually relying on their accumulated experience and
physical intuitions. This is especially true for photonic inverse design, where
one must find the appropriate photonic structures with the desired optical
functions. Recently, deep learning approaches have been pursued by scientific
community to automatically design sophisticated structures that can satisfy the
design objective, leading to substantial progress in this direction. This
research project will enable photonics non-experts to use the developed
Artificial Intelligence (AI) model to obtain solutions to their individual
optical design problems. Furthermore, understanding the underlying operational
principles will advance more generalizable photonics knowledge and enable
researchers to develop new structures faster.

To accomplish their goals, the research team will explore and apply two powerful
AI technologies. The first tool to be studied is deep reinforcement learning, a
sequential generation process that learns to design structures with trial-and-
reward, in a way to mimic how human and animals learn to interact with the
world. Cooperative learning between machine and human will be pursued, where
human teaches machine to learn, and machine inspires human to understand. This
combined input will benefit the realization of various types of optical
structures. The second method utilizes the transformer method, the powerhouse
behind the highly successful powerful large language models, for smart optical
design. The research team will leverage the Foundation model, the large machine
learning models that tackle various downstream tasks once trained on diverse,
and large-scale data, to address the optical inverse design of large-scale and
complicated nanostructures. The knowledge gained through the study will be
applied further to a few testbeds for experimental demonstrations. With more
people using the technology and increased data available for training the neural
network, one can anticipate its learning and generative capabilities will
advance and will the users even more effectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.