* 2309437
* SBIR Phase II:  Point-of-Care Electrochemical Platform for the Rapid Detection of Drug Toxicity
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Marcin Guzinski, INFUSENSE LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 999,852.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that poisoning by drugs of abuse affects
almost 3 million people annually and is the leading cause of injury-related
death in the United States. There were 100,306 opioid overdose deaths in the US
in 2021, the majority of which were due to fentanyl poisoning. Screening
patients for toxic drug levels currently requires specimen processing in
hospital laboratories, taking hours to obtain results. Immediate, accurate
detection of fentanyl poisoning at the point of contact, in the ambulance or
emergency room, will create a new paradigm for the rapid diagnosis and improved
care of poisoned patients and save lives. The SBIR Phase II project outcome will
be an FDA-ready, hand-held sensor device capable of accurately measuring
fentanyl and other drug levels from a drop of blood or saliva within minutes.
The platform device uses disposable sensor strips and is low cost and scalable,
permitting broad commercial adoption. Future potential applications for this
point of care testing technology include its use by physicians for office-based
screening for therapeutic drug monitoring to confirm compliance and optimize
medication use and efficacy.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will test an
innovative, prototype biosensor device that provides the user with real time,
accurate detection and quantification of toxic drug levels in the blood using
inexpensive, disposable test strips similar to a diabetes glucometer. The
research to be performed in the Phase II project will utilize electroanalytical
methods to optimize the performance of the sensor to improve its selectivity and
lowest limit of detection for fentanyl and other drugs commonly associated with
poisoning. Additional methods, sensor coatings, and testing conditions will be
used to detect total-drug levels in the blood and demonstrate that the biosensor
can distinguish between classes of medications and potential clinical
interferents as well as show equivalent results to current clinical laboratory
methods. The biosensor will detect drugs of overdose and other medications below
therapeutic levels, without specimen processing. Pilot large animal studies will
seek to validate the correlation of drug levels in the blood with saliva to
establish a proof of concept for rapid sublingual testing for drug toxicity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.