* 2309988
* Differentiating Electron-Capture and Core-Collapse Supernovae
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* William Hix, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Core-collapse supernovae mark the deaths of massive stars and the formation of
neutron stars and black holes. Beyond the visual display from which they draw
their name, they are also marked by the release of tremendous fluxes of
neutrinos and the ejection into their galaxy of prodigious quantities of newly
made atomic nuclei. In fact, it is the neutrino flux which powers the explosion.
Much of the chemical composition of our planet and ourselves comes originally
from these explosions, thus core-collapse supernovae are an essential link in
our chain of origins. With this project, state-of-the-art simulations of the
formation of the neutron star, the emission of the neutrinos and the formation
of new atomic nuclei will be extended to the epoch, hours to days later, when
these newly made elements become visible to telescopic observations. In
parallel, state-of-the-art models of supernovae will be extended to less common,
less well studied, electron-capture supernovae, which occur in somewhat less
massive, super Asymptotic Giant Branch stars. In the process, two graduate
students will be trained in both nuclear astrophysics and computational science,
equipping them to join the STEM workforce upon graduation.

This project will result in a world-leading ability to simulate core-collapse
and electron-capture supernovae, calculate their nucleosynthesis, and compare
these predictions with observations of supernovae, supernova remnants and
galactic chemical evolution. The inclusion in the CHIMERA code of arbitrary
nuclear reaction networks is a significant advantage for these studies. For
electron-capture supernovae, inclusion of a couple hundred nuclear species is
underway, allowing for much more complete coverage of the electron captures that
initiate the explosion than has previously been possible. Inclusion of 160
nuclear species has already been demonstrated in CHIMERA for core-collapse
supernovae, providing the most extensive representation of the nuclear
composition in a multi-dimensional model of a core collapse supernova to date.
Extension of both core-collapse and electron capture simulations, with their
detailed representation of the nuclear composition, through the entire stellar
envelope and into the circumstellar medium until the ejecta achieves homology,
opens the possibility to constrain these models with photonic observations from
days to months after explosion, as the composition and distribution of the
elements plays an essential role in these observations. Thus these models will
shed light on the shortcomings in our current understanding of supernova
nucleosynthesis.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.