* 2309972
* Conference: A review of the current state of STEM sign language lexicons
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Caroline Solomon, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,960.00

Deaf and hard of hearing individuals (DHH) in STEM remain a small percentage of
both the disability and general community leading to a severe
underrepresentation in STEM. Many DHH students are in K-12 classes and often are
the only DHH student or one of few DHH students with a sign language
interpreter. Despite the surge of STEM sign language development and its
popularity in the media, technical terminology in sign languages for STEM terms
and concepts is still lacking, and what does exist is not widely known. Most
current STEM sign language lexicons focus primarily on creating a collection of
single-word, single-sign videos within a small cohort of individuals. However,
this current framework prevents widespread dissemination and conceptually
accurate sharing of information to K-12 schools, K-12 interpreters, and DHH STEM
professionals. To solve these issues, this project will organize a series of
workshops that will culminate with a summit to discuss the current state of STEM
sign lexicons around the world. This project aims to assess and evaluate the use
and success of STEM sign language lexicons in three critical areas. First, the
team will evaluate the ethical and linguistic implications of robust STEM sign
language development by researchers and the downstream impact on the educational
community. Second, participants and organizers will develop assessment and
evaluation tools for the K-12 classroom and extra-curricular activities.
Finally, the participants will formulate new research directions to ensure
sustainability of STEM sign language lexicons in the digital world. The project
includes a series of convenings to bring together STEM education, linguistics,
and anthropology experts along with the developers and leaders of current STEM
sign language lexicons to lead new research that improves STEM education for DHH
students in K-12 settings.

This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.