* 2309923
* WoU-MMA: Studying Neutron Stars through the Lens of Nuclear Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kyle Brown, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Neutron stars are the remnants of massive stars that have undergone a supernova
explosion, resulting in an object that is similar in mass to our own sun, but
has a radius of only about 12 km. The relationship between their mass and radii
is determined by the properties of the nuclear matter that composes these stars,
which is still under investigation. These super-dense objects provide a unique
window to study the nature of this dense, nuclear material. The ground-breaking
measurement of the gravitational waves originating from the merger of two
neutrons stars by the LIGO-VIRGO collaboration, and the subsequent multi-
messenger observations, significantly expanded our understanding of nuclear
matter. The research team will perform laboratory measurements of nuclear
reactions to address two important questions on the composition of neutron stars
and their processes. This work will complement the constraints provided by the
gravitational wave measurements from LIGO-VIRGO, as well as the new results from
the NASA funded Neutron star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER). The project
sits at the intersection of nuclear science and astrophysics, addressing the
science case of the NSF Big Idea “Windows on the Universe.” The
interdisciplinary nature of the work will help attract a diverse set of graduate
and undergraduate students. The training these students will receive will
prepare them for a wide range of careers. In particular, the recruitment and
education of these young scientists is critical to address an ongoing shortage
of nuclear chemists in the country.

The team will utilize heavy-ion collisions with rare-isotope beams at the new
Facility for Rare Isotope beams to provide laboratory constraints on the density
and momentum dependence of the Symmetry Energy. This is the component of the
nuclear equation of state (EoS) that accounts for systems of unequal amounts of
neutrons and protons. At present, the Symmetry Energy is the component of the
EoS with the largest uncertainty. Combining these results with the existing
results from reactions, structure, and astrophysical observations will
significantly tighten the constraints on the EoS near twice normal nuclear
density, the density regime most important to the science of neutron stars. This
work also focuses on a key reaction to understand type-I X-ray Bursts (XRB), now
accessible by direct methods. The measurement of the capture cross sections on
particular, important waiting points in XRBs are needed to understand the
double-peaked nature of their light curves. The team will measure the cross
section for the 30S(α,p) reaction, which is one of the important waiting points.
This cross section has not been measured directly. This measurement will also
constrain the optical potentials needed to model the reactions important for
XRBs. The measurements of XRBs also constrain the mass-radius relationship of
neutron stars.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.