* 2309456
* Theoretical Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Csaba Csaki, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 885,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Csaba Csaki, Yuval
Grossman, Thomas Hartman, Liam McAllister, and Maxim Perelstein at Cornell
University.

Observations of the cosmos, combined with terrestrial experiments in particle
physics, have given physicists a glimpse of the fundamental laws that govern our
universe. The research supported by this award includes the study of
mathematical and conceptual aspects of quantum mechanics and gravity, as well as
the investigation of observable phenomena in particle physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology. Professors Csaki, Grossman, and Perelstein will research the physical
laws governing the known fundamental particles, as well as new hypothesized
particles known as monopoles and axions, and will investigate possible
explanations for the dark matter in the universe. Professor Hartman will study
how quantum mechanics and gravity affect the properties of black holes.
Professor McAllister will research possible signatures of quantum gravity in the
observable universe. This work will impact the design and interpretation of new
experiments. Theoretical work in this area advances the national interest by
strengthening the foundations on which other scientific progress can be built.
This research will also have significant broader impacts: the investigators will
work closely with graduate students and postdocs, thereby contributing to
training the next generation of physicists. The investigators will also give
public lectures and colloquia to convey the results of their research to a
broader audience, in the hope of inspiring a deeper appreciation of science in
the community.

More technically, Professor Csaki will investigate the physics of magnetic
monopoles using his novel method of pairwise helicity, study the phases of gauge
theories, and examine cosmological solutions to the hierarchy problem and the
cosmological constant problem. Professor Grossman will study flavor physics and
investigate the neutrino force. Professor Hartman will study connections between
entanglement and geometry in quantum gravity, and also develop new techniques to
solve strongly interacting field theories with the conformal bootstrap.
Professor McAllister will study four-dimensional solutions of string theory and
characterize the physics of axions in string theory. Professor Perelstein will
construct novel models of dark matter and study their experimental and
observational signatures; develop strategies to search for new physics at the
LHC and future colliders; and explore the potential of fixed-target experiments
with beam dumps to search for dark photons, axion-like particles, and other new
physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.