* 2309682
* Computational mathematics of Arctic processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Malgorzata Peszynska, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 388,716.00

The Arctic is a vast and complex environment which influences planet-scale
budgets of water and energy fluxes. The project will develop robust
computational models and their mathematical analyses for coupled phenomena in
the Arctic including thermal, hydrological, and mechanical processes in
permafrost soils as well as selected biosphere processes. Beside their
connections to large scale climate, these processes have significant local
impact on humans and infrastructure. The models developed in this project and
their use for predictive simulations of realistic scenarios will contribute to
the knowledge supporting the plans to mitigate the effects, e.g., of permafrost
thaw. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved and trained in
computational mathematics as well as in an ability to contribute meaningfully
and critically to the interdisciplinary efforts within and outside the project,
with efforts towards an effective mentoring support structure for
underrepresented groups. Training both undergraduate and graduate students on
the topics of the project is expected.

The project will develop algorithms for approximations of solutions to the
models of coupled processes in the Arctic including the thermal, hydrological,
mechanical, and biosphere processes. The main challenges are the nonlinearity
and complexity of the underlying partial differential equations and the sparsity
of data which is not easy to collect in the vast Arctic environment. These
challenges are exacerbated for coupled systems across the many relevant temporal
and spatial scales. The investigators will focus on the cross-cutting theme of
multiple scales connecting the microscopic Pore scale of x-ray images of
permafrost soil to the Darcy scale of experiments to the Landscape scale of
kilometers common in observations. These efforts will support the development of
efficient prototype and surrogate models along with new metrics for the quality
of the approximations, and these tools can be used for simulations of realistic
scenarios of climate events associated with Arctic permafrost.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.