* 2309902
* Scaling Flow Decomposition to Multi-Sample Multiassembly and Comparison
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Lucia Williams, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The assembly of full RNA and DNA sequences from short sequence data is a
fundamental computational problem in biology. The goals of this project are to
develop state-of-the-art algorithmic approaches to better assemble sequences
with guarantees on computational efficiency and the quality of the assemblies
produced. We will evaluate these computational methods on biological datasets
and develop the most promising software tools that are well-documented and easy
to use by anyone in the biological research community. The project will provide
support and training for two PhD students at Montana State University (MSU) and
will also potentially involve undergraduate students in research, both through
existing programs at MSU designed to engage undergraduate students in research,
as well as through a new REU program in the School of Computing. Additionally,
outreach activities are planned for K-12 students in the local community.

The technical focus of the project is to advance computational methods and
algorithms for both RNA and DNA multiassembly -- the assembly of multiple
related but different genetic sequences from next-generation sequencing reads.
Multiassembly is essential for many tasks in biological research, from the
assembly of gene transcripts to characterize gene function to the assembly of
viral variants in an evolving population. While there are existing tools in this
space, they are often built around heuristic methods that do not necessarily
guarantee an optimal solution is found. The objectives of this project are
centered around explicit formulations of the problems and on exact computational
methods that can find optimal solutions. Specific aims include developing
scalable methods for flow decomposition problems and identifying “safe”
properties of the solutions, adapting methods to cope with newer technologies
such as paired-end and long reads as well as uncertainty in data, and comparing
and relating data from multiple samples. Result of the project will be found on
the website "www.cs.montana.edu/multiassembly". The project is jointly funded by
Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.