* 2309597
* Collaborative Research: An Optimal Algorithm for Orthogonal Eigenvectors of Symmetric Tridiagonals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Plamen Koev, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 211,750.00

The investigators will design, implement, and perform a thorough theoretical and
numerical analysis of a new stable algorithm for the tridiagonal eigenvector
problem. This project will not only advance the field of numerical linear
algebra, but will also immediately impact all areas of research which use
mathematical models whose computational bottlenecks are eigenvalue/eigenvector
algorithms for their study and development. Many natural phenomena (e.g., heat
transfer, turbulence, wave propagation, etc.) are governed by differential
equations, which result in an eigenvalue/eigenvector problem when discretized.
This new algorithm will not only reduce the cost of obtaining accurate results
in existing applications but also enable applications which may currently be
computationally cost prohibitive. The project will provide research training
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students.

The new eigenvector algorithm will be more accurate than the existing
algorithms, yet competitive in its efficiency with the best existing ones and
have optimal complexity. The computed eigenvectors will not only have the
traditional accuracy properties such as small residuals and accuracy with
respect to the usual relative gap error bound, but will also possess the
mathematical properties of their true counterparts of being orthogonal to
working precision and having the correct number of sign changes in each
eigenvector. The latter two properties are well determined by the data and stem
from the connection of the symmetric tridiagonal matrices with the totally
nonnegative matrices (matrices with all minors nonnegative).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.