* 2309352
* Getting the Best Multi-Messenger Science out of Gravitational-Wave Data with Better Modeling of its Noise and Automation
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Sukanta Bose, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 80,000.00

This award will support the pursuit for understanding the nature of short-
duration gamma-ray bursts (SGRBs) and their progenitors. An SGRB is one of the
most energetic explosions in the cosmos and is triggered by the collision of two
neutron stars or a neutron star and a black hole. It is accompanied by the
emission of electromagnetic radiation across a wide range of wavelengths, as
well as gravitational waves. While the prototypical binary neutron star
collision, GW170817, expanded our understanding of such bursts in unprecedented
ways, it also left certain questions unresolved. One such question is the fate
of these collisions, which have been conjectured to affect the afterglows of
SGRBs. This work will support multi-messenger astronomical observations of SGRB
counterparts of gravitational wave (GW) signals in LIGO and Virgo to understand
the nature of the remnants produced by them. The project will involve citizen
scientists in this investigation via the development of Machine Learning tools
for distinguishing noise artifacts in GW detectors that can masquerade as GW
signals from these collisions. It will also contribute to training students at
the Tri-Cities campus of the Washington State University and education and
public outreach activities in neighboring areas. This campus is close to the
LIGO-Hanford site and caters to a large percentage of Hispanic and Native-
American populations.

This project will enhance the science exploitation of gravitational-wave
observations with LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA during their fourth and fifth
observation runs. It will reduce the number of false alarms among the low-
latency alerts issued by those detectors. For this purpose, it will specifically
target GW signals from binaries involving neutron stars. This aids astronomical
observatories that follow-up these GW alerts in their quest for detecting
accompanying electromagnetic and particle emissions. The project will pursue
this objective by (a) contributing to the more complete accounting of sources of
non-Gaussian transient noise, (b) identifying different types of non-linear
couplings of noise sources, and (c) improving the significance measurement of
online GW alerts by utilizing Machine Learning solutions and automated data
quality inputs. It will also develop signal-based noise discriminators, or “chi-
square” tests, for targeting especially those noise artifacts that are
responsible for a majority of false alerts. Observations of these binaries will
be used to improve our understanding of the neutron star equation of state and
gravitational-wave aided measurements of the Hubble constant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.