* 2309263
* I-Corps: Novel Catalytic Ozonation Processes for Advanced Water and Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Tingting Wu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of plasmon-enhanced catalytic ozonation innovations to provide a
cost-effective solution to the water quality challenge associated with
increasing recalcitrant organic pollutants in the source water. The system
adaptability of the photo-assisted catalytic ozonation process could make it a
competitive treatment technology that can accommodate to both current available
centralized infrastructure and emerging distributed/reuse facilities. Thus, a
successful commercialization effort will help address a significant societal
challenge: increasing demand for clean water under the stress of rapid
population growth, shortage of fresh water sources, climate change, impaired
water sources, and aging infrastructure.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an innovation of a novel
catalytic ozonation process mediated by plasmonic metal catalysts for the
removal of recalcitrant organic pollutants from water. Effective degradation of
representative pollutants was achieved in both synthetic solutions and real
environmental waters with low energy consumption and byproduct formation. The
superior treatment performance together with the low material costs, mature and
facile synthesis methods, and good recyclability of the catalysts, all
demonstrates the great commercialization potential of plasmon-enhanced catalytic
ozonation processes. It is estimated that one-third of all counties in the
contiguous U.S. will face high risk of water shortage by 2050 and a market worth
of $128.78 billion is forecast for water and wastewater treatment technologies
by 2029. Contamination of aquatic environment with thousands of organic
chemicals, which often cannot be effectively removed in conventional water and
wastewater treatment, is a key water quality problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.