* 2309349
* Conference: UCLA Synthetic Data Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Guang Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,999.00

This award supports participation by experts from diverse mathematical
disciplines and computer science, especially graduate students and other early-
career researchers, in the upcoming UCLA Synthetic Data Workshop to be held at
the University of California, Los Angeles, from April 13 to April 14, 2023. The
goal of the workshop is to foster the collaboration of researchers in several
areas connected to synthetic data and data privacy, including differential
privacy, fairness, and adversarial robustness. The rationale for this activity
is that synthetic data generation is a rapidly growing and highly disciplinary
research area that draws much attention. For the development of algorithmic
procedures for fraud deception and spam identification, as well as for the
construction of AI-driven models in manufacturing and supply chain management,
synthetic data has become a valuable resource. The goal of this workshop is to
investigate scientific foundations that are spawned by these advancements and
examine new strategies for solving open problems. The workshop will also have a
substantial pedagogical component in the form of introductory talks that will
cover background and recent exciting progress in its focus areas. These talks
will be accessible to non-experts, including graduate students and junior
researchers.

Synthetic data is especially useful when obtaining real-world data is either too
costly or too risky. Recent results hint at a new and promising direction that
practitioners may effectively train AI models by addressing edge scenarios and
dangerous occurrences while using synthetic data. Despite numerous successful
applications of synthetic data, its scientific foundation, e.g., the tradeoff
among fidelity, utility, and privacy, is still missing. In addition, industrial
standards for generating and utilizing synthetic data, as well as the privacy
law concerning synthetic data, are yet to be established. This workshop will
provide an environment for experts to exchange their ideas for open questions
about synthetic data, such as whether or not privacy is lost when creating
synthetic data, whether or not using synthetic data affects fairness, and how,
at the most basic level, one should judge the quality and usefulness of
synthetic data. The website for the workshop is https://ucla-synthetic-
data.github.io/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.