* 2309660
* Conference: NSF Workshop on AI-Enabled Scientific Revolution
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Vipin Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is poised to disrupt science by unlocking new
approaches that enable scientific advances with far-reaching societal
consequences. However, there are critical issues to be addressed as AI now
relies on primarily on training systems based on big, labeled data corpora,
which is not an option in all areas of science. This workshop will bring
together leading researchers in AI and scientific domains to identify key
challenges and opportunities to dramatically accelerate the AI for science
revolution. The workshop will be focused on developing a vision and strategy for
catalyzing the next-generation AI-enabled science. An AI-enabled fourth
industrial revolution will be key to addressing the biggest global societal
challenges (feeding the growing population without destroying the planet,
improving human health, renewable energy, mitigating and managing climate
change, and creating a sustainable and just society). Leadership in AI is also
critical for the economic prosperity and wellbeing of our country (e.g.,
developing the industries and workforce of the future).

This workshop will lead the discussion on a new frontier in AI, where novel AI
frameworks will drive scientific inquiry, suggest novel experiments, elucidate
new theories, and thus revolutionize the traditional discovery process across
multiple scientific disciplines. It will identify limitations of the current
state-of-the-art in AI for existing scientific grand challenge problems, and lay
out the strategies for designing building blocks for translational use-inspired
research that will have transformative and long-lasting scientific and societal
impact. In particular, there is a tremendous opportunity for (1) advancing
frontiers of AI that are driven by the unique needs of scientific problems, and
(2) taking advances made in the context of specific scientific domains to many
other domains. In addition, challenges unique to scientific problems also offer
an opportunity to advance AI, leading to a virtuous cycle of fundamental AI
research driving scientific discovery, and use-inspired challenges in scientific
problems advancing the frontiers of AI. The workshop will help build a
collaborative community of scholars and practitioners across scientific
disciplines to explore a set of potential research themes that are foundational
and translational.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.