* 2309595
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Probing cellular surplus in single bacterial cells to understand concerted controls of cell growth and adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Fangwei Si, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 789,277.00

Bacteria as simple living organisms can survive and thrive in a broad range of
conditions. Fast growth in steady conditions and rapid adaptation to new
conditions are both essential for augmenting cell fitness. The goal of this
project is to understand the physiological basis that defines the timescale of
the non-genetic adaptation of bacterial cells. Studying the basic physiology of
bacterial cells such as growth and adaptation requires both quantitative
experiments and holistic modeling of the cellular system. The fundamental,
multidisciplinary, and collaborative nature of this project makes it suitable
for educating undergraduate and graduate students on research and fostering
interactions between students trained in experiments and modeling. Along this
line, a summer undergraduate program will be established focusing on
underrepresented minority groups, and a mini-exchange graduate program will be
set up to enhance binational efforts on biophysics research. This project could
have biomedical and biotechnology applications. A better understanding of
cellular adaptation can help unveil how pathogenic bacteria adapt to various
niches and antibiotics and develop tolerance in the human body. Harnessing
cellular adaptation may facilitate the development of more robust bio-industrial
processes.

While the control of the growth rate of bacterial cells in steady conditions has
been extensively studied, what controls their adaptation time when switched from
one condition to another is still largely unknown. The main strategy of this
project is to test a hypothesis that the core biosynthetic machines could have a
surplus that is not needed to maintain steady growth but is beneficial for
adapting to a new condition. This project will experimentally test this
hypothesis by employing perturbations of the abundance of core biosynthetic
machines and quantitative measurements of the effect on the rates of growth and
adaptation in single E. coli cells. This project will also establish a
multiscale theoretical framework introducing redundancy to the core biosynthetic
network to explain the experimental observations and make testable predictions.
The expected outcomes of this project could reveal fundamental tradeoff
strategies for growth and adaptation by controlling the abundance of cellular
components.

This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.