* 2309243
* RUI: Coupling Trapped Ions to Bulk Piezoelectric Resonators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Hess, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 305,612.00

Individual atomic ions, isolated in evacuated metal chambers where they can be
confined and levitated by electric forces, are a key component of newly
developing quantum technologies for communication, sensing, and computation. In
most cases these atoms are controlled by laser light directed through the
chamber’s windows and are monitored by detecting the light the atoms emit. When
the atomic ions are brought close to solid surfaces, they can exhibit new
behavior that could remove the need for the lasers, allowing quantum control to
be performed entirely electronically, which could vastly simplify experimental
setups. The PI and his undergraduate research students will study the
interactions of a single trapped atomic ion with a nearby vibrating
piezoelectric crystal (piezo). This type of material is commonly used in sensors
to measure small forces or displacements by converting them directly into
electrical signals. This application could be enhanced by quantum sensing
techniques applied to a nearby trapped ion if the ion-piezo interactions were
well understood. The research group will measure the dependence of the
interaction on several parameters, including the distance between the ions and
the crystal, and the vibrational frequency of the levitated trapped ion, and
will compare the results to a theoretical model. Good agreement between
experiment and theory will motivate follow-up experiments seeking to control the
ions with the crystal and eventually to design and construct quantum enhanced
piezo sensors. Much of the experiment, from apparatus design and building to
data acquisition and analysis, will be performed by undergraduate students,
helping them develop skills necessary for graduate studies and careers in the
burgeoning field of quantum information science and technology.

The PI will experimentally measure the effects of a bulk piezoelectric resonator
coupling to the motion of trapped atomic ions. The experiment will consist of a
singly ionized Ytterbium (Yb) atom, stably confined by a radiofrequency (RF) ion
trap, placed in proximity to a bulk lead zirconate titanate piezoelectric
resonator (piezo) within an ultra-high vacuum chamber. With the piezo at room
temperature, the coupling should manifest itself as an increased heating rate of
the ion’s motion when on resonance with the piezo's mechanical vibrations. By
performing thermometry measurements on the trapped ion, the research team can
infer the strength of this coupling as a function of piezo-ion distance by
moving the piezo on an in-vacuum translation stage. Crystals of trapped atomic
Yb ions have proven to be an ideal platform for engineering complex quantum
systems, where the Coulomb repulsion between ions can be used to generate
entanglement within a crystal using coherent laser interactions. However, this
approach has fundamental limitations when attempting to scale the ion numbers
past current limits; a problem which a controlled piezo-ion coupling could help
solve. For instance, a piezo could be built into an optomechanical cavity to
form a quantum transducer, imprinting information about the ion's motion into
the frequency modulation of a laser beam and making it available for long-
distance transmission. In addition, piezoelectric materials see wide use as
mechanical sensors, and the ability to couple a piezo and ion crystal could lead
to development of enhanced quantum sensing techniques for piezo readout. The
piezo again serves as a transducer, transforming mechanical vibrations into
electrical vibrations to which trapped ions are exquisitely sensitive. This
project is jointly funded by the AMO Experimental Physics Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.