* 2309255
* Track 1: Conference - Two Means to an End, Broadening participation research and practice - CAREER panel and workshop for DEIA leaders
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 02/29/2024
* USD 98,543.00

The vision of the CoNECD (pronounced, “connected”) Conference is to provide a
forum for exploring current research and practices to enhance diversity and
inclusion of all underrepresented populations in the engineering and computing
professions including gender identity and expression, race and ethnicity,
disability, veterans, LGBTQ+, 1st generation and socio-economic status. The
CoNECD Conference is dedicated to all the diverse groups that comprise our
engineering and computing workforce. The purpose of this project is twofold: 1)
to enable the hosting of a panel of CAREER awardees at the CoNECD Conference and
2) to provide a preconference workshop to bring together Engineering Diversity
Leaders (EDLs) from engineering academic units for a workshop to enhance both
their DEI (diversity, equity, and inclusion) skillsets and enable the creation
of a community of professionals. The Faculty Early CAREER Development Program
(CAREER) is an NSF-wide program recognized as one of the most prestigious awards
supporting early career faculty research efforts. It recognizes the importance
of early academic career development and emphasizes the importance of the link
between research and education. Research results in this area must be broadly
shared with practitioners and other researchers to reap the full benefits of the
research outcomes. EDLs are tasked with fostering inclusive environments and
attending to retention and recruitment efforts at the undergraduate, graduate,
and/or faculty levels. Additionally, they serve a community that includes pre-
college, undergraduate, and graduate students and faculty and staff. However,
being brought in as leaders and experts in their field, more is needed to know
about the degree of support, professional development opportunities, and
community these individuals have within their respective colleges and
universities that pertain directly to their responsibilities. Bringing together
researchers in this space and providing practical knowledge through information
sharing in a workshop setting can be pivotal for practitioners in DEI
leadership.

This project will enable knowledge and community sharing of current practices
in broadening participation through DEI leadership work with those charged with
achieving this goal. It is expected that this will enable the practitioners to
navigate political, resource-driven, and new environments that will increase the
numbers of underrepresented and underserved individuals who engage in
engineering and computing. Creating a community of DEI leaders in
engineering/engineering technology academic units will facilitate sharing of
ideas and best practices, as well as the development of mentoring relationships.
The work conducted by EDLs is critical in achieving the stated goals and vision
of equity, inclusion, and diversity at the college of engineering/technology
level. Their work can be far-reaching in a college’s attempt to fulfill its
strategic plans for DEI. For many colleges, these roles are new positions and
relatedly have a limited body of research to reference for experiences, best
practices, and community development. It is vital to cultivate and encourage a
community of support for these individuals by connecting individuals with each
other to share knowledge and history. This community of practice can share
necessary tools, resources, and support to further their career goals and work
successes. Additionally, we must bridge the research-to-practice divide. By
bringing practitioners and researchers into the same space via the CoNECD
conference, this project will enable greater communication between these groups
and aid in disseminating research to those most suitable to implement
interventions based on the research outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.