* 2309477
* CCRI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Hardware-in-the-Loop and Remotely-Accessible/Configurable/Programmable Internet of Things (IoT) Testbeds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Qiang Zeng, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 320,545.00

Internet of Things (IoT) devices and systems have a lot of applications, such as
smart home, smart office, healthcare, elderly care, and industrial systems.
International Data Corporation (IDC) report shows that over 815 million smart
home IoT devices were shipped in 2019 and predicts that this number will reach
1.39 billion in 2023. There has been extensive research on IoT and related
areas. However, most existing IoT research uses small-scale, ad hoc and non-
realistic testbeds or simulation tools to generate data and/or evaluate their
work. The U.S. IoT research community lacks high-fidelity experimental
facilities to support rigorous and repeatable experimental evaluations of
networked IoT systems. The objective of this project is to address the critical
issue by developing an integrated IoT infrastructure that provides remotely
accessible, configurable, and programmable IoT testbeds. The infrastructure is
the first realistic large-scale one, and it includes a smart-home & IoT hardware
testbed, a smart heath care testbed, and a smart-office IoT testbed. The
testbeds will enable novel and high-quality research in many areas, such as
hardware design, IoT, healthcare, elderly care, smart home/office, smart city,
etc. This project will engage a broad community (including academia, industry,
and government) in the design, development and management of the infrastructure.
The project will integrate research with curriculum development, and broaden
participation of computing by including underrepresented students and the K-12
community. Shared, remotely accessible, configurable, programmable, and
observable IoT testbeds are in great need for researchers at different
organizations to experiment and test their work at scale. This project addresses
the critical issue by developing an integrated IoT infrastructure. The
infrastructure includes three remotely accessible, configurable, and
programmable IoT testbeds using one uniform interface: a smart-home & IoT
hardware testbed, a smart heath care testbed, and a smart-office IoT testbed.
Each testbed consists of several remotely-controllable/programmable robots (to
emulate human activities), a large number of smart IoT devices, and an IoT edge
server (to store and process IoT data locally. The smart-home & IoT hardware
testbed also includes FPGA boards and a high-end mixed-signal oscilloscope, for
developing the capabilities to interface with robots and IoT devices, and
override their control as needed to further customize their functions. In this
project, the team will develop hardware and software (e.g., smart IoT
applications (apps), IoT management software, and web interfaces) to grant these
off-the-shell IoT devices such remote access features. The proposed
infrastructure will enable many new CISE research opportunities, such as remote
hardware design and evaluation, configurable IoT hardware test, IoT research
based on realistic testbeds and real IoT data, and efficient healthcare and
elderly care utilizing smart IoT. With the three IoT testbeds, for the first
time the broad research communities (such as hardware design, IoT, healthcare,
elderly care, and smart home/office) will be able to generate, access and
collect real data, as well as instrument and run experiments using real devices.
This project will enable, extend and accelerate high-quality research in the
broad areas, and contribute to bringing different communities together.

The proposed infrastructure will enable a number of new CISE research
opportunities and support high-fidelity research in healthcare, elderly care,
smart home/office, IoT, hardware design, etc. (2) This project will engage a
broad community (including academia, industry, and government). (3) The project
will integrate the infrastructure development and the supported research into
their curriculum development. This proposed project will directly foster new
research and educational opportunities at Temple University, and two EPSCoR
institutions (University of Arkansas and University of South Carolina). (4) The
PIs will engage students of underrepresented groups and the K-12 community into
this project. (5) In addition to publications, the PIs will create a publicly-
accessible GitHub repository to share the project results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.