* 2309300
* Potassium Atoms in 2D Triangular Superlattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 221,452.00

Advanced technologies are fueled by advances in our understanding of materials.
Given that a material is composed of a specific selection of atomic elements in
a specific crystalline form, we seek to understand what are the macroscopic
properties of the material in terms of electrical and heat conduction,
magnetization, and so on. This understanding is often obtained from numerical
simulation. However, a new paradigm is emerging for the exploration of materials
science: quantum simulation. In this new approach, properties of a material are
understood by creating a physical simulacrum of the material, i.e. a highly
controlled system that obeys the same microscopic rules as those governing the
real material, but a system in which physical properties can be readily tuned
and measured. In this project, the research team will simulate the properties of
materials using a gas of potassium atoms, cooled to extremely low temperatures,
and trapped within a regular structure produced at the intersection of several
laser beams (an optical lattice). The motion of the ultracold gas of atoms in
this optical lattice mimics the motion of electrons in a crystal. By taking
high-resolution images of the atomic gas, the team will gain insight that can
guide the design of new materials. Students engaged in the project will receive
valuable training in the expanding field of quantum information science. The
specific scientific focus of this project is the role of geometric frustration
and flat bands in artificial ultracold atomic and also solid state materials.
Ultracold potassium atoms will be placed within optical lattices of several
geometries, including the honeycomb lattice and the kagome lattice. Both these
lattices support a band structure that includes flat bands, i.e. a macroscopic
degeneracy of states in which the energy does not vary with quasi-momentum. The
team will conduct experiments using the fermionic isotope of potassium, 40-K, in
order to probe and verify the flatness of these bands, explore the implication
of flat bands on the thermodynamics of itinerant fermions, and study the
possibility of metallic, ferromagnetic, charge-density-wave modulated, and
superconducting states of fermions in flat-band optical lattices. The findings
of this work will advance our knowledge of complex electronic phases that arise
in flat-band and heavy-fermion materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.