* 2309187
* NeTS: Small: Hybrid Switching in Data Center Networks: Systems-driven Modeling and Principled Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Pramod Viswanath, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 187,180.00

Data analytics are increasingly an engine of technical and economic growth. They
typically involve distributed computation across many interconnected servers in
large data centers. The increasing number of applications and the rapidly
growing scale of datacenters are driving a strong need for fast, dynamic and
economic changes in the interconnection patterns among datacenter servers. To
address this, this project will make use of optical circuit switches, which can
handle large data traffic flows with sparse connection patterns. It will develop
scheduling algorithms to manage when to connect servers via these switches,
taking into account practical constraints associated with the switching hardware
as well as practical systems constraints. Addressing this challenge will enable
more efficient use of data center resources for data analytics and other
computationally intensive tasks.

This project addresses the problem of fast dynamic switching for adaptation to
datacenter traffic patterns. In particular it investigates the issue of
balancing the overhead of reconfiguring circuit switches with the capability of
dynamically meeting traffic demand requirements. The project will design
scalable scheduling algorithms for hybrid switches (combination of optical
circuit switches and electronic packet switches) with direct applications to
modern data centers, addressing a wide range of practical requirements. These
goals are addressed via a two-step approach: (a) Systems modeling, i.e. deriving
canonical models of the optimization problems underlying the constraints of the
hardware (speed, connectivity constraints and switching costs) as well as
practical system requirements (such as throughput and tail latency); (b)
Principled algorithms: deriving scalable scheduling solutions with formal
optimality guarantees by conducting a first-principles study of the underlying
mixed continuous/combinatorial optimization problems. The output of this project
is expected to impact both practical networking designs of modern data centers
as well as the development of next generation optical switches with high
connectivity and small switching costs.