* 2309482
* EAGER: Cut-and-Seam Manufacturing of Sensor Meshes for Perfusible Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,09/30/2024
* C. Harnett, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2024
* USD 246,793.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
research on attaching electronics to fiber arrays, bringing porous meshes into
an electronics manufacturing system originally designed for solid surfaces.
Sensor chips will be applied to spider-like microelectromechanical (MEMS)
interposers that grip onto mesh fibers. The benefit of mesh packaging is it
allows sensors to be placed into new, technologically important environments
with flowing fluids, including cell growth scaffolds, membrane reactors used in
chemical manufacturing, and coolant-flushed electronics. The supporting
materials are softer than conventional electronic circuit boards, and the
researchers will investigate how to join deformable materials making electronic
connections across seams without precise alignment. Cut-and-seam manufacturing
benefits filtration systems such as air handlers and respiratory masks that must
fit one-of-a-kind three-dimensional (3D) surfaces without gaps. This project can
lead to a new electronics manufacturing method designed for porous and fibrous
materials. It presents a strategy for 3D assembly of working sensor meshes and
evaluates its success as well as limitations for seam crossing and signal
identification. This project also provides research and training opportunities
for undergraduates in textile engineering, mechanical engineering, and
electrical engineering, and outreach materials for participants to learn about
MEMS and Sensors.

The goal of this EAGER research is to make progress on three challenges: 1)
scalable transfer processes for low-resistance contacts between MEMS and fibers,
2) sufficient mechanical strength for operating in perfused environments, and 3)
addressability across seams made with the loose alignment tolerances of textile
manufacturing. The project investigates a new thermal method for device release
from a donor surface. The devices’ pull-off force is characterized under flow,
and electrical contact is measured using a probe station. The approach is to use
chip-scale diodes in a rectifying seam tape that prevents shorting at seams.
Finally, using temperature chips with unique ID numbers, the sensor meshes will
be scanned with a heat source and the sensor signals are used to identify the
heated location across a seam. This interdisciplinary project transforms
microtransfer printing to porous and fibrous substrates by improving
understanding of device-to-fiber junctions’ electrical and mechanical properties
and their dependence on layout. Microtransfer chip printing techniques are now
seeing commercial success, but these methods are designed for continuous, non-
porous, surfaces with predictable adhesion contact area. This project defines
the problem of signal integrity at seam crossings, an increasingly important
topic in manufacturing stretchable electronic systems where a standardized
connector technology is not yet available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.