* 2309260
* Preparing Students for the Second Quantum Revolution Using Research-Validated Learning Tools
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2026
* USD 498,945.00

This award funds a project to develop research-based educational materials that
will help prepare future scientists and engineers for the demands of the second
quantum revolution. The materials developed will include Quantum Interactive
Learning Tutorials (QuILTs) and peer-instruction tools focusing on quantum
information science and technology (QIST) for undergraduate courses. These
research-based learning tools will focus on helping students develop a
functional understanding of concepts related to QIST, e.g., quantum measurement
and time-development, entanglement, quantum computing, teleportation, and
cryptography. Guidance and effective instructional approaches are critical in
retaining traditionally marginalized students (e.g., women and racial and ethnic
minority students) in science and in shaping their career choices. The guidance
and scaffolding support provided by the QuILTs and peer-instruction tools have
the potential to attract more traditionally marginalized students to pursue
physical science/engineering major and careers related to QIST. Since the QuILT
modules will focus on QIST concepts, they can be an effective approach to
introducing students to the second quantum revolution and inspiring them to
become future contributors in the growing field of quantum information science
and technology as leaders in areas related to quantum computing, and quantum
communication. First-hand exposure to QIST concepts and cutting-edge
applications in QuILTs and peer-instruction tools can motivate students to
continue learning those topics further. The tools will be disseminated broadly
and will also be implemented at minority serving institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.