* 2309920
* A physics-based neural network approach for geophysical inversions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* George Karniadakis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 304,285.00

Geophysical imaging has contributed to much of our understanding of the Earth
and its geologic, tectonic, and volcanic history. However, most geophysical
imaging utilizes single data types rather than using multiple data types
jointly, resulting in images that can be incompatible with other data. Such
incompatibilities can lead to misleading or erroneous inferences about the Earth
and the underlying geophysical processes. This project investigates a method for
allowing seamless usage of both gravity and seismic data jointly by leveraging
new artificial intelligence tools that have physics based constraints. The
method promises to be easily and efficiently applied to many different
geophysical imaging problems and therefore potentially improve our understanding
of Earthâ€™s tectonic history. In other contexts, the enhanced images may help
determine how to best respond to natural hazards like earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions. This work also helps connect the artificial intelligence and
geophysics scientific communities, two communities that would benefit from more
interactions with each other. In addition, the project supports graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as outreach efforts in the Providence public
schools that includes minority and low-income high school students.

Joint inversions that robustly minimize the tradeoffs inherent in using
different types of geophysical data are challenging to implement, in part due to
the specialized expertise needed for each data type, the unique difficulties in
setting up each type of inversion, and the quantity of data and simulations that
must be analyzed as part of such studies. Machine learning has made great
strides in addressing all three of the above challenges, but it still often
remains computationally impractical to implement robustly and this is true of
joint inversions of full-waveform seismic and gravity data. This work uses a new
machine learning framework called physics informed neural networks (PINNs) to
implement joint inversions of such data. The PINN framework leverages an
understanding of the underlying physical model to reduce the cost of building a
neural network to accurately approximate the wave propagation or Poisson
equation governing the relevant data. One test target of the PINN-based joint
inversion methodology is using field data from the Los Angeles Basin, where
numerous prior in situ geological and structural field data can be used to test
whether the joint inversion accomplishes the goal of improving the resolution of
true geologic features.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.