* 2309022
* CRCNS US-German Collaborative Research Proposal: Neural and computational mechanisms of flexible goal-directed decision making
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Amitai Shenhav, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 01/31/2028
* USD 812,227.00

To behave adaptively, people need to flexibly align their decisions with their
immediate and long-term goals. Failures of such goal-directed decision-making
can result in an array of maladaptive behaviors, such as financial risk taking,
drug abuse, or gambling. While past research has helped identify the drivers of
goal-directed decisions, there are still significant gaps in our understanding
of how people are able to reorient those decisions as flexibly as they do, as
well as when and why they fail to do so. In a series of studies that combine
computational modeling with measures of behavior, attentional focus, and brain
activity, we are studying the capacities and limits of human decision-makers to
flexibly adjust their information search and actions to different goals and task
demands. By uncovering the hidden levers and potential failure modes of goal-
directed behavior, our work better disentangles sources of real-world decision-
making failures, and provide a path towards targeted interventions to better
align choices with long-term goals.

Our project addresses critical gaps in research on the neural and computational
mechanisms that link decision-making and cognitive control. Past work on the
computational and neural mechanisms of goal-directed decision-making has been
singularly focused on a narrow subset of human goals (how people select the best
option from a set). It is therefore unknown how people flexibly reconfigure to
their wider array of goals – for instance, selecting under different criteria or
accumulating information across options rather than comparing between them – and
when and why they fail to do so. Our project develops and tests a computational
framework that accommodates the range of flexibility observed in human decision-
making, by representing explicit choice goals that define a) how information is
translated into evidence and b) how evidence is then integrated to select
responses. We are testing our framework in a series of studies that combine
behavioral tasks with eye-tracking, EEG and fMRI. This multi-modal approach
allows us to uncover the neural circuits and dynamics that enable people to
flexibly transform and integrate information about their options to achieve
their current goals, and to understand how and why people vary in these
capacities. The project further supports outreach activities aimed at training
researchers in computational methods for predicting and testing a wide array of
decision-making behavior.

A companion project is being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, Germany (BMBF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.