* 2309407
* Acquisition of a Lexxyg Research Devise for Radiative Stimulated Luminescence Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Marine Frouin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 158,664.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, the Luminescence Dating
Research Laboratory at Stony Brook University (SBU), acquires a Lexsyg Research
Luminescence Reader from Freiberg Instruments. This state-of-the-art device has
been specially designed to conduct thermoluminescence (TL), optically stimulated
luminescence (OSL), and infrared-radiofluorescence (IR-RF) measurements for the
dating of sedimentary samples. The enhanced capacity of this equipment to
include IR-RF stimulation and detection provides a vital resource for students,
faculty, and visiting scholars questioning the current understanding of human
evolution in Africa and Eurasia. In addition to specific project applications,
the instrument is used in the SBU laboratory’s work in refining the accuracy and
efficacy of IR-RF dating while expanding the upper dating limit of the
methodology. The rarity of this instrument, and specifically its physical
adaptability, is a key factor in engaging interdisciplinary STEM youth by making
luminescence dating and research in geochronology more broadly engaging.

Innovations in dating methods are crucial for pushing the boundaries of our
understanding of the past. By extending the time range of the application of
luminescence-based dating techniques, the research group provides fundamental
new dating evidence directly relevant to archaeological and ecological
investigations centered on hominin evolution, past human behavior, and responses
to climate change. The instrument’s ability to service IR-RF dating provides a
new tool for archaeologists and evolutionary anthropologists to obtain numerical
ages on Pleistocene fossil-bearing sediments. Specifically, the device will
contribute to the success of multiple ongoing research projects focused on: 1)
Examining the accuracy and age limit of the IR-RF dating method, 2) Determining
the age of sedimentary deposits containing early stone tools and fossils across
multiple regions of the world. 3) Demonstrate the link between environmental
changes and the dispersion of ancient cultures across multiple continents. 4)
Defining the cultures, territories, and interactions between multiple human
species over the Paleolithic and the timing of the disappearance of Neanderthals
and Denisovans, 5) Tracking the impact of ecological change on early pastoral
societies and their resulting exploitation of the territory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.