* 2309340
* Molecular Spectroscopy to Measure Lifetimes and Collisional Dynamics of Lithium and NaK Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Burcin Bayram, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 289,846.00

Scientists have developed remarkable methods to study the formation of molecules
in interstellar medium although they are light years away from the Earth-based
labs. They have also learned to generate ultracold molecules to explore their
unique quantum properties. The research team will use a highly effective method
known as a high-resolution molecular spectroscopy along with pulsed lasers to
investigate the radiative properties of target diatomic (2-atom) molecules,
lithium and NaK (a mixture of sodium and potassium), in a heatpipe oven. In the
heatpipe oven some atoms chemically bind to form molecules. When exposed to
laser light, molecules absorb photons from the laser and undergo a transition to
their excited quantum state. The excited molecules eventually return to lower
quantum states by emitting photons in a characteristic time scale, which is
called the radiative lifetime. The decay time of the emitted photons can be
probed using various time-resolved spectroscopic techniques. The research team
will use a sophisticated photon-counting technique to record arrival time of the
individual photon from a specific excited state. As the process repeats, the
recorded number of photons builds up and the result yields molecular lifetime.
Additionally, the research team will investigate the effect of the atomic and
molecular collisions on lifetimes as collisions often alter the interaction of
light with molecules. The primary potential benefit of this research is to gain
knowledge of the fundamental understanding of radiative processes in molecules
as they, for example, occur in the interstellar medium and in ultracold atomic
and molecular physics. The project will also provide benchmark values to test
the reliability of recent theoretical lifetime calculations and advance the
understanding of how atoms and molecules interact. The broader impacts of the
project are benefits to society by providing extensive hands-on research
training for undergraduate and graduate students, and developing research-based
educational materials for curriculum enrichment. Students will gain valuable
knowledge and skills in atomic and molecular physics, and in advanced
spectroscopic and optical techniques. During the science outreach program, the
research team will engage with hundreds of K-12 students and their teachers,
demonstrating the principles of light and optics to promote public understanding
and appreciation of science.

The goal of the project is to study the radiative lifetimes and collisional
dynamics of highly excited lithium and NaK molecules. Molecular transitions are
much more complex compared to the atomic transitions since each molecular
quantum state consists of additional vibrational and rotational quantum levels.
Thus, a high spectral resolution is needed to identify the correct transition
pathway. The research team will use very precisely pulsed lasers to initiate the
excitation process and a high-resolution molecular spectroscopy along with a
photon-counting technique to detect photons from a specific vibrational-
rotational quantum level. Such study can be used to detect predissociation,
which is a process by which a chemical bond within the molecule is broken, and
radiative association, which is the formation of a new molecule from colliding
atoms. Thus, the measurements open up possibilities for searching
predissociation and radiative association processes that are particularly
important in interstellar clouds, plasma physics and meteorology. The study of
highly excited lithium molecules is specifically interesting due to the exotic
double peak structure in molecular states, opening up potential applications in
ultracold physics. The output of this research program will be complementary to
the recently calculated radiative lifetimes and will advance understanding of
molecular interaction dynamics. The relatively simple yet still sufficiently
rich internal structure of lithium and NaK molecules is then a compelling target
for testing fundamental laws of nature and probing novel states of quantum
matter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.