* 2309467
* LTREB Renewal: The Arctic Carbon and Climate (ACCLIMATE) Observatory:  Tundra Ecosystem Carbon Balance and Old Carbon Loss as a Consequence of Permafrost Degradation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Edward Schuur, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2028
* USD 512,346.00

Permafrost- soil that remains frozen throughout the year- stores substantial
quantities of carbon. Permafrost carbon is derived from the remnants of plants,
microbes, and animals accumulated in frozen Arctic soil over thousands of years.
However, permafrost is vulnerable to thawing with increasing temperatures. This
project examines the dynamics of permafrost carbon at a long-term study in a
tundra ecosystem in interior Alaska. The long-term measurements collected by
this project are critical for a landscape understanding about the impact of
permafrost carbon on climate. The Arctic Carbon and Climate (ACCLIMATE)
permafrost carbon observatory uses field observations to measure carbon fluxes,
carbon isotope ratios, and ecosystem carbon pools in a tundra ecosystem that is
undergoing rapid and irreversible change due to regional warming. The project
educates undergraduate students who are conducting research projects. The
project also conducts outreach to Denali National Park through the Murie Science
and Learning Center. This project will also interface with the broader science
community through ongoing synthesis work organized by the Permafrost Carbon
Network.

This project is the second five years of a planned ten-year study. The research
plan is designed to answer three questions: 1) Does warming and permafrost
degradation cause a net release of carbon from the terrestrial ecosystem to the
atmosphere, and how does the magnitude change over years to decades? 2) What
proportion of this carbon release is derived from old carbon stored in the
soil?, and 3) How does change in surface hydrology interact with thawing to
control old carbon losses through carbon dioxide and methane? The central
hypothesis is that the transfer of carbon to the atmosphere will occur as a
result of permafrost thaw and the microbial decomposition of organic carbon.
Permafrost may act as an accelerating feedback to climate change if the old
carbon that forms the bulk of the soil pool is respired to the atmosphere
following permafrost thaw. Ultimately, the research will test this feedback loop
in an important Arctic ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.