* 2309208
* Microfronts and Other Nocturnal Submeso Motions over Microtopography
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Larry Mahrt, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 473,044.00

This award examines the boundary layer of air adjacent to the ground surface
that cools at night. Strongest cooling occurs with clear skies and low wind
speeds. This situation is poorly understood compared to other boundary layers
with more significant winds or daytime heating. The strong cooling leads to
practical issues including freezing street surfaces and frost damage to
sensitive crops. The strong surface cooling also reduces vertical mixing and
thus increases the probability of high concentrations of pollutants. The weak
winds correspond to large variability of wind direction that spreads the
pollutants over a variety of wind directions. This process is currently hard to
predict. Formation of dense fog is another outcome of the strong cooling and
weak vertical mixing. Local spatial variation of the surface cooling is an
important feature requiring more attention. This project will increase
understanding through analysis of intense measurements from different sites.
Each site contains a network of clustered stations. The above analyses will
improve the boundary-layer part of forecast computer models.

The general analysis of different subclasses of very stable nocturnal boundary
layers, and the relation of submeso motions to these subclasses, will be
investigated. Very stable nocturnal boundary layers most often occur with strong
stability associated with low wind speeds and clear skies. Submeso motions occur
on scales just larger than the largest turbulent eddies but smaller than the
mesoscale motions. Submeso motions include microfronts, wave motions, meandering
motions, and more complex structures. These motions densely populate the very
stable boundary layer. The analyses will be based on time series, spatial
information across networks, and combined time-space domains from different
datasets. The analysis will first concentrate on microfronts. The first stage
focusses on increasing horizontal gradients of temperature. The second stage
includes horizontal convergence that concentrates horizontal gradients into
microfronts. Analysis of other submeso motions will follow with both individual
analyses of each type of submeso motion and collective analysis of all submeso
motions. Examination of the large wind-direction variability caused by submeso
motions will be examined in detail. Additional data sets will be evaluated with
possible recommendation of a new tailored field program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.