* 2309323
* Laser-induced graphene composites-based standalone stretchable sweat sensing system for remote health monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Huanyu Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Inflammation as a defense mechanism in the body is an immune response, which
forms the basis of many physiological and pathological processes. However,
certain infections can also cause an overwhelming local/systemic inflammatory
response, leading to life-threatening diseases. Because of the association
between specific cytokines and infectious diseases, there is significant
interest in utilizing cytokine levels as an early marker for infection. While
blood collection and sample analysis have been applied in current testing for
cytokines, they often involve phlebotomy and complex laboratory equipment.
Although invasive real-time measurement of small molecules can be achieved with
aptamer-based sensors, continuous, non-invasive, and remote monitoring of
cytokine levels cannot be accomplished. There is an unmet need to develop
wearable devices for non-invasive, continuous monitoring of inflammatory markers
to identify at the earliest possible time individuals who are likely to be
infected. The non-invasive measurement of biomarkers with ultralow
concentrations from the biofluids (e.g., sweat, interstitial fluids) with
complex composition requires high sensitivity and selectivity in the sensors,
which is challenging to achieve with most existing devices. The need for complex
laboratory equipment and the lack of sustained power supplies makes long-term,
real-time monitoring elusive. This project will result in a standalone device
can simultaneously provide the required properties of high
sensitivity/selectivity, wireless measurement, and sustained power supplies. A
grand challenge in wearable devices is to achieve non-invasive, long-term, real-
time, wireless measurements with high sensitivity/selectivity for diagnostic
confirmation and health monitoring. In pursuit of this goal, the research
project will investigate a set of foundational laser-induced graphene composite
materials, manufacturing approaches, and device problems to shift the current
bulky devices or wearable sensors toward standalone stretchable sweat sensing
systems for remote real-time health monitoring. The proposed standalone
stretchable device systems will distinguish themselves from existing wearable
devices in that they possess soft microfluidic electrochemical sensors with
enhanced sensitivity/selectivity for real-time synchronous detection of multiple
analytes and sustained power supplies for long-term operation. A combined
experimental and modeling research program will 1) elucidate the effect of
highly porous 3D nanocomposite electrodes functionalized by aptamers on enhanced
sensitivity/selectivity, 2) understand the role of Multiphysics design for
stretchable devices under mechanical deformations, and 3) uncover the
fundamental mechanisms of nanocomposites-based power supplies for enhanced power
performance. Through the synergistic integration of research and educational
activities, this project will also provide next-generation engineers and
scientists with career development opportunities and relevant skill sets to
address grand challenges related to bioelectronics for human health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.