* 2309021
* Dynamical and Strong-Field Gravitational-Wave Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David Nichols, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 210,000.00

The NSF's Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) and
collaborating facilities observed gravitational waves from nearly one hundred
merging black holes and neutron stars. These remarkable measurements opened a
new field of gravitational-wave astrophysics, which is allowing gravity to be
studied in new ways. To interpret the results of these observations and learn
about Einstein's general relativity, the underlying theory of gravity that
describes these waves, precise calculations must be carried out of the
gravitational waves that are emitted during the merger of two black holes. This
award supports a research effort that combines first-principles calculations,
data-analysis procedures, and analytical and numerical modeling of black holes,
which will be used to extract insights from gravitational-wave observations.
Many of the calculations will be carried out by graduate students, who will be
trained in techniques that are useful in physics research and other quantitative
areas. A final component of the award will be short essays about the general
themes of black holes and gravitational waves, to help introduce these subjects
to a wider audience of fiction and non-fiction readers. The writings will be
free to read on the research website of the PI.

More specifically, the goals of this project will be to make advances in
gravitational physics in several directions. (i) The PI and students will
compute persistent gravitational-wave signals from binary black holes using
consistency relations determined from recently identified conservation laws in
asymptotically flat spacetimes; the detection prospects of these signals will be
assessed. (ii) They will model the waves of the persistent observable called the
gravitational-wave memory, which has the best chance of being detected from
binary mergers. With their improved model, they will reassess the significance
of the memory effect in the observed black-hole mergers. (iii) They will improve
the computation of gravitational waves emitted from black-hole binaries with
large mass ratios that are surrounded by dense distributions of dark matter. The
dark matter and its interaction with the binary will be modeled more accurately,
which will help produce smaller biases in the data analysis and parameter
estimation forecasts. (iv) They will develop gravitational waveforms for mergers
of black holes in modifications of Einsteinâ€™s theory that cover all the stages
of the merger process. These approximate waveforms can help reveal a simpler
picture of the more complicated phenomenology of the merger and could be used in
gravitational-wave tests of general relativity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.