* 2309678
* Conference: NEON Great Lakes User Group Workshop
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Alison Donnelly, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 18,354.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) was developed to understand
biological phenomena at regional to continental scales. The Macrosystems Biology
& NEON-Enabled Science program places a high priorty on scaling and integrating
the results from observations at one scale to understand processes and dynamics
better at other scales. The Great Lakes User Group (GLUG) is a domain-specific
ensemble of researchers with a wide range of expertise, whose goal is to address
scientific and technical issues specific to the Great Lakes region. This award
provides support for a GLUG workshop to engage as many stakeholders as possible
in identifying what ecological research and data collection is ongoing within
the Great Lakes Domain and how this knowledge and expertise can be leveraged to
advance scientific knowledge and address environmental challenges at regional to
continental scales. The benefits to society include the application of this
expertise to conservation and restoration in the Great Lakes and beyond.
Promotion of learning and societal understanding of science will be achieved by
the inclusion of members of underrepresented groups in science, including
graduate students.

GLUG will facilitate regionally focused, nationally relevant collaborative
research, and create a mechanism for communication among regional stakeholders
and NEON scientific staff. A workshop-based approach, consisting of short
presentations, a keynote address, breakout brainstorming sessions and site
visits will be adopted to create a network of researchers, facilitate exchange
of research knowledge, integrate data from a range of ecologically focused
disciplines, establish a framework to facilitate other user groups to organize
and develop a roadmap for a collaborative project proposal. The outcome of these
activities will strengthen existing collaborations and foster new ones, together
with raising greater awareness and promoting use of NEON observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.