* 2309025
* RUI: Quantum Correlations and Dynamics of Ring Sensors and Simulators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kunal Das, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

Harnessing the exotic features of quantum mechanics to reach beyond the limits
of classical physics has emerged as one of the most prominent themes of
technological innovations set to define this century. Rather than displace,
quantum rules are poised to substantially extend the capacity of existing
technologies, with the most promising thrusts being in the realms of
computation, sensing and simulation. This project focuses on the last two
aspects as their benefits can have a broad impact: Sensitivity to acceleration
and force fields can be dramatically enhanced by quantum effects, with direct
applications in metrology and systems control. It has also been long recognized
that quantum effects are most effectively simulated by quantum systems. The
fragility of quantum states when interfaced with the human scale continues to
drive a quest for better platforms. This project investigates an alternate
platform comprising of ultracold atoms confined to a ring-shaped periodic
lattice, a system that is robust, yet encompasses all quantum features relevant
for applications. The essence of quantum mechanical advantage lies in the deep
hierarchy of correlations within a system that transcends classical notions of
locality. Furthermore, applications require a system to evolve in time,
necessitating a thorough understanding of its quantum dynamics. This research
will conduct a thorough analysis of these two fundamental aspects of the ring
lattice system in the context of utility in multiple pathways for simulators of
quantum processes and development of an array of quantum sensors that push the
limits of sensitivity. Training of numerous undergraduate students in physics
research will be a priority, building on success under prior grants to leverage
the experience to channel students into STEM career paths, including many from
under-represented demographics.

Sensor development will prioritize a mechanism patented under a prior grant to
do high precision sensing of rotation and magnetic fields. Instead of
interferometry, the staple of precision sensing for over a century, the
operating principle is based on a localization transition for coherent media in
ring lattices. Its development and deployment will hinge on how dynamics and
quantum correlations impact sensitivity and calibration. Quantum advantage will
be sought in enhancing sensitivity with effects like spin-squeezing and
multimode coherent dynamics, that can utilize inter-atomic interactions
constructively. The ring structure and its generalization to cylinder or torus,
with optional lattice structure will be developed as a comprehensive quantum
dynamical simulator: Mimicking electronic transitions in atoms with those of the
modes of a ring lattice can simulate quantum optics with external degrees of
freedom; Quantum entanglement can be generated in collective spin states and
applied to effects like quantum teleportation; Matter wave counterparts of
optical effects as well as parity-time (PT) symmetric physics that involves
atypical non-Hermitian Hamiltonians, can be simulated within the novel context
of closed loop lattices; The non-trivial topology supplemented by rotation
allows simulation of dynamical topological effects associated with the quantum
Hall effect and synthetic gauge fields; The finite unbounded configuration of a
ring lattice allows simulation of many-body physics, including phase transitions
and quantum dynamics with fewer approximations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.