* 2309142
* Travel: Support for Conference Participation at the ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Yong Zheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2024
* USD 27,017.00

This award will support student attendance at the 2023 version of the
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI) conference to be held in Sydney, Australia.
IUI is the main international conference where researchers in human computer
interaction (HCI) and artificial intelligence (AI) present work on systems that
use AI to help people be more effective in interacting with computers. IUI
research spans a wide range of socially important topics and domains, including
recommender systems, adaptive educational systems, accessibility, autonomous
systems, creativity, virtual agents, and many others. Providing travel funding
that allows junior researchers to present their own work and be enriched by
others' work will strengthen the IUI community and provide valuable benefits for
the students involved.

The funding will support around 12 students, some in person and some virtually,
to attend the conference. Most of these students will also attend a Doctoral
Consortium at which later-stage PhD students will present and get feedback on
their dissertation research from both senior researchers and other PhD students
in the IUI community. The availability of travel funding will be widely
announced in the relevant communities, with students being invited to submit
applications describing their doctoral work. These applications will be reviewed
by a program committee that gives substantive feedback for every application,
whether accepted or not. Acceptance decisions will be made with an eye toward
topical, institutional, and demographic diversity of participants, while also
considering financial need. Chosen students will attend a day-long doctoral
consortium, have additional opportunities to meet with individual mentors, and
be invited to present in a poster session for the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.