* 2309549
* Acceleration, Complexity and Implementation of Active Set Methods for Large-scale Sparse Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Hongchao Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 236,770.00

Large-scale nonconvex sparse nonlinear optimization problems frequently arise in
many modern applications where speed, stability and solution accuracy are
critically important. Such applications include optimal control, image
processing and stochastic learning. This project improves the implementation and
theory of current active set methods for solving large-scale nonlinear
optimization problems. Innovation in the project will help to understand the
convergence rate and computational complexities of active set methods which have
not been fully addressed in the literature. The algorithms and software
developed in the project will not only benefit the research in computational
optimization but also the investigations of new methods in broader areas of
computational science. All the graduate and undergraduate students supported by
this project will have opportunities to perform interdisciplinary research in
both computational mathematics and data science.

Although interior point methods successfully solve optimization problems with
excellent computational complexity, there are rarely global computational
complexity results of active set methods for constrained optimization. This
project develops practical, efficient and robust active set algorithms and
software to solve the large-scale sparse optimization problems to high accuracy
with both local fast convergence and global computational complexity guaranteed.
In particular, by exploring the affine-scaling techniques and the second-order
information the developed methods will have accelerated asymptotic convergence
speed, guaranteed global iteration complexity and converge to a (weak) second-
order stationary point. In addition, by combining the approach with a
generalized minimum eigenvalue procedure and a conjugate gradient method with
negative curvature line search, the developed algorithm is expected to have
excellent practical performance. All the algorithms will be developed carefully
from both theoretical and implementation perspectives to ensure the eventual
success of implemented software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.