* 2309779
* Collaborative Research: Construction and Properties of Sobolev Spaces of Differential Forms on Smooth and Lipschitz Manifolds with Applications to FEEC
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ali Behzadan, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 65,826.00

Thanks to the development of calculus due to Newton and others, we are able to
understand the physical world around us by constructing sentences using the
language of calculus; these sentences often take the form of differential
equations. These equations are used to formulate the fundamental laws of nature,
from Newton’s law in classical mechanics and Maxwell’s equations in
electromagnetism to Einstein’s field equations in general relativity and
Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics, and to model the most diverse
phenomena (in engineering, chemistry, biology, astronomy, and numerous other
fields). Many important applications involve differential equations whose
solutions are functions that are defined on manifolds; roughly speaking, a
manifold is curved surface. For this reason, the study of function spaces on
manifolds is of paramount importance in applied mathematics, and a major part of
this project is focused on developing a more complete mathematical understanding
of properties of certain function spaces known as Sobolev spaces on manifolds.
Additionally, differential equations usually cannot be solved using analytic
techniques, and therefore designing and rigorously analyzing various aspects of
algorithms for approximating solutions to these equations is of central
importance and is a second major part of this project. If our goals are
achieved, the results of this project will have a broad impact on areas of
mathematics and physics such as the mathematical theory of general relativity,
numerical relativity, mathematical and computational membrane mechanics, and
other areas of science and engineering. Training of at least one graduate
student at UCSD on the topics of the project is expected.

This project is concerned with the properties of Sobolev spaces of functions,
differential forms, and more generally sections of vector bundles on manifolds,
with particular focus on nonsmooth manifolds. Our primary application is to
general Petrov-Galerkin numerical methods for partial differential equations
(PDE) on hypersurfaces of arbitrary dimension and on more general manifolds, and
an important technical tool throughout our work will be the Finite Element
Exterior Calculus (FEEC) framework. Such function spaces arise naturally in
numerical treatment of PDE in two distinct ways: First, the study of boundary
value problems (BVP) involving differential forms on Lipschitz domains in Rn
leads to nonsmooth differential forms on the Lipschitz boundary manifold.
Second, a careful analysis of PDE on triangulated surfaces, which are obtained
by discretization of a smooth surface and replacing it with an approximate
manifold, involves Sobolev spaces on Lipschitz manifolds. Although there are
results on the properties of Sobolev spaces on nonsmooth (primarily compact)
manifolds scattered throughout the literature, a complete and coherent rigorous
study of the properties of such spaces is missing. A primary goal of this
project is to study the properties of Sobolev spaces needed for theoretical and
numerical analysis of PDE on nonsmooth manifolds, and establish results that are
currently missing in the literature. It is well-known that in the study of BVP,
one quickly encounters fractional-order Sobolev spaces that exhibit surprising
behavior even on domains in Rn. One of the challenging features of this project
will be to explore the extent to which properties of fractional-order Sobolev
spaces on domains in Rn will transfer to Sobolev spaces of differential forms on
open manifolds and on Lipschitz manifolds obtained as a result of the
triangulation of hypersurfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.