* 2309854
* Regulation of pre-mRNA splicing by the circadian system
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Stacey Harmer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

The survival of plants depends upon their ability to anticipate and respond
appropriately to environmental challenges such as changes in light, temperature,
and encounters with pests and pathogens. A key regulator of the timing and
magnitude of responses to such challenges is the plant circadian clock.
Advantageous variants of components of this internal timekeeper have been
selected by farmers during the domestication of many crops; further selection of
clock components will be important as we adapt existing crop species to a
changing climate. A better understanding of the nature of the plant circadian
clock and how it interacts with fundamental cellular processes is required to
expedite such efforts. The project supported by this award will investigate the
relationship between the plant circadian clock and RNA processing, providing
valuable insights into both these highly conserved and essential processes. In
addition, the project will help train a new generation of scientists, engaging
high school and undergraduate students as well as graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars. An important component will be a research-based course for
first-year college students; such courses have been shown to increase
persistence of students in science and enhance their understanding of concepts
and development of skills.

The overall objective of this project is to understand how the circadian system
and RNA generation and processing pathways interact with each other. The
abundance of approximately one-third of transcripts in Arabidopsis thaliana are
regulated by the circadian oscillator. However, the respective contributions of
circadian control of transcription, RNA processing, and RNA export from the
nucleus on these rhythms have not been investigated. Moreover, the relative
influence of these processes on normal circadian function is still being
clarified. This project will use genomic, genetic, biochemical, and modeling
methods to investigate the connections between pre-mRNA processing and the
circadian system, the role of splicing kinetics in the circadian clock, and the
functional relationship between XCT and PRP19, two factors highly conserved
across eukaryotes that play important roles in both RNA processing and circadian
clock function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.