* 2309748
* Collaborative Research: Effective Numerical Schemes for Fundamental Problems Related to Incompressible Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to develop a novel computational method to investigate the
stability of buoyancy-driven fluids and turbulent flows due to electrical
conduction, known as magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence. By accurately
simulating these phenomena, the research will provide insights into improving
modeling and prediction of extreme weather events such as tornados, astronomical
occurrences, phenomena like Northern lights and solar flares, and electrically
conducting fluid of plasma and liquid metals. The new computational method will
be a valuable tool for the scientific computing community. Graduate students,
including those from underrepresented groups, will be trained in both
theoretical and computer fields. The research will also engage undergraduates
and K-12 students, benefiting local schools and communities.

The project aims to investigate numerical methods to solve the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations, delivering the divergence free velocity, provable
stability, robustness in high Reynolds numbers, and high efficiency in long-time
computations. The research will focus on improving the shortcomings of the
classical projection method with the following goals. First, the method will
achieve the divergence-free condition. This feature is critical in the accurate
simulation of buoyancy-driven fluids. The temperature in these fluids will be
transported, rearranged, and stratified by the velocity field, and the
enforcement of the divergence-free condition will give a more accurate account
of the evolution and the eventual states. Second, this algorithm will be able to
handle arbitrarily large Reynolds numbers with high accuracy. The simulations of
the 3D Navier-Stokes flows with a high Reynolds number will result in optimal
convergence and avoid nonphysical oscillations. Third, stability and error
estimates will be established for this scheme, where the results will be
independent of the Reynolds numbers. The investigators will apply this numerical
method to simulate the buoyancy-driven fluids near the hydrostatic equilibrium
and the electrically conducting fluids near a background magnetic field. In the
first problem, a Boussinesq-Navier-Stokes system governing the perturbations
near the hydrostatic equilibrium will be solved. The Boussinesq system couples
the Navier-Stokes equations forced by buoyancy with the temperature transport
equation. The numerical method will also be extended to simulate anisotropic
flows for which the vertical viscosity is much smaller than the horizontal one.
This problem arises in modeling turbulent flows in Ekman layers occurring in the
atmosphere and the ocean. In the second problem, the stability and long-time
behavior of electrically conducting fluids under a guiding magnetic field will
be computed and analyzed. When complemented with rigorous analysis, these
simulations will help accelerate the resolution of several open stability
problems on the Boussinesq and the MHD equations.

This project is jointly funded by the Computational Mathematics program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.