* 2309821
* Innovative Time Integrators for Stiff and Highly Oscillatory Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Vu Thai Luan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 226,073.00

Advancements in science and engineering increasingly require fast and accurate
computational methods for simulating complex multi-physical processes and their
interactions occurring at a wide range of temporal scales or high frequencies.
Numerical weather prediction and climate modeling are notable examples of such
applications that rely on the computational solution of primitive equations,
which are used to predict the behavior of the atmosphere, oceans, land surface,
ice, etc., as well as the complex interactions among them. Numerical solutions
of such multiphysics problems remain a challenging task due to the presence of
multiple time scales in the system where different processes take different
amounts of time to complete. As such, developing advanced numerical methods
capable of offering fast and reliable solutions is crucial for many applications
that rely on large-scale simulations of complex systems. The overall goal of
this project is to develop novel time integration methods for stiff and highly
oscillatory systems and demonstrate their performance on applications such as
numerical weather prediction, ocean modeling, and molecular dynamics
simulations. Additionally, the project aims to train one doctoral student and
offer opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics at
Mississippi State University. Training of at least one graduate student on the
topics of the proposed work is expected.

The project has four primary aims. First, the investigator will derive novel
mixed exponential integrators and preconditioned rational exponential
integrators for stiff systems and implement them. Second, the investigator will
develop stiffly-accurate embedded multirate exponential methods for additively
partitioned systems. Third, the investigator will develop stiffly-accurate
exponential Nyström methods. Fourth, the investigator will investigate the
performance of the newly developed methods on applications in numerical weather
prediction, ocean modeling, and molecular dynamics simulations. The investigator
will build off of his previous expertise in constructing, analyzing, and
implementing exponential and multirate time integration methods to achieve these
aims. Ongoing collaborations with numerical analysts, meteorologists, and
computer scientists will also contribute to the success of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.