* 2309410
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Pilot observations of enhanced near-bottom equatorial turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Caitlin Whalen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,205.00

The low-latitude deep Pacific is known to be the locus of a critical abyssal
upwelling branch of the overturning circulation. This upwelling requires
diapycnal mixing of buoyancy downward from the less dense upper ocean. However,
the diapycnal mechanisms driving this process are currently poorly understood
and relatively poorly sampled. This project will leverage a funded mooring array
at 140°W (part of the NSF project OCE-2048660 “Evaluating mechanisms for
enhanced mixing below tropical instability waves”) to make the first full year,
high-resolution equatorial observations of abyssal mixing. The funded moorings
are scheduled to be deployed at the end of 2023. Instrumentation will be added
to the mooring planned for 0.5 and 3°N latitutde to observe the bottom boundary
layer, using point and profiling current meters and a dense positioning of
temperature sensors.

This pilot project will inform understanding of the low-latitude diffusive
upwelling branch of the global circulation, a fundamental component of climate.
The observations will be used to test several hypothesized abyssal equatorial
turbulence mechanisms including: near-bottom wave trapping driven by the
horizontal component of the Earth's rotation, topographic lee-wave- driven
mixing, and inertial instability generated through wave-driven displacement of
fluid away from the equator. The project will advance knowledge of deep
equatorial dynamics and the overturning circulation to inform future
observations of mixing in the deep equatorial Pacific.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.