* 2309085
* WoU-MMA: Gravitational Wave Data Analysis and Tools for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Peter Shawhan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

NSF’s LIGO observatories have produced outstanding scientific discoveries,
beginning with the first direct detection of gravitational waves in 2015. To
date, over 90 gravitational-wave signals have been detected by the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration together with its international partners. One of the
most exciting discoveries so far was the event named GW170817, which was
produced when two neutron stars merged and was followed by a gamma-ray burst
along with distinctive X-ray, visible-light, infrared, and radio emissions
across the whole electromagnetic spectrum used by astronomers. That “multi-
messenger” event revealed new information about the astrophysics of gamma-ray
bursts, the physical properties of super-dense neutron stars, the speed of
gravitational waves versus light, and the source of heavy elements like gold – a
remarkable success of NSF’s “Windows on the Universe” initiative. The Advanced
LIGO detectors, along with the European Virgo detector and Japanese KAGRA
detector, are currently being prepared for their fourth observing run. This
award is supporting research to improve the data analysis methods in order to
increase the number of gravitational-wave signals that can be identified in the
data, by using machine learning techniques to make use of measures of data
quality, to enable even better studies of astrophysics and fundamental physics
using gravitational waves. This award also supports real-time data analysis
operations and rapid checks so that reliable candidate events can quickly be
communicated to astronomers, to enable rapid follow-up observations leading to
the next multi-messenger breakthroughs. The award supports the training of a
graduate-student scientist and outreach activities to share LIGO science results
and general science concepts with the public.

The research supported by this award will advance the science program of NSF's
LIGO and the project's international partners in two main areas: improving the
detection of compact binary coalescence (CBC) events in the upcoming O4
observing run, and ensuring readiness to detect and study the next great multi-
messenger event – or the next few, as nature provides. The PyCBC data analysis
pipeline will be improved by incorporating data quality information into the
detection statistic using machine learning methods, an approach which has been
demonstrated (in preliminary studies) to improve the net sensitivity of
searches. The upgraded PyCBC pipeline will be used both for low-latency searches
and for the final production analysis feeding into the next LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA
(LVK) transient event catalog, furthering LVK collaboration goals while
developing the scientific skills and experience of a graduate student
researcher. This award will also support the validation and monitoring of other
data analysis pipelines, and tools and procedures to coordinate rapid response
activities by LVK scientists when a promising candidate has been found. This
award also will support the maintenance of collaboration tools to plan, track,
publish and disseminate the LVK’s science results from the O4 observing run.
Finally, it will provide some funds for supplies for the University of Maryland
Physics Department’s STEM education/outreach programming for young students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.