* 2309107
* Conference: Mid-scale RI-EW: Concepts for a Full-Scale Wave Flume for Coastal Resilience and Adaptation; Newark, Delaware; 16 May 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Jack Puleo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2024
* USD 45,999.00

Nearly 40 percent of the United States population lives along coastlines, where
coastal regions are major economic drivers, contain transport routes for
overland cargo, and have a wide variety of critical infrastructure at-risk due
to extreme wind and waves. These locations will suffer increased flooding
hazards to the built and natural environments, via climate change, through sea
level rise, abnormal weather patterns, and extreme coastal storms. The recent
aftermath of Hurricane Ian in Florida in 2022 has demonstrated the destructive
potential of increased waves and water levels. Yet, there is no experimental
facility in the United States that can simulate holistic wave-driven processes
at full scale to foster coastal climate resilience. This award will support a
workshop to identify 1) the critical gaps in holistic coastal processes research
and experimental facilities; 2) the needed characteristics of an academic-based,
national, full-scale wave facility; and 3) the needed computational capabilities
to support the wave facility. This workshop contributes to the National Science
Foundation role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.

The workshop will be held on 16 May 2023, at the University of Delaware in
Newark, Delaware. The workshop will identify critical research gaps in coastal
processes of importance to the natural and built environment to foster climate
resilience, including, but not limited to, wave-current interaction, impact
forces on infrastructure, scour and sediment transport, damage and failure,
geotechnical characteristics, and foundation stability. The workshop will then
explore the design characteristics and capabilities needed for a full-scale wave
facility and the corresponding supporting computational efforts. The workshop
will include participants from the United States and abroad, representing
academia, government, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, and
wave laboratories. A workshop report will outline the critical research
questions requiring a full-scale wave facility for inquiry and the design
characteristics of such a facility. The report will be publicly available on the
NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure DesignSafe
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.