* 2309083
* Center for Advanced Materials &amp; Manufacturing (CAMM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2029
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Center for Advanced Materials & Manufacturing (CAMM),
a Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of
Tennessee (UT), Knoxville, focuses on the exploration, discovery, and design of
new materials with properties of critical societal importance for energy,
transport, and security advancements. CAMM brings together experts from diverse
fields to make groundbreaking discoveries in two areas: (1) materials for future
quantum technologies, and (2) advanced materials for extreme conditions. To
tackle these challenges, CAMM utilizes the latest advances in artificial
intelligence (AI) together with neutron scattering, materials synthesis, and
modeling. Interdisciplinary research group (IRG) 1 is dedicated to accelerating
the understanding, design, and control of quantum materials and systems through
the use of AI with advances expected in the design of materials for energy
harvesting, low-power electronics, quantum computing, and novel sensing
applications. CAMM’s second IRG focuses on developing materials that can
withstand extreme temperatures and pressure needed for nuclear fusion and
hypersonic defense systems. These applications require high-performance
structural materials not available today, and CAMM researchers are increasing
the understanding of the structure, properties, and processing relationship to
uncover new and enhanced materials with superior properties capable of
performing in such harsh operating environments. At the core of CAMM is a
culture of research, innovation, and learning. The center provides opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral trainees, to
prepare for careers as researchers, entrepreneurs, and innovators in academia,
industry, and national laboratories. These students gain the necessary skills
and knowledge to engage in AI-enabled discovery and innovation. CAMM is
committed to promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion and works closely with
minority serving institutions in the Southeast US to address the lack of
diversity in STEM fields. CAMM offers mechanisms for collaborative research and
technology translation as well as access to unique research resources and shared
facilities in AI and extreme conditions making it an important center for
advancing scientific knowledge and innovation in the country.

Technical Abstract: The Center for Advanced Materials & Manufacturing (CAMM)
addresses two critical challenges: (1) how to overcome the complexity of quantum
materials that currently hinders progress (interdisciplinary research group 1
(IRG1)); and (2) realizing structural materials capable of the extreme
performance characteristics needed for future technologies (IRG2). IRG1 focuses
on applying AI to quantum magnetic materials and engineered quantum systems
supporting the rational design of materials with applications. It develops AI-
based tools to handle complex quantum phases and physical behavior. IRG2
explores the effects of extreme conditions on stability, structure, and
properties of high-performance structural materials, elucidating the materials
paradigm for these novel systems. These materials are vital for a broad spectrum
of energy, transport, and security applications. Four interrelated research
methodologies – neutron scattering; modeling, simulations, and AI; in situ
experiments; and materials co-design – connect the IRGs, with application and
development of machine learning providing mathematical, analysis, and data
science tools to find patterns in data and simulations and enable optimization
and autonomous discovery. CAMM includes a tailored graduate education model and
curriculum incorporating the use of AI in materials and manufacturing discovery,
and a Research Experiences for Undergraduate program that exposes diverse cadres
of undergraduate students to the joy of discovery and the wide-ranging career
opportunities created by graduate education. It engages partners including
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, to increase the number of
underrepresented students participating in research experiences, education,
entrepreneurship, and innovation. CAMM also leverages UT’s strong corporate
partnership program and engages East Tennessee’s rich innovation ecosystem.
Further, it leverages the unique strategic partnership of the University of
Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory to strengthen collaborations among
materials science and engineering communities. CAMM impacts the nation by making
new experimental and AI capabilities available to researchers; training future
researchers in next-generation approaches to quantum and extreme materials; and
advancing the frontier of technologies from low power electronics and quantum
sensors to nuclear fusion and hypersonic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.