* 2309135
* Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* David Gross, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2028
* USD 5,628,768.00

The Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics (KITP) at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), serves the global theoretical physics
community via a unique structure and mode of operation. KITP drives interactions
with long-stay, scientist-curated programs for the broad and diverse physics
community. This extended exposure of program participants to scientific peers
stimulates collaborative networks that advance the intellectual enterprise of
physics. As a largely peer-managed institute, with essential input from the
community in the planning and implementation of its research programs, the KITP
responds to new scientific opportunities, encourages transformational research,
and promotes diversity by ensuring broad opportunities and representation. In
order to bring forefront physics to as large an audience as possible, the KITP
has developed the capability to record all talks, seminars, discussions and
public lectures and provide them to the world-wide community. KITP Online hosts
over 21,000 talks and is watched for more than 400 hours every day of the year,
dramatically increasing its impact.

The KITP is a user facility, with the NSF, UCSB, and other substantial private
foundation grants supporting the visitors' expenses and the staff and
infrastructure needed to support the programs. In a typical year, the KITP runs
12 research programs, lasting from four weeks to four months. There are always
two overlapping programs, resulting in 24,000 visitor-days per year and an
average of 68 visitors at the KITP at any time. The KITP is a window to the
world and a prime example of international scientific cooperation. Most long
programs also host a short conference, providing an opportunity for
approximately 60-80 additional researchers to come to the KITP. KITP includes
the opportunity for graduate students to participate by supporting visits when
their mentors are present. Motivated by the lessons learned during the lock-down
period of the pandemic, KITP offers a hybrid attendance opportunity for all
programs and conferences. The activities at the KITP also enhance the careers of
those who participate, allowing for new mentors and mentees to be discovered as
well as raising the profiles of early-career researchers. This award is co-
funded by the Division of Physics, the Division of Materials Research, and the
Division of Astronomical Sciences within the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.