* 2309485
* RAPID: Documenting and understanding large-scale migrations between social media platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Brian Keegan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 95,201.00

Although social networking sites employ many features to discourage users from
moving between platforms, users still migrate to new platforms following sudden
changes to rules, designs, and incentives. Since October 2022, alternative
social networking sites like Mastodon, an open-source, decentralized micro-
blogging service, have received hundreds of thousands of new users. The scale
and speed of this migration provide a unique opportunity to understand the
motivations to migrate between social networks, to identify the challenges of
sudden platform migrations, and to preserve important information from the
migration. Surveys, interviews, and archived content will provide time-sensitive
data to inform reporting, research, and design related to sudden platform
migrations and develop research methods for analyzing decentralized social
media. Understanding the drivers of platform migrations and the challenges of
re-creating communities on a new platform are important for ensuring that online
“public squares” can remain resilient and inclusive spaces for connection,
deliberation, and organizing.

This project will use quantitative and qualitative methods to characterize the
socio-technical mechanisms underpinning the 2022 migration. The first data
collection effort will survey users to understand their motivations and
challenges with migrating, cross-posting, or remaining. The second data
collection effort will interview stakeholders like moderators and software
developers to understand their values, priorities, and challenges for governing
social platforms facing rapid migrations. The third data collection effort will
archive digital traces of content documenting onboarding, socialization, and
conflicts illustrating the tensions and challenges associated with the
migration. The resources and findings developed by this project will be shared
via regular blog posts, a public archive, and peer-reviewed manuscripts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.