* 2309133
* Coherent Attosecond Ionization Dynamics in Laser-Dressed Atomic and Molecular Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Luca Argenti, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Many chemical transformations, such as combustion, photosynthesis, and
radiational damage, are driven by the motion of electric charge. Observing and
steering the motion of charge at the molecular level so to efficiently harness
energy, transfer information, and control chemical reactions, however, is
complicated by the extremely short timescale at which electrons move. An
electron can travel across tens of atoms in less than a millionth of a billionth
of a second (one femtosecond, fs). This motion can only be affected by using
probes that operate at a similar speed. Such a probe, an extreme ultraviolet
light pulse with sub-femtosecond duration, was reported for the first time only
at the turn of this century. In the two decades elapsed since, attosecond (1 as
= 0.001 fs) laser and detection technology has advanced to a level that allows
us to follow and to partially alter the natural course of transformations
triggered by ionizing light. Many aspects of ultrafast transformations, however,
are still unknown. In this project, the PI and his group will theoretically
study the statistical properties and the time evolution of localized charges
created in organic molecules by the absorption of short pulses of ionizing
radiation using novel numerical techniques complementary to those employed by
other groups. In particular, the PI's group will explore how infrared pulses,
such as those used in pulsed-laser surgery, can be used to increase the purity
of the quantum states produced. The project will serve the national interest
through the advancement of ultrafast science, through the development of
researchers at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate level, through
synergistic collaborations with US research groups, and through outreach
programs that include research internships of high-school students as well as
hands-on workshops on molecular structure at local minority-serving high
schools.

The PI's group has developed wave-function-based ab initio correlated methods
for the time-resolved study of multiphoton ionization of polyelectronic atoms
and, more recently, of small molecules. This project tackles three open
challenges: the stabilization, conversion, and fragmentation control of
autoionizing polaritons in atomic and molecular systems; the creation,
propagation, and monitoring of localized electron holes in molecular photoions;
and the calculation of the photoelectron distribution from the ionization of
laser-dressed helium atoms by free-electron-laser pulses, mediated by
autoionizing states. The project has multiple methodological components: the
implementation of a non-Hermitian Floquet solver in a basis of Siegert states,
to determine the complex energy surfaces of autoionizing polaritons and to
identify exceptional points for topologically robust conversions; the
calculation, within a wave-function based approach, of the ensemble of molecular
ions emerging from a photoionization event, to characterize hole localization;
and the segmentation of the wavefunction, to reconstruct the photoelectron
distribution from the ionization of laser-dressed helium atoms by long XUV FEL
pulses. On the phenomenological side, these advancements will allow the group to
identify and characterize exceptional points between autoionizing states in
laser dressed atoms and molecules, thus extending coherent control above the
ionization threshold to include topologically robust conversion protocols; to
characterize hole localization and state purity in the ions generated in the
photoionization of small molecules, their subsequent correlated dynamics and the
optical and photoelectron observables able to probe such dynamics; and to
explain coincidence measurements in the ionization of laser-dressed helium by
FEL pulses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.