* 2309785
* Finite Element Complexes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Long Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 81,864.00

This project focuses on enhancing our ability to solve complex mathematical
problems that have practical applications in areas such as engineering and
physics. The aim is to create a unified framework that will better understand
and tackle these problems, using cutting-edge computational techniques. In
addition to advancing scientific knowledge, the project has a strong emphasis on
education and promoting diversity by training the next generation of
computational mathematicians. By developing easy-to-use tools and sharing
knowledge through various platforms, the project aims to benefit society at
large, improving our understanding of complex systems and enabling the
development of innovative solutions in multiple fields. The project will include
training of at least two graduate students.

The technical aspect of this project employs a powerful approach called Finite
Element Exterior Calculus (FEEC), which has already proven effective in
analyzing the stability of finite element discretizations and in revealing new
finite elements for solving various partial differential equations (PDEs). The
goal is to extend the range of FEEC to design finite element spaces for tensors
and construct additional finite element complexes. The project will utilize the
Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand (BGG) construction to systematically develop finite
element complexes for various applications, such as Hessian complex, elasticity
complex, and divdiv complex. Moreover, this project seeks to unify non-
conforming finite element methods, weak Galerkin element methods, and virtual
element methods using weak stability and distributional finite element
complexes, thus expanding the finite element periodic table. Research topics
include smooth finite element spaces for scalar functions, div-conforming face
elements for tensors, finite element de Rham and Stokes complexes, discrete BGG
construction, weak div and divdiv stability, and distributional finite element
complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.