* 2309609
* Developing High Order Stable and Efficient Methods for Long Time Simulations of Gravitational Waveforms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Sigal Gottlieb, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 349,101.00

Gravitational waves were predicted by Einstein a century ago. Still, they had
never been directly observed before the Nobel Prize-winning discovery of black
hole and neutron star binary systems by the US-based Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) detectors in 2015. This detection heralded
a major scientific transformation in the gravitational wave astrophysics field,
which led to an urgent need for advanced computational models that will play a
critical role in the future success of LIGO and upcoming space-borne missions
like Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. High-accuracy gravitational wave
simulations are needed to produce the expected gravitational wave signal emitted
from these systems over hundreds of thousands of orbital cycles, which are
required to filter noisy data. The main objective of this project is to develop
new computational techniques to accurately and efficiently simulate
gravitational waves that will allow scientists to maximize the scientific output
of current and future detectors. These efforts open a window into the universe
and capture the interest of the general public as well as a younger generation
of scientists. Previous research projects by the investigators have been
discussed in the general media, and this work will continue to be successful in
outreach to the general public. The computational skills that the students
develop are broadly applicable and, therefore, would allow them access to
various career options, including in areas of urgent national need.

The project aims to develop advanced mathematical and computational models to
accurately simulate large-mass-ratio binary black hole systems, which are
crucial for detecting gravitational waves. In particular, it will develop
efficient and stable high-order methods that can handle the highly singular
source terms of the s = ±2 Teukolsky model, including the development of a novel
algorithm using a discontinuous Galerkin scheme and a mixed precision 2D
weighted essentially non-oscillatory scheme. Work will also focus on developing
high-order, positivity-preserving time-stepping methods with minimized phase and
dispersion errors to enhance the accuracy of the simulations. The research
outcomes will significantly impact the field of gravitational wave discoveries
by enabling the modeling of highly realistic astrophysical scenarios that were
previously infeasible, such as systems in which both black holes are rapidly
spinning in the extreme mass ratio limit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.