* 2309557
* Development of an Efficient, Parameter Uniform and Robust Fluid Solver in Porous Media with Complex Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lin Mu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 315,000.00

The incompressible fluid model is widely used in various fields in engineering
and science and their numerical solutions are of prominent importance in
understanding complex, natural, engineered, and societal systems. This project
aims to advance the state of the art by developing and demonstrating a low-cost,
uniform, and parameter robust scheme for fluid flows with mass conservation via
a pressure robust finite element method. The proposed research offers
significant advancements in accuracy, efficiency, effectiveness, robustness,
flexibility, and reliability of simulations for practical applications. This
project will strengthen interdisciplinary collaborations among researchers who
have different expertise in applied mathematics, computer science, computational
fluid dynamics, computational physics, and petroleum engineering. Undergraduate
and graduate students will receive interdisciplinary education through course
development, research project design, and student training, with a special
emphasis on supporting women and underrepresented minority students. The
techniques will be implemented in an open-source software package and will be
made available to the scientific community. Training of graduate students on the
topics of the project is also expected.

The proposed mathematical modeling and computational methods address key
scientific challenges in the fluid simulation. Novel mathematical formulations
are formed based on a divergence preserving numerical scheme and thus guarantee
the fundamental mass conservation. The major components include: 1) Designing an
applicable scheme that breaks the limitations of traditional solvers to achieve
both pressure robustness and mass conservation. 2) Developing a uniform scheme
with minimal computational cost, capable of handling varying physical parameters
in the mixed regime. 3). Designing a flexible and affordable numerical scheme
that can handle problems with complex geometries, providing high grid
flexibility. 4). Investigating the robust and effective linear solvers for the
resulting discrete linear systems, which is robust with respect to physical and
discretization parameters. For all aspects of the project, rigorous numerical
analysis will be carried out to prove and validate stability, convergence, and
robustness. Corresponding numerical experiments will be performed for further
validation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.