* 2309245
* Algorithmic and analytical development for solving and learning nonlocal models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qiang Du, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 394,840.00

Nonlocal interactions have become increasingly prominent in natural systems,
which has led to the growing interest in nonlocal modeling. The study of
nonlocal models has attracted much attention from applied and computational
mathematicians, motivated by applications in disciplines like mechanics,
materials science, life science, data science, and social science. This project
aims to study an important class of nonlocal models involving nonlocal
interactions of a finite range. In a variety of real world applications, these
models can serve as an alternative or complement to traditional PDE-based models
and help connect PDE models with discrete models. The project is consistent with
our vision of informative and intelligent scientific computing, which will
broadly contribute to the advance of computation science and various scientific
and engineering research fields, particularly as the world becomes increasingly
connected (and nonlocal). The investigator will continue to build a close
working relationship with research scientists at different institutions to
facilitate the collaborative research effort and to strengthen the training and
mentoring of young students and junior researchers. Effort will be made to
ensure the timely translation and integration of new research findings into
enhanced modeling and simulation capabilities for applications. Training at
least one graduate student on the topics of the proposed research is expected.

Nonlocal models differ from the more common local models represented by partial
differential equations (PDEs) in that they employ nonlocal operators in integral
forms, which can account for nonlocal interactions explicitly and provide more
general modeling choices. Despite much progress, the mathematical theory and
numerical analysis of nonlocal models are still at a nascent stage. Many key
questions remain unanswered in all aspects of nonlocal modeling, analysis, and
computation. In this project, the investigator aims to advance the mathematical
and algorithmic development of nonlocal models with a finite range of
interactions through an integrated solution and learning process. On one hand,
the investigator will focus on a few key questions related to the formulation,
discretization, and learning of nonlocal models, particularly involving physical
boundaries or interfaces. This is represented by some specific tasks concerning
the analytical and algorithmic development for solving nonlocal problems with
inhomogeneous data at or near the boundary and/or with heterogeneous nonlocal
interactions. These problems are notoriously challenging and their satisfactory
solutions will have a significant impact on applications. Meanwhile, the project
will help us build integrated modeling and learning processes. New strategies
and algorithms will be developed to help bring potentially transformative
changes to how nonlocal models are formulated and learned and to the related
numerical methods, including their development, analysis, and application. By
drawing close connections to local PDEs, fractional, and discrete graph models,
the project will also shed light on the mathematical and computational studies
of many other related subjects

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.