* 2309273
* Collaborative Research: PM: High-Z Highly Charged Ions Probing Nuclear Charge Radii, QED, and the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Endre Takacs, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 387,481.00

This project is jointly funded by Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Experimental
Physics, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
Experimental Nuclear Physics. When many of the outer electrons are removed from
an atom, it becomes a highly charged ion. Such highly charged ions (HCI) are
interesting as they have exotic properties compared to neutral atoms. In these
ions, the remaining electrons are those that overlap significantly with the
small central nucleus. Precision measurements of the light emitted as the
electrons change orbits thus yields information about the nucleus. These include
the finite nuclear charge radius, nuclear deformations, and magnetic properties.
Using an electron beam ion trap (EBIT), this project aims to conduct an
experimental study of HCI chosen to have simple, theoretically calculable
electronic configurations in order to understand nuclear effects. By measuring
the emitted radiation in the extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) and x-ray region, the PIs
and their collaborators recently conducted a series of benchmark experiments
using Na-like and Mg-like ions and determined the nuclear charge radii
differences of high-Z isotopes. In the present project, they will expand these
studies, investigate its limitations, and explore its sensitivity to beyond the
standard model (BSM) physics. The study will also be used to improve the
existing atomic theories of complex atomic systems. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in setting up the experiment, data collection,
analysis, interpretation, scientific report writing, and presentation at
conferences. The research work will integrate with the interdisciplinary
educational programs taken by the students such as the “creative inquiry”
program at Clemson University and the “Methods of Experimental Physics” at
Appalachian State University. Students from underrepresented populations will be
encouraged to join the research work and graduate students will be trained to
mentor undergraduates.

Only a few methods exist to measure the absolute nuclear charge radius, which is
a key property of the nucleus that provides information about the onset of
nuclear deformation, the structure of exotic halo nuclei, and the interaction
between nucleons. In astrophysics, the nuclear charge radius enters in the
determination of stellar elemental abundances and is an important parameter in
dark matter searches. Atomic spectroscopy of Na-like and Mg-like HCI in an EBIT
offers a new method to pursue the measurement of root-mean-square nuclear charge
radii that supplement only a handful of available nuclear and atomic physics-
based techniques. In addition to the strong electron-nuclear overlap,
relativistic and quantum electrodynamics (QED) effects are also more pronounced
in high-Z ions compared to neutral atoms or few-times ionized systems. The
experimental precision provided by the spectrometer resolution and high
statistics of the Na/Mg-like systems complemented by highly accurate state-of-
the-art ab-initio calculations thus allows for the study of atomic structure
effects such as hyperfine splitting, nuclear deformation, nuclear polarization,
and higher-order QED. The experiment will measure the isotope shift between
isotopes with some of the smallest nuclear charge radius uncertainties such as
tungsten and osmium, serving as ideal candidates to test the limits of the
technique and to look for the signs of BSM effects. Nuclear charge radii of
isotopes with a large uncertainty such as rhenium will be conducted using osmium
as an anchor. Prior work by the PIs have demonstrated the method in xenon and
the reduction of the previously reported uncertainty of iridium isotopes by an
order of magnitude.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.