* 2309659
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Remineralization effects of enhanced allochthonous dissolved organic matter in the West Florida Shelf impacted by Hurricane Ian
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Huan Chen, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 194,914.00

This project will study the fate of organic matter and nutrients delivered to
the West Florida Shelf during Hurricane Ian in September 2022. The study will
focus on three aspects of this hurricane event: (1) how do bacteria and light
alter dissolved organic matter as it is transported offshore, (2) what is the
effect of this large pulse of organic matter on inorganic carbon parameters and
organic alkalinity, and (3) do nutrients derived from the recycling of this
organic matter stimulate harmful algal blooms. Scientists involved in this
project collected samples in late August/early September 2022 and in early
October 2022, representing conditions just prior to and following Hurricane Ian.
They will collect samples again in January 2023. This unique set of samples will
enable the team of scientists to study how extreme events influence the carbon
cycle in coastal waters. The project will support scientists from groups that
are traditionally underrepresented in marine science, including two early career
scientists. The broader impacts include student training and outreach activities
at each institution.

The magnitude and frequency of tropical storms and extreme weather events is
expected to increase in response to climate change. This project will add new
insights about the effects of these events on the carbon cycle in a unique
setting. Hurricane Ian made landfall west of Fort Myers FL on September 28, 2022
as a Category 4 storm and delivered large amounts of dissolved organic matter
and nutrients to the West Florida Shelf (WFS). The investigators propose to
examine whether the remineralization of allochthonous dissolved organic matter
released during this extreme event alters water chemistry and ecological
processes on the WFS. The project brings together an interdisciplinary team of
scientists with diverse and complementary expertise including organic matter
characterization, inorganic carbon measurements, remote sensing and satellite
imaging analysis, and stable and radiogenic isotope measurements. The project
will provide training opportunities for one graduate student, one undergraduate,
and will contribute to education and outreach activities at each of the
institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.