* 2309564
* Creating a High-Performance Computing Virtual Environment for Artificial Intelligence Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Voicu Popescu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a virtual
environment for learning Artificial Intelligence (AI). Advances in AI are
transforming research and development across industries, government, and
academia. A key challenge in learning AI is that its solutions are less
transparent than traditional algorithmic solutions that mimic high-level human
reasoning. AI solutions are often a black box, lacking interpretability, which
makes it hard to gain insights, understand, and ultimately develop knowledge in
AI. This project will develop a real-time interactive tool that will promote the
development of AI knowledge and practices of learners from all disciplinary
backgrounds. Such a tool will inform the design of learning interventions that
will make abstract and complex topics more accessible.

The outcomes of this project will support learning in AI with the scaffolding of
interactive visualization, according to tenets of embodied cognition theories.
The envisioned tool will be designed from the ground up to best support AI
education through interactive visualization that is either immersive, using
virtual reality headsets, or non-immersive, on conventional displays. The
project will focus on foundational topics in AI and will contribute to
discipline-based education research in AI education. The findings will generate
new knowledge about students’ conceptual understanding of AI constructs and
procedural understanding of AI practices. The visualization environment’s
learning effectiveness will be validated iteratively first in a pilot and then
in an experimental stage, with a diverse group of 250 learners from an
interdisciplinary community at Purdue University. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.