* 2309378
* Innovation of Numerical Methods for High-Dimensional Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jianfeng Lu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

High dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs) arise ubiquitously from
scientific and engineering problems with many degrees of freedom. Important
examples include, but are not limited to, many-body quantum mechanics, dynamics
of chemical systems, learning and control of complex systems, and spectral
methods for high dimensional data. The numerical solution of high dimensional
PDEs, such as the many-body Schrodinger equations, has been one of the greatest
scientific challenges and remains a formidable task even with today's
computational power and algorithmic advances. This project involves cross-
fertilization of mathematical analysis and numerical algorithm development to
address challenges in solving these nonlinear, high dimensional equations. The
research results will advance our mathematical understanding and improve
numerical algorithms for quantum many-body problems and other high dimensional
PDE problems. The project involves new curriculum development and training of
graduate students in applied mathematics and computational science.

The research project aims to innovate numerical strategies for high dimensional
PDEs by drawing from and further developing ideas and tools from recent advances
in computational physics, quantum chemistry, and machine learning. In
particular, modern techniques for nonlinear parametrization of high dimensional
functions and sampling for high dimensional distributions. Specifically, the
investigator will (1) design and analyze neural-network parametrization for
high-dimensional functions with symmetry constraints, and (2) develop and
analyze efficient adaptive sampling strategies for training neural-network
solutions to high-dimensional PDEs. The research combines mathematical analysis
and algorithm design to make progress in numerical methods for high dimensional
PDEs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.