* 2309712
* Fredholm Alternative Quadrature: A Novel Framework for Numerical Integration Over Geometrically Complex Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Grady Wright, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 288,741.00

Integration is fundamental to the mathematical modeling of many processes in
science, engineering, medicine, and economics. For example, integration is used
to mathematically express the total quantity of a substance, such as a hazardous
chemical, over a given spatial region (or domain). However, the integration
problems in these models can rarely be solved by pen and paper techniques, so
researchers must employ numerical integration, or quadrature, methods. This
project introduces an entirely new framework, Fredholm Alternative Quadrature
(FAQ), for performing the essential task of quadrature. It thus gives
researchers new effective options for tackling integration problems, especially
those involving geometrically complicated domains and irregularly sampled data.
The framework also offers a new approach to a classical subject that has been
around for millennia, providing fresh insights and pedagogical opportunities.
The project will support one Ph.D. student in the recently created computational
math, science, & engineering (CMSE) program, which will also help bolster the
research portfolio of this program. Building from a successful track record of
recruiting graduate students in computational mathematics from underrepresented
groups, the investigator will continue working with the Institute for Inclusive
and Transformative Scholarship to help identify potential candidates for the
project. New educational opportunities for undergraduate, master's, and Ph.D.
students will also be created through the development of a Vertically Integrated
Project (VIP) that incorporates topics from the project.

The FAQ framework is based on a relationship between the continuous Fredholm
Alternative (FA) theorem for Poisson's equation and the discrete FA for linear
systems that arise from discretizing this equation. It does not employ
integration but instead requires discretizing certain Laplace operators at a
given set of points over the integration domain and solving an eigenvalue
problem. To maximize the flexibility and practicality of FAQ, the mesh-free
radial basis function finite difference (RBF-FD) method for discretizing the
Laplace operators will be used. This results in a method that 1) does not
require explicitly or implicitly integrating basis functions, 2) can be used on
geometrically complicated domains (even surfaces), 3) can be implemented for
scattered samples of the integrand without meshing, 4) can yield high orders of
accuracy for smooth functions, and 5) can be computed efficiently. Several
numerical and theoretical advancements will also be made, including techniques
for producing high-order accurate RBF-FD discretizations, efficient meshfree
multilevel methods for computing the FAQ formulas, least squares techniques for
enhancing the stability of FAQ formulas, tools for analyzing FAQ approximation
properties, and new insights on classical quadrature formulas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.