* 2309247
* Transient Optical Nonlinearities Engendered by Femtosecond Laser Filamentation in Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dmitri Romanov, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

In an intense, ultrashort laser pulse, the electric field magnitude can reach
and exceed characteristic atomic values to produce a partially ionized,
nonequilibrium plasma in the pulse wake. Interaction of such pulses with gas
media offers an opportunity to take direct control of electrons in the system,
and to engage the system in highly nonlinear processes with lasting outcomes.
This research project addresses the transitional regime in which the electrons
released by the strong-field ionization during the laser pulse become actively
interacting with neighbor atoms. The project will concentrate on transient
nonlinear optics in the controllable filament-wake channels; the expected
results will be linked to a number of current and upcoming experimental
activities. The research will advance knowledge of intense laser-matter
interactions, a topic of considerable interest for physics, chemistry, and
coherent control communities. It also has many technological applications, such
as remote lasing in the atmosphere, and developing new sources of attosecond and
X-ray pulses. The research activity at the Center for Advanced Photonics
Research (CAPR) at Temple University attracts a large number of students at
graduate and undergraduate levels, including broad participation of
underrepresented groups. These students receive training in high-technology
areas of femtosecond laser systems and the related fields of high-volume
parallel computations.

The project aims at exploring and harnessing the physical mechanisms that create
and control a transient alternative state of medium in a filament wake channel
and thus determine its nonlinear-optical manifestations. Delayed nonlinear
effects are manifest in many recent measurements, including higher harmonics
generation, igniter-heater processes, and giant Rabi sideband emission from the
channels. The task will be addressed using a combination of ab initio
calculations for the nonlinear response of individual ions, kinetic description
of the evolution of the inhomogeneous excited medium, and density matrix
calculations for probe laser coupling with this medium. The objectives include:
(i) developing a predictive description of filament channel formation in a
relatively dense gas medium, as driven by the competing processes of inverse
Bremsstrahlung on neutrals, impact ionization, and collisional excitation,
toward exploring pulse-shape control of the resulting excited system; (ii)
tracing evolution of electronic degrees of freedom in the filament wake
channels, including structured channels with finite ionization/excitation
gratings, as driven by thermalized electrons engaged in collisional processes
and affected by Penning ionization and also by dissociative recombination and
vibrational excitation in the case of molecular gases; the expected output being
the spatio-temporal patterns of the evolving ion density profiles and
molecular/atomic excitation; (iii) calculating dynamic polarizability and
hyperpolarizability coefficients of ions in the wake of the laser pulse (when
perturbative approaches become applicable) by implementing the auxiliary-field
approach and ab initio calculations to obtain the evolving dynamic quadratic and
quartic nonlinear refractive indices in filament wake channels and ionization
gratings; and (iv) investigating hallmark nonlinear interactions of probe pulses
with the wake channels and predicting the patterns of molecular rotational
revival induced via the transient nonadiabatic charge redistribution mechanism,
the patterns of frequency-domain mapping of ionic rotational revivals, and
controllable spatial-spectral patterns of dynamic Rabi sideband emission from
structured channels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.