* 2309919
* RUI: The Non-Linear Universe: Precision Numerical Cosmology and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* John Giblin, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This RUI award funds the research of Professor John T. Giblin, Jr. at Kenyon
College.

We live at a time when telescopes and gravitational wave-observatories are
showering us with data. At the same time, there are still great unanswered
questions about the nature of dark matter, dark energy, and the high-temperature
initial moments of the Universe. As part of his research, Professor Giblin will
probe high-energy physics using precision numerical simulations to predict the
consequences of different models of high-energy physics. Professor Giblin will
continue to develop, along with his undergraduate research students, cutting-
edge computational tools to study the complex particle physics in the extreme
environments of the early universe. This work is in the national interest as it
builds foundational understanding of high-energy physics, trains scientifically
literate human resources, and strengthens our understanding of numerical
methods. Additionally, it will bring these important topics to high schools
through outreach into physics classrooms.

Specifically, Professor Giblin will study the detailed physics of (p)reheating
at the end of inflation by studying realistic beyond-the-standard-model
scenarios and implementing full non-linear gravitational simulations to better
understand if cosmological processes can create primordial black holes.
Professor Giblin will also study cosmological processes in the late universe to
look at how nonlinear physics might contribute to our understanding of dark
matter, the Hubble tension, and dark energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.