* 2309879
* Analytical Studies Using Ionic Liquids, GUMBOS, and nanoGUMBOS
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Isiah Warner, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2025
* USD 401,980.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Isiah Warner, Jin-Woo Choi, and Kevin McCarter and
their groups at Louisiana State University are using liquid and solid organic
salts as the basis for new kinds of chemical sensors for important and
biomedically relevant analytes. These solid phase salts are being formulated as
nanomaterials to enable additional analytical applications. The probe involves
coupling the salts with a "quartz crystal microbalance" (QCM) - an instrument
normally used for simply weighing minute amounts of materials, but in this case
providing selective sensing based on the selective interactions of the salts
with target analytes. Miniature versions of this novel instrumentation are being
developed to enable use as portable sensors for analyses of volatile analytes.
The work exposes a diverse group of students to state-of-the-art research in
chemical instrumentation through research opportunities and extensive public
outreach.

These studies focus on ionic liquids and solid-state materials derived from a
"Group of Uniform Materials Based on Organic Salts" (GUMBOS), including
nanomaterials derived from GUMBOS (nanoGUMBOS). The nanoGUMBOS can be safe and
effective alternatives relative to many current nanomaterials used for
bioanalytical applications. The work targets novel, useful, and environmentally
friendly analytical applications. For example, strategies are being developed
for selective measurement of analytically important biomedical targets through
novel solvent and solid phase extractions. In combination with the QCM, the
GUMBOs can serve in sensors using multiple analytical strategies. Novel QCM
micro-instrumentation is being developed to enhance the range of analytical
applications for this methodology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.