* 2309631
* HAYSTAC Axion Dark Matter Experiment: Phase III
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Reina Maruyama, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

There are three astronomical observations that, to be understood, require the
presence of so-called Dark Matter, which is invisible matter that almost
exclusively interacts with itself and other matter through gravity. First, the
velocities of stars bound in galaxies (including the Milky Way) are too fast to
be accounted for by the total mass of the visible stars. Second, the expansion
of the Universe requires the introduction of more matter than we can observe as
ordinary atoms and particles. Third, the filamentary structure of the
distribution of galaxies cannot be established based on gravitational
interactions between galaxies, based on their observed masses. The fundamental
nature of dark matter is one of the leading unsolved problems of modern science.
Much work has been done to detect new types of massive dark matter particles
that are predicted based on an extended theory of particle physics called
supersymmetry. So far, no such particles have been seen in accelerator or dark
matter detectors. Another possible theoretical dark matter particle is the
axion, which was introduced to make the strong, or nuclear, force independent of
the direction of time, as has been experimentally determined to very high
precision. Although the axion has never been observed, its properties can be
calculated, and it is perfect for a dark matter candidate. Such axions would
form halos around galaxies, including our own. To search for axions, a microwave
resonator is placed in a very strong magnetic field. The axions in the galactic
halo can convert to photons, or radio waves, in the presence of the magnetic
field. A sensitive amplifier is used to search for the signal arising from this
conversion, the frequency of which is unknown. This system, called a haloscope,
must be tuned slowly in frequency to search for the conversion signal. The group
has operated the detector in the 4-7 GHz range several years and is continuing
the search with a planned increase in sensitivity. The collaboration-wide
efforts in support of HAYSTAC are leading to many technical innovations that
will be useful in many research and technology fields, with the principal result
being that it is possible to have a delicate quantum state measurement subsystem
operate in a real-world system that is subject to vibration and very large
magnetic fields, while operating with nearly 100% reliability, over times scales
approaching a year. HAYSTAC also serves as a fantastic training ground for
students and postdocs in particle physics, axion dark matter, and quantum
sensing techniques.

HAYSTAC (Haloscope at Yale Sensitive to Axion Cold Dark Matter) has been in
continuous operation, with interruptions for system upgrades, since the initial
commissioning in the Summer of 2014. The first version of the detector was based
on a Josephson parametric amplifier that was able to reach the quantum noise
limit of the phase-preserving amplifier. In 2019, the project successfully
incorporated quantum-enhanced detection based on a squeeze-state receiver system
that is not subject to the standard quantum limit. This increased the frequency
scan speed by a factor of two with a modest increase in sensitivity, due to the
approximately 4 dB of squeezing that was obtained, being limited by losses in
the microwave circulators. This system is currently taking data in the 4.5 â€“ 5
GHz range and will continue to do so through Summer 2023, with sensitivity at
the KSVZ model level. The expertise that was developed from the beginning of
HAYSTAC includes vibration suppression, accurate control of the conversion
cavity frequency and coupling, and highly effective magnetic shielding of the
quantum amplifiers that need to operate near the 8 Tesla superconducting magnet
used for conversion. The project has developed operational techniques that allow
continuous operation of the cryogenic system for months. During the first year
of the proposed activity, the experiment will install a new multi-rod cavity
that will allow operation at higher frequencies (favored by cosmogenic axion
models) with a good volume form factor that is being developed at U.C. Berkeley,
and test its cryogenic properties. Next, a new quantum enable receiver system
being developed at the University of Colorado will be integrated into HAYSTAC.
This system eliminates the lossy circulators and will allow a substantial
increase in sensitivity. The group anticipates that the full commissioning of
the upgraded system will be complete at the beginning in mid-2025, and operate
in the 7-10 GHz range or above, with sensitivity well into the KSVZ parameter
range.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.