* 2309231
* WOU-MMA: Maximizing Science Output of LIGO: Data Analysis and Improved Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 140,000.00

This project aims at maximizing the scientific output of NSF's Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) via formulating strategies
for detector improvements and the development and implementation of new data
analysis algorithms. This project will contribute to advancing precision
measurement technology, deepen understanding of general relativity, and push the
frontier of experimental physics at the interface between gravitational and
quantum physics. It also supports the observation and interpretation of multi-
messenger astrophysical sources. This project will serve as a training ground
for early career physicists and astrophysicists, teaching them a wide variety of
research techniques. By interacting with the broader quantum metrology
community, this project will benefit other precision measurement experiments
outside the gravitational-wave community. Participants of this project will also
vigorously pursue a wide range of activities that reach out to the broader
scientific community and the general public through (i) dissemination of
research results and scientific data via publications, lectures, and the
internet (including YouTube); (ii) interacting with K-12 educators and students,
e.g., via the LIGO and Caltech Astronomy outreach programs; and (iii) public
lecturing.

The primary scientific objective of this project is to drive the continued
improvement of LIGO sensitivity, to enable the most efficient analysis of LIGO
data, and to extract fundamental physics for upcoming LIGO detections. More
general objectives are to contribute to the advancement of precision measurement
technology, to contribute to our understanding of general relativity, and to
push the frontier of experimental physics at the interface between gravitational
and quantum physics. More specifically: (A) This project will formulate and
evaluate innovative approaches to improving LIGOâ€™s sensitivity. For quantum
noise, this program will: better understand the Fundamental Quantum Limit for
waveform detection, design back-action evading quantum amplification techniques,
and explore new readout strategies that potentially circumvent quantum noise.
This project will also study strategies for lowering thermal noise. By
collaborating with experimentalists, we attempt to make theoretical progress
that will eventually impact real experiments. (B) This project will apply
numerical relativity simulations to LIGO data analysis: (i) Simulations
following up on LIGO detections will be used to verify the accuracy of semi-
analytic waveform models, to explore parameter biases of these models, and to
perform alternative parameter estimation strategies as needed; and (ii) Improved
surrogate waveform models, which interpolate between numerical relativity
waveforms to produce a waveform at requested parameters to high accuracy, will
be implemented into LALSuite and be used in parameter estimation studies on
future events. This project will also better understand the content of binary
black hole ringdown waves and apply a new filtering technique to analyze the
mode contents of numerical relativity waveforms and LIGO data. (C) This project
will use LIGO data to explore the vicinity of black hole horizons, including
better describing the ways gravitational waves can be reflected from the
vicinity of the horizon and the echoes they might cause, and formulate tests for
stochastic metric perturbations caused by effects of quantum gravity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.