* 2309066
* Exploring Strong-Field Gravity through Gravitational-Wave and Multimessenger Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kento Yagi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 80,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to reveal how well one can ultimately
probe the nature of strong, dynamical, and nonlinear gravity through
gravitational-wave observations of black holes and multimessenger observations
of neutron stars. Currently, one of the biggest challenges in testing General
Relativity with gravitational waves from binary black hole coalescences is the
lack of complete gravitational waveforms from theories beyond General Relativity
that are valid throughout the inspiral, merger, and ringdown of the binary
evolution. Moreover, for binary neutron stars, certain tests of General
Relativity are limited by uncertainties in nuclear matter properties. The PI
will tackle these problems by (I) constructing, for the first time,
gravitational waveforms in theories beyond General Relativity that are valid in
all of the inspiral-merger-ringdown phases, and (II) performing a comprehensive
study of multimessenger tests of General Relativity with neutron star
observations by avoiding uncertainties in nuclear physics. The gravitational
waveform models to be developed will be ready to use and can be widely adopted
by the gravitational wave community and beyond. Multimessenger tests of General
Relativity with neutron star observations are extremely timely, and the outcome
of both projects will impact various communities in physics and beyond,
including gravitational physics, particle physics, nuclear physics, and
astrophysics. The long-term educational goal of the project is to connect with
potential next-generation scientists and convey the beauty and excitement of
physics, in particular General Relativity.

For the construction of the complete gravitational waveforms, the PI will work
in a specific gravitational theory motivated by string theory, in which some
simulations are already available. The PI and collaborators will produce more
simulation data for the merger-ringdown, stitch them against analytic waveforms
during the inspiral, construct ready-to-use surrogate models, and compare them
with the existing gravitational-wave data. These complete waveforms allow one to
probe more precisely theories beyond General Relativity with the existing
gravitational wave events and will assist in searches for new physics with
future observations. For multi-messenger tests, the PI will employ universal
relations among certain neutron star observables that do not depend sensitively
on the unknown internal structure of neutron stars. The PI will study such
relations in a few theories beyond General Relativity that either introduce
additional scalar/vector fields or introduce modifications in the high curvature
regime. The PI will then study how well one can probe these theories through
current and future multimessenger observations. To achieve the educational goal,
the PI's team will develop an online game on General Relativity and
gravitational waves to reach out to young players across the world. In the game
instructions, the PI will provide a brief description of General Relativity,
black holes, and gravitational waves, conveying the excitement and key aspects
of recent Nobel-prize-winning physics. UVA undergraduate students will be
involved in game development, integrating the research and educational
activities. The PI will make the source codes publicly available so that anyone
can develop their own games. The achievement will be advertised at annual
meetings for physics teachers in Virginia and around and through a public
article and audiobook that will reach over 55,000 readers globally including
STEM minority regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.