* 2309728
* Collaborative Research: Accuracy-Preserving Robust Time-Stepping Methods for Fluid Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Benjamin Seibold, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 218,333.00

The simulation of principled physics- or engineering-based models of reality
often requires the solution of large time-evolution equations. This project aims
to develop new mathematical theory and methodologies that improve the accuracy
and efficiency of numerical approaches to time-advance such problems, while
retaining the general structure of established methods. The research includes
methods appropriate for solving wave equations, such as those arising in
acoustics, or electromagnetic, and equations with constraints, such as those
arising in the simulation of fluid flows. A key application will be the enhanced
simulation of shallow water fluid motion, which can describe phenomena such as
storm surge, tsunamis, and wave generation via extreme weather (e.g.,
hurricanes). This project will support two graduate students who will be co-
mentored by faculty at two institutions, and also include an undergraduate
research component.

This project aims to establish new directions on the time integration of
differential equations that include the development of Runge-Kutta methods that
avoid order reduction and multistep methods for differential algebraic
equations. The key research contributions will be (A) developing novel
construction approaches and algebraic theory for explicit, and implicit-explicit
Runge-Kutta methods satisfying weak stage order; (B) proofs of time-stepping
barrier theorems for stiff problems; and (C) development thrusts for pathways of
the developed methods into community software. The concepts will be employed to
provide new methodologies in three particular fluid flow applications: (i) the
dispersive shallow water equations; (ii) the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations; and (iii) advection-dominated problems, including hyperbolic
conservation laws.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.