* 2309774
* Algorithms, Theory, and Applications for Fiber Coating Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hangjie Ji, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 290,730.00

Thin liquid films flowing down a vertical fiber, a phenomenon known as fiber
coating, is a fundamental component in various engineering applications such as
mass and heat exchangers for thermal desalination, water vapor, and ultra-fine
particle capture. These liquid films spontaneously exhibit intriguing
interfacial instabilities, leading to trains of traveling droplets and irregular
wavy patterns. Although there have been extensive studies on the modeling of
fiber coating dynamics, the inherent nonlinearity and degeneracy of these models
often present analytical and computational challenges in broader applications.
This research project aims to develop a hybrid numerical and machine learning
framework that accelerates the computation and facilitates the control of large-
scale stiff problems associated with fiber coating systems. The development of
these techniques can lead to a prototype for real-time simulation and prediction
in fiber coating applications. Parts of the project will be incorporated into
the investigator’s courses on scientific computing and data science. This
project will also provide research training opportunities for both undergraduate
and graduate students.

This project will employ analytical approaches, numerical simulations, and
machine learning techniques to develop theory and algorithms for challenging
free-surface flow problems that arise from fiber coating systems. Such problems
are characterized by fourth-order highly-nonlinear partial differential equation
(PDE) systems, which are sensitive to traditional numerical methods and data-
driven machine-learning approaches. The objectives of the project are organized
around three interconnected aspects: 1) Analysis of the regularity and structure
of traveling droplets described by coupled PDE systems. The derived structures
will be utilized to develop simplified dynamical systems from full-order models
for individual droplets. A prototype control problem will be studied to
establish the foundation for control design of general fiber coating systems; 2)
Development of robust and structural-preserving algorithms for simulating and
learning fiber coating dynamics. This involves bridging physics-based modeling
principles, PDE theory, and neural ordinary differential equation techniques for
long-time sequential learning and reduced-order modeling. The data-driven
learning techniques developed for high-order nonlinear degenerate PDEs in this
project are expected to advance scientific machine learning for stiff physical
systems; 3) A real-world large-scale application will serve as a case study for
the theoretical understanding and verification of the developed algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.