* 2309534
* Innovative Butterfly-Compressed Microlocal Hadamard-Babich Integrators for Large-Scale High-Frequency Wave Modeling and Inversion in Variable Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jianliang Qian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 07/31/2026
* USD 290,000.00

This project develops and implements innovative fast algorithms for large-scale
wave modeling and inversion. Waves are ubiquitous, for example, wireless signals
are communicated in the form of electromagnetic waves, and ultrasound CT imaging
is based on propagation of acoustic waves. In fact, wave simulation is a
fundamental, growing technology in a variety of disciplines ranging from
synthetic aperture radar, sonar, geophysical resources exploration, medical
imaging, submarine detection, remote sensing and electronics to microscopy and
nanotechnology. Developing fast algorithms for these fields and applications
will serve the national interest very well in many aspects, such as advancing
national health by providing fast algorithms for medical imaging and advancing
national energy security by helping the U.S. petroleum industry maintain its
edge in oil and gas exploration. One of the most challenging problems in
computational wave propagation is how to carry out large-scale high frequency
wave simulation efficiently and accurately, and the investigator will develop
new fast butterfly-compressed integrator to address this crucial objective. To
expand the educational impacts, the project will integrate the scientific
discoveries with a series of short courses so that graduate students can be
trained on the latest scientific tools. Interdisciplinary hands-on training will
be developed for both undergraduate and graduate students, with an emphasis on
increasing the diversity and participation of under-represented groups of
students for STEM education.

The project will design novel fast butterfly-compressed microlocal Hadamard-
Babich (HB) integrators for large-scale high-frequency acoustic,
electromagnetic, and elastic wave modeling and inversion motivated by industrial
and military applications. The targeted problems for this scientific computing
project are large-scale wave modeling and inverse problems with big data sets.
The aimed model equations include high-frequency Helmholtz equations, Maxwell's
equations, and elastic wave equations in inhomogeneous media in the presence of
caustics. This project will foster breakthrough innovations in at least three
theoretical and computational aspects. First, the new butterfly-compressed HB
integrators will meet significant scientific challenges in large-scale high-
frequency wave modeling and inversion in the presence of caustics. Second,
significant advances will be made in developing novel butterfly compression and
HB integrators for PDE-based Eulerian microlocal analysis and computational wave
propagation. The new fast HB integrator is capable of producing uniform
asymptotic solutions beyond caustics. Third, new butterfly-compressed HB
integrators will provide efficient tools for many wave-related applications in
inhomogeneous media, such as seismic imaging and inversion. New butterfly-
compressed microlocal HB integrators will be developed for the first time for
these applications. The new methodology generated by the project will have broad
impacts on multiple scientific fields in both mathematics and engineering
applications and will significantly improve the simulation capacities of large-
scale wave propagation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.