* 2309007
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Megawatt Optical Power in Cosmic Explorer
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 65,281.00

Gravitational-wave astronomy has opened a new window on the universe. A century
after Einstein predicted gravitational waves, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) has rewarded decades of investment with
the first direct observations of gravitational waves from merging black holes
and neutron stars. Cosmic Explorer, a concept for a next-generation
gravitational-wave observatory in the United States, aims to push the reach of
gravitational-wave astronomy to the edge of the observable universe, using
proven LIGO technology in a ten times larger facility. Cosmic Explorer will
enable transformative discoveries across physics, astronomy, and cosmology, by
observing black holes and neutron stars across cosmic time, probing the nature
of the most extreme matter in the universe, and exploring questions in gravity
and fundamental physics. This award supports research to design an adaptive
optical sensing and controls system critical to enabling Cosmic Explorer. The
success of Cosmic Explorer will reshape the field of gravitational-wave
astrophysics and the futures of current early-career researchers. By clearing a
key technological hurdle towards its realization, this award will ensure that
gravitational-wave science continues inspiring young scientists across the
country to fulfill their potential as the world-leading researchers of the
future.

To achieve its unprecedented sensitivity, Cosmic Explorer will require much
higher circulating laser power (1.5 MW) than has ever been demonstrated in a
large interferometer. The objective of this work is to enable laser
interferometry at the megawatt scale, by developing the initial design of a Mode
Sensing and Control system for Cosmic Explorer capable of overcoming the
thermally-induced optical aberrations that limit current detectors.
Specifically, Cosmic Explorer’s thermal compensation requirements will be
modeled, documenting the degree to which known sources of wavefront error must
be sensed and corrected to achieve the detector design sensitivity. Then,
current and emerging technological options will be comprehensively assessed,
making down-selections where possible, to deliver a detector subsystem
conceptual design for optical mode sensing and control. This work supported by
this award will feed into the overall detector design, ahead of a conceptual
design review anticipated to take place roughly five years from the award start
date.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.