* 2309400
* SaTC: EDU: Advancing Cybersecurity and Privacy of Educational Technologies Used in K-12 schools
* EDU,DGE
* 11/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Florence Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 413,141.00

As the need and demand for digital learning have grown, there has been a sharp
rise in the number and intensity of cybersecurity attacks on K-12 school
networks and their users. These attacks—including phishing, data disclosure,
denial of service, and ransomware attacks—threaten students’ and schools’ cyber
safety and privacy by making their personal and educational information
vulnerable. These increasing cybersecurity threats highlight a need for
cybersecurity education targeted to school administrators and staff to ensure
they are adequately prepared to decide which educational technologies to use and
how to optimize their security configurations and features. This project will
provide cybersecurity education directly to school administrators, technology
support staff, and teachers across North Carolina through the novel
Cybersecurity Awareness-Ask-Action (AAA) program. This professional development
program will equip school educators with a deeper awareness of how to secure
their educational technologies, the communication skills to enable them to ask
security- and privacy-related questions of software providers, and critical
information on how to act when they recognize a threat to the digital privacy
and security of their schools.

The project has three goals. First, K-12 school personnel will identify and
analyze educational technology applications for collection, storage, and access
to different student and school data types. Second, the project team will design
and develop workshop modules for school administrators, technology support
staff, and teachers. Last, the team will facilitate a summer Cybersecurity AAA
program to implement the modules with school administrators, technology support
staff, and teachers. Outcomes are expected to improve the cybersecurity
protection of K-12 school systems and further secure their student data.
Evaluation results will be used to improve training modules. Materials will be
made freely available for use by other school systems across the country.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.