* 2309443
* I-Corps: Liveness detection and integrity authentication of digital audio
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Hafiz Malik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a reliable liveness detection and integrity authentication tool
for digital audio. Recent technological advances in the areas of artificial
intelligence, fake audio generation, and easy access to smart speakers pose
serious security and privacy threats to voice activated devices/services
(VAD/S)-based systems. Researchers have demonstrated existing VAD/S are
vulnerable to attacks and the growing adoption of VAD/S for e-commerce, voice-
based search, and speaker recognition-based banking and remote identity
verification highlights the problem. The proposed technology aims to secure
VAD/S, e.g., Google Home, Amazon Alexa, Apple Siri, etc., against a growing
number of attacks including spoofing, replay, and deepfake attacks.
Specifically, the proposed technology may reliably detect and prevent attacks on
speaker/speech recognition systems using liveness detection for real-time
systems and determine integrity verification for off-line systems. In addition,
the proposed technology may benefit other areas including multimedia forensics,
e-discovery, remote biometric verification, law enforcement and the
entertainment industry.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of real-time liveness detection
and integrity authentication of digital audio data. This is a relevant problem
that concerns security of many critical applications central to modern digital
usage such as speaker verification, speech recognition, fintech, e-commerce, and
social medial platforms. Reliable liveness detection may be used to counter the
threat of deepfakes to speaker verification and the spread of disinformation and
falsehood on social media platforms while safeguarding speaker verification
systems commonly used for noninvasive identity verification. The proposed
liveness detection and integrity verification of audio data framework relies on
the physics of acoustic and photo-acoustic processes and mathematical modeling
of distortion artifacts due replay attacks. The solution will use these to
detect liveness of audio with the input of voice activated devices and services.
In addition, the proposed innovation leverages the acoustic environment,
acquisition device, and post-processing artifacts for forensic analysis and
content integrity authentication. This technology may protect VAD/S against the
growing number of attacks and provide forensic examiners and law enforcement
personnel with a powerful, computationally efficient, scalable, and reliable
tool to perform online as well as offline forensics analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.