* 2309852
* Semi-Automated Discovery of Synthetic Polymers with Protein Features
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Adam Gormley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 579,734.00

Enzymes are biological catalysts with unrivaled complexity. In some cases, tens
of millions of years of evolution have shaped their structure and function. To
create enzymes with new capabilities, a design strategy that can replace
evolution is needed. The goal of this project is to combine artificial
intelligence, polymer science, and robotics to accelerate the design and
development of synthetic enzymes. Peptides are strings of amino acids, the
building blocks of enzymes. Combining polymers and peptides will create a
greater variety of structures and chemistries to be evaluated than would be
possible simply using peptides to create enzymes. To prepare a future workforce
proficient in this approach to enzyme design, this project will create an
interdisciplinary and immersive environment for graduate and undergraduate
students. Students from traditionally underrepresented groups will be actively
recruited via outreach and participation in training programs at Rutgers
University.

Enzymes are typically globular proteins with an active pocket capable of
catalyzing chemical reactions with exceptional specificity. Single-chain polymer
nanoparticles (SCNPs) hydrophobically collapse around catalytic elements,
creating synthetic enzyme mimics. There is no current method that yields bespoke
polymers that can assume protein-like structures. The goal of this project is to
develop SCNPs that collapse and structure around catalytic ligands to produce
globular nanomaterials that mimic the structure and function of glutathione
peroxidase and carbonic anhydrase. The central hypothesis is that active machine
learning through physicochemical landscapes via automation will provide an
efficient process for designing catalytic SCNPs with enzymatic activity. This
project will implement an iterative and closed-loop Design-Build-Test-Learn
process to reveal underlying structure-function behavior that encode enzyme
mimetic behavior in SCNPs. The following three objectives will be completed: 1)
program automation for sequence-level synthetic control of SCNPs, 2) machine
learning model training through active learning on an automated platform, and 3)
in-depth analysis of structure-function relationships to reveal underlying
biophysical behavior. The resulting models and data will be published open
source to serve the synthetic enzyme / SCNP community as a digital resource.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.