* 2309845
* Integrated Multiscale Computational and Experimental Investigations on Fracture of Additively Manufactured Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Vijaya Chalivendra, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 405,320.00

This project will create new computational capabilities using experimental
investigations to understand fracture and failure in 3D printed polymer
composites. 3D printing is transitioning from demonstrative prototypes to
functional products that impact a wide range of industrial sectors. However,
many polymer-based 3D printed parts are prone to fracture and failure. This
limits their applications in load-bearing components. Various polymer composite
filaments reinforced with particles and/or fibers are being developed to improve
the performance of 3D printed components. The current research and development
are hindered by the complex variabilities of 3D printing. It thus largely
remains in a trial-and-error stage with insufficient scientific guidance. This
project will develop a science-based strategy that combines computational
modeling and simulations with an optimal suite of experiments. This approach
helps to gain a fundamental understanding of multiscale fracture as well as to
quantify uncertainties associated with 3D printed polymer composites. The new
knowledge achieved through this research can develop new technologies for 3D
printing of high-performance components. The outcomes of this research can be
applied to a broad array of industries. The research will be complemented by
educational and outreach activities. These include curriculum enhancements,
hands-on 3D printing workshops, and STEM education programs that engage K-12 and
underrepresented minority students.

This project will take on the challenges of quantifying the process-structure-
property-performance relationship and deriving multiscale fracture mechanics
mechanisms for additively manufactured polymer composites. Although additive
manufacturing is capable of printing parts with relatively complex geometries,
several fundamental issues must be addressed before AM can advance to producing
functional composites. Current limitations include microstructural defects due
to strong thermal gradients induced during manufacturing, heterogeneous
interface bonding conditions, and large fracture and failure performance
variations. The research objectives of this project thus include: 1) developing
direct mesoscale simulations capable of predicting thermo-mechanical-chemical
coupling and fluid-structure interactions during the additive manufacturing
process, which will address fundamental questions of how motions and
deformations, temperature gradients, melting/solidification between filaments
and reinforced particles/fibers interplay with one other in assocoation with
micro-crack nucleation and propagation; 2) deriving multiscale modeling of
fracture based on machine learning of micro-crack simulations and phase-field
models of macro-crack predictions, with in-situ monitoring of manufacturing
processes and multiscale experimental characterizations being used for direct
model validations; and 3) developing an optimal model-based uncertainty
quantification protocol that organizes computational and experimental activities
to validate the model, investigate parameter sensitivities, and quantify
process/property variations. The research outcomes will advance fundamental
knowledge of the complex interplay between additive manufacturing process
parameters and fracture behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.