* 2309931
* Travel Support for 16th Tri-Annual International Conference on Stochastic Programming (ICSP); Davis, California; 24-28 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2023,08/31/2023
* David Woodruff, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,000.00

This grant provides funds for PhD students and post-doctoral researchers to
attend the 16th Tri-Annual International Conference on Stochastic Programming
(ICSP), in Davis, California, 24-28 July 2023. The ICSP is the premier event of
the Stochastic Programming Society, a technical session of the Mathematical
Optimization Society that brings together researchers, students, and
practitioners who work on decision-making under uncertainty. Funded participants
are expected to engage in research at the intersection of data and decision
analytics, machine learning, and operations research, with applications to
autonomous systems, climate adaptation, and cyber-physical systems.

The emphasis on new challenges brought by emerging technologies requires novel
ways of conceptualizing and modeling decision processes in coupled systems.
Multiple sources of uncertainty become common when using optimization models to
plan for responses to natural disasters. New research directions and ideas are
expected to converge among the conference participants. This project reduces
financial barriers for underrepresented groups to attend the conference and thus
makes STEM fields more diverse and inclusive. The conference also provides a
networking opportunity for researchers in industry and academic institutions of
the US and other countries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.