* 2309729
* Theory and algorithms for a new class of computationally amenable nonconvex functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ying Cui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,330.00

As the significance of data science continues to expand, nonconvex optimization
models become increasingly prevalent in various scientific and engineering
applications. Despite the field's rapid development, there are still a host of
theoretical and applied problems that so far are left open and void of rigorous
analysis and efficient methods for solution. Driven by practicality and
reinforced by rigor, this project aims to conduct a comprehensive investigation
of composite nonconvex optimization problems and games. The technologies
developed will offer valuable tools for fundamental science and engineering
research, positively impacting the environment and fostering societal
integration with the big-data world. Additionally, the project will educate
undergraduate and graduate students, cultivating the next generation of experts
in the field.

This project seeks to advance state-of-the-art techniques for solving nonconvex
optimization problems and games through both theoretical and computational
approaches. At its core is the innovative concept of "approachable difference-
of-convex functions," which uncovers a hidden, asymptotically decomposable
structure within the multi-composition of nonconvex and non-smooth functions.
The project will tackle three main tasks: (i) establishing fundamental
properties for a novel class of computationally amenable nonconvex and non-
smooth composite functions; (ii) designing and analyzing computational schemes
for single-agent optimization problems, with objective and constrained functions
belonging to the aforementioned class; and (iii) extending these approaches to
address nonconvex games.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.