* 2309315
* PM: Machine Learning Algorithms for Quantum-Logic Spectroscopy of Molecular Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* David Leibrandt, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 692,351.00

This award supports Professor David Leibrandt and his research group at the
University of California, Los Angeles to develop and characterize new techniques
that will use lasers to measure and control the quantum mechanical state of
individual trapped and isolated molecules. This is an interdisciplinary project
that spans quantum information and control, molecular physics and physical
chemistry, and machine learning and computer science. The potential benefits and
applications are correspondingly diverse, ranging from quantum sensing and
computing to improving our understanding of chemical physics to enabling
searches for physics beyond the Standard Model, which encompasses our
understanding of the fundamental particles and their interactions.

The goals of this project are to construct a new experimental apparatus and
develop machine learning algorithms for quantum-logic spectroscopy of molecular
ions (i.e., electrically charged molecules). In quantum-logic spectroscopy, a
single molecular ion of interest (BeH+, MgH+, or CaH+ in this work) is co-
trapped with a single atomic ion qubit (Sr+ in this work) for sympathetic laser
cooling and state measurement based on a two-qubit quantum gate. The research
team will develop machine learning algorithms based on the partially observable
Markov decision processes framework that select the quantum-logic measurement
pulses adaptively and in real-time in order to projectively prepare pure quantum
states of the molecule with high fidelity and efficiency. These algorithms will
be scalable to polyatomic molecules with many thermally occupied states,
enabling precision tests of fundamental physics in future work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.