* 2309275
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Beyond App-centric Privacy: Investigating Privacy Ecosystems among Vulnerable Populations
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nora McDonald, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 393,256.00

Much privacy research has taken an app-centric approach, narrowly focused on
understanding user concerns, if any, with privacy risks of an app and
alleviating the symptomatic evidence of the ailment (data leaked by a specific
app). This project tackles the privacy ecosystem, an interlocking web of
dataveillance that can encompass everything from credit card purchases to
location history to communications metadata. The larger privacy ecosystems goes
beyond the risks of particular apps and aims to mitigate the multiple privacy
risks that threaten people, particularly vulnerable individuals who are both
more at risk of privacy breaches and more harmed by their consequences. Health
is a key context and domain in which a broad view of privacy is necessary. This
project goes beyond app-centric views of health privacy and aims to examine
vulnerable individuals’ privacy behaviors in the healthcare context. It develops
and evaluates ways that these individuals can better protect themselves, as well
as tools to help healthcare providers support their clients’ privacy.

Through qualitative research that includes in-depth interviews and systematic
analysis, this project is characterizing the understanding of risk experienced
by vulnerable individuals in the context of their healthcare, taking into
account the broad privacy ecosystem beyond individual apps. Qualitative research
also is exploring the role of service providers, including librarians, social
workers, teachers, and healthcare professionals in providing privacy management
strategies. Through qualitative research that includes in-depth interviews and
systematic analysis, this project is characterizing the understanding of risk
experienced by vulnerable individuals in the context of their healthcare, taking
into account the broad privacy ecosystem beyond individual apps. The second part
of this research involves vulnerable populations, service providers, and privacy
experts. Participatory design is employed to develop and evaluate a toolkit to
support privacy ecosystem management. This research project is developing a
freely available privacy toolkit designed for those who provide support and
guidance to vulnerable individuals to help mitigate privacy harms. The project
is contributing to understanding privacy risk and management for vulnerable
individuals and provides a new frame for privacy and security researchers in the
study of privacy protection for vulnerable communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.