* 2309296
* Collaborative Research: Center for Coatings Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 172,901.00

The Center for Coatings Research (CCR) focuses on the development of advanced
mirror coatings for gravitational wave detectors, a new and booming field of
observational astrophysics. By reducing mechanical loss and thus thermal noise
in mirror coatings, the project aims to enhance the sensitivity of Cosmic
Explorer (CE), the proposed third generation gravitational wave detector. This
research holds significant importance as it expands our understanding of the
universe by enabling observations of cosmic events, such as the collision of
remnants from the first stars. Moreover, the project has broader impacts on
precision measurement technology, benefiting areas like precision timing,
quantum information, low noise interferometry, and the search for deviations in
the gravitational inverse-square law. The outcomes of this research can also
have implications for the semiconductor, laser, and quantum computing
communities, as correlations between mechanical loss and other loss mechanisms
are explored. Additionally, this collaboration between materials science and
gravitational wave communities promotes education and diversity, providing
research opportunities for students at different education levels and advancing
the participation of women and underrepresented minorities.

This project aims to develop mirror coatings that meet the mechanical and
optical requirements for implementation in CE. Through extending the length of
the interferometer arms from the current 4 km to 20 and/or 40 km systems, CE's
observational reach will be significantly expanded. To fully utilize this
infrastructure, improvements are necessary in the mirror coatings' mechanical
loss and thermal noise reduction. The CCR combines groups working on coating
deposition, characterization of atomic structure and macroscopic material
properties, and computational modeling. These components are often performed by
three diverse communities that work in relative isolation from each other. The
strength of the CCR and its promise for accelerating discoveries arises from
close integration of these communities focusing on a unified research goal.
Since the formation of the CCR in 2017, the collaboration has become a knowledge
repository for gravitational wave detector coatings research, making significant
progress on all the proposed research directions, including uncovering atomic
structural motifs associated with room temperature vs cryogenic mechanical
losses, using that understanding to develop Ti:GeO2 coatings that can meet the
requirements for Advanced LIGO + (A+). Going forward research efforts include
the development of improved amorphous coatings and crystalline AlGaAs coatings.
The project will investigate atomic structural motifs associated with mechanical
losses at different temperatures, aiming for at least a two-fold reduction in
thermal noise compared to Advanced LIGO + coatings. CCR contributions have
implications for precision measurement, impacting various fields and potentially
benefiting the semiconductor, laser, and quantum computing communities. Overall,
this research advances the field of gravitational wave detection, supports
education at multiple levels, and promotes diversity within the physical
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.