* 2309814
* Model Reduction Methods for Extended Quantum Systems: Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Weiqi Chu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 11/30/2026
* USD 40,091.00

Much recent development in materials science and chemistry involves quantum
properties of the underlying systems. Quantum properties are often studied as if
the system of interest is isolated and evolves by itself, but in practice, a
quantum system is always coupled with its surrounding environment. Direct
simulations of such a system can result in overwhelming computational costs.
There is a strong demand for simplified models and efficient simulation
algorithms so that people can study quantum systems - such as semiconductors and
nanoelectronic devices - while retaining realistic complexity. This project
tackles the fundamental challenge of simulating an extended system with quantum
degrees of freedom by developing new models and data-assimilation methods. The
project will provide research training opportunities for undergraduates.

This project will focus on a Galerkin-projection-based model-reduction
framework. This project will aim to separate the quantum system from its
surrounding environment and describe the dynamics with fewer variables. This
project will provide rigorous error analysis of the model-reduction method and
consider a nonparametric data-driven approach to estimate the system properties
from data observations. As an interdisciplinary project, this project will
bridge techniques from different disciplines, including mathematics, physics,
chemistry, and quantum computing, and give rise to more accurate and reliable
models that can be implemented to accelerate computationally heavy problems of
different disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.