* 2309941
* Electrically driven plasmonic light emitters strongly coupled to excitons and dielectric resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 442,649.00

Extremely small light emitting devices are of potential use in next-generation
computing and communications technologies. Two metal electrodes separated by an
atomic-scale gap can function as both an electrical device and a nanoscale light
source. When a current is driven across the nanogap, the electrons that “tunnel”
from one electrode to the other can excite collective motions of the electrons,
called plasmons, in the electrodes. Energy from successive electrons can build
up in the plasmons and the electrodes, leading to a steady-state population of
electrons with an effective temperature so high that they glow in the visible
range. If the nanogap is very close to materials with optical resonances in that
same energy range, then the light emission can be strongly modified, as energy
is transferred back and forth between the metal and the optical materials. The
PI proposes to examine light emission in two such coupled systems: 2D materials
that act as semiconductors and have the kind of optical transitions in light
emitting diodes; and special patterned insulators (cavities) that are designed
to trap light at specific energies. The goals are to maximize the strength of
the plasmon-material energy transfer, to examine the effect on light emission of
electrically tuning the semiconductor and having very sharp cavity resonances,
to create light emitting devices of this type that function stably at room
temperature, and to count individual emitted photons to search for quantum
effects in the light emission. Results will be presented through publications,
conference talks, and accessible writing by the PI on his blog. This project
will support the professional development and research training of graduate
students and undergraduate researchers, contributing to a skilled technological
workforce. The PI will participate in Rice efforts incorporating K12 teachers
and will continue public outreach to lifelong learners through the Glasscock
School of Continuing Studies.

The PI’s group has demonstrated that nanoscale plasmonic tunnel junctions can
emit light at energies above the applied electrical bias in an
electroluminescent process based on the plasmon-assisted generation and plasmon-
enhanced recombination of a steady-state population of hot carriers. In nanogaps
coupled to 2D semiconductors, the electroluminescence shows peak splittings
indicative of strong plasmon/exciton coupling, showing that these devices are
electrically driven “plexcitonic” emitters. The PI proposes an integrated
research and education program to quantify and maximize these effects. Goals
include maximizing the plasmon/exciton coupling in devices incorporating gate-
tunable transition metal dichalcogenides; demonstrating electroluminescence in
plasmonic nanogaps strongly coupled to photonic crystal dielectric cavities;
implementing such junctions in plasmonic materials that allow room temperature
operation; and using photon counting statistics to examine photon
bunching/antibunching, to better understand emission mechanisms in these
polaritonic structures. The PI’s team of graduate and undergraduate researchers
will collaborate with theorists in modeling of these systems, enabling critical
feedback for optimization of device structures. Results will be presented
through publications, conference talks, and accessible writing by the PI on his
blog. This project will support the professional development and research
training of graduate students and undergraduate researchers, contributing to a
skilled technological workforce. The PI will participate in Rice efforts
incorporating K12 teachers and will continue public outreach to lifelong
learners through the Glasscock School of Continuing Studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.