* 2309887
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Communication Latency Limits Beyond the Traditional Block-Coding Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,998.00

Advanced wireless communication networks have driven many technological advances
ranging from the convenience of smartphones, personalized health monitoring
devices, to smart soil / crop sensors for precision agriculture, to name but a
few. While the amount of data that can be delivered through wireless networks
has increased exponentially in the past decades through numerous innovations of
signal processing, there has been significantly less progress on the reduction
of latency (i.e., response time) of wireless communications. This project aims
to substantially shorten the wireless communication latency by first
characterizing the drawbacks of the ubiquitously used design paradigm called the
block coding architecture. The project will then design non-block-coding-based
solutions that significantly lower the latency beyond what is considered
possible under standard block-coding architectures. The new ultra-fast response
time of wireless communications will support complex, diverse, and highly
dynamic applications in Internet-of-Things, edge computing, and cyber-physical
systems, and may yet unlock countless new transformative applications beyond
what is conceivable under today's technologies. In the relentless pursuit of
ultra-low latency, a system designer must utilize every source of delay
reduction, and this project thus takes a multi-pronged approach that minimizes,
simultaneously, the decode-&-forward delay in the network level, the queueing
delay in the link level, and the synchronization delay in the signal level. For
the network level, the project will reinvent amplify-&-forward schemes by
designing a soliton-based concatenation mechanism that takes advantage of the
ultra-low latency of amplify-&-forward without its main drawback of error
accumulation. For the link level, new random-walk-based analysis and design
tools will be developed as the theoretical foundation for new blockless designs
that eliminate queueing delay completely through continuous, on-the-fly packet
encoding. For the signal level, this project proposes a rateless design under
the framework of quickest change detection. The resulting scheme would
significantly improve the link start-up / synchronization time, a major source
of delay when sending short, sporadic messages to Internet-of-Things devices.
The theoretical results of this project should lead to new practical designs
that harvest the ultra-low latency benefits beyond any block-based solutions and
open up new ideas in other important disciplines, including reliable and fast
information propagation over noisy social networks, and distributed computation
over unreliable communication networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.