* 2309551
* Learning Partial Differential Equation (PDE) and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hong-Kai Zhao, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 81,022.00

Partial differential equations (PDE) are powerful tools in modeling physical,
biological and social worlds. They are used to understand, predict, simulate and
infer complex phenomena and quantities across disciplines of science and
engineering, from heat transfer, wave propagation, and biological systems to
weather forecast, climate change, and economic and social behavior. In the past,
most of the equations are derived from basic physical laws and assumptions. With
the advancement of technologies, abundant data are available from measurements
and observations in many complex situations where the underlying model is not
yet available or not accurate enough. Whether one can learn a PDE model directly
from observed data becomes a both interesting and important question. In this
project, a new perspective of PDE learning based on observed solution data, from
theory and methodology to efficient algorithms and applications, will be
developed. Mathematical theories and computational tools developed in this
project will be useful for researchers and practitioners in many disciplines
that have to deal with computational modeling of systems using differential
equations. The developed mathematical tools and computational algorithms will be
disseminated broadly for advancing scientific and technological progress.
Integration with education at different levels will be designed to provide
training for young computational mathematicians.

A data driven approach to PDE learning can provide a useful tool to discover new
or more accurate quantitative models for complex systems and dynamics not only
in traditional physical sciences but also in biological, social and other
disciplines where basic principles and laws are not available but data are
abundant. In return, the learned PDE model will provide more understandings and
insights of the underlying problem as well as computational tools. For any data
driven, data intensive and data-enabled approach, it is a fundamental task to
study and understand the complexity of the underlying problem, model, or data
and using this understanding to design effective representation, dimension
reduction and fast algorithm that are problem specific. This project is aimed to
address a few important questions and challenges which include (1) understanding
and characterization of the data, e.g., how much data are available and how much
data are needed, (2) data selection and data processing to deal with numerical
errors and noise, and (3) development of efficient and accurate algorithms based
on different formulations. Systematic experiments will be designed to verify the
developed theories and test proposed methodologies and algorithms. The insights
obtained in this project will also provide new perspectives on mathematics and
physics based learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.