* 2309938
* Precision Neutron Decay Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Fred Wietfeldt, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2026
* USD 845,994.00

The neutron is a key building block of ordinary matter. More than half of the
Earth's mass is from neutrons, but when freed from the confines of an atom, the
neutron is unstable and decays into other elementary particles: a proton, an
electron, and an antineutrino (a lightweight neutral particle), with an average
lifetime of about 15 minutes. Neutron decay is a useful laboratory for studying
details of the force responsible - the weak nuclear force - one of the four
fundamental forces of nature. This award will support experiments using beams of
free neutrons passing through specialized detectors that will precisely measure
the neutron decay lifetime and the angles between the emitted particles. These
results test and lead to refinements of the weak interaction theory and a better
understanding of the physics of the sun, stars, the Big Bang, and important
nuclear reactions. This work, at the "precision frontier" of particle and
nuclear physics, complements research at the "high energy frontier", for example
at the Large Hadron Collider in Europe. This program includes excellent
opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate students in the general
methods and theory of neutron science that are applicable to diverse fields in
physics, chemistry, materials science, and biology research at major neutron
sources around the world.

The beta decay of the free neutron is the prototype semileptonic weak
interaction and simplest nuclear beta decay. There are no complications from
nuclear structure, and the decay energy is small compared to the nucleon mass,
so recoil-order weak form factors enter below the 0.1% level. Therefore, neutron
decay is an attractive system for precise low energy weak interaction
measurements. The neutron lifetime establishes the time scale and temperature of
nucleon "freeze out" shortly after the Big Bang, which sets the neutron to
proton ratio during the era of primordial nucleosynthesis and thence the helium
abundance, and indirectly constrains the effective number of light neutrinos.
The electron-antineutrino correlation a-coefficient gives lambda, the ratio of
axial vector (GA) and vector (GV) weak nucleon couplings. With the neutron
lifetime it can be used to determine Vud, the first element of the Cabbibo-
Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix, and constrain new physics beyond the Standard Model
such as weak scalar and tensor forces. There is a serious problem with recent
neutron lifetime experiments: results obtained using the traditional beam
method, and those using the newer ultracold neutron storage method, disagree by
about 1% (4 standard deviations). An important goal of this research program is
to resolve this troubling discrepancy. The program consists of two main
projects: 1) completing the BL2 neutron lifetime experiment now running at the
NIST Center for Neutron Research; 2) development and operation of the new BL3
next-generation beam neutron lifetime experiment that will investigate and test
systematic effects that can help resolve the neutron lifetime discrepancy and
improve the precision of the beam method to less than 0.04%.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.