* 2309360
* WoU-MMA: Targeted Search for Binary Mergers with Multiple Harmonics in Gravitational Wave Data
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Tejaswi Nerella, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Black holes and neutron stars are some of the final endpoints of stars that we
see in the universe. These massive and dense compact objects are hard to detect
by their electromagnetic emission. Since 2016, interferometric detectors such as
LIGO, VIRGO, and KAGRA have helped detect compact objects through the
gravitational waves that they emit as they merge with each other. As the
detectors' sensitivity improved, the field has moved from the era of notable
single detections to one in which we can systematically survey the population of
compact objects in the universe. The most interesting and informative detections
are those that show complexity (such as overtones and modulations) in the
signal, as these effects ultimately inform us about the environment these
binaries were assembled in; existing searches do not account for these effects
as they complicate the search algorithms. This research program will boost the
sensitivity of searches to such signals, and hence extend the reach in the most
interesting parts of parameter space - the highest mass mergers (extending all
the way to several hundred solar masses), and binaries with very high mass
ratios and misaligned spins. Detecting and characterizing these special systems
can answer a range of fundamental astrophysical questions, such as the link
between stellar-mass black holes and the more massive ones at the centers of
galaxies, the endpoint of stellar evolution for the most massive stars (which
collapse to the most massive black holes), and the means by which black hole
binaries are assembled (from the configurations and sizes of the component
spins). In a broader sense, the research program will also facilitate NSF’s
long-term vision of building an outside community around the LIGO strain data,
introduce fresh perspectives to the analyses, and maximize the potential of pre-
existing open data: this will be realized by means of a workshop for the field,
and collaborations with local researchers and established university programs to
disseminate ideas among high school students.

The research is motivated by the presence of subtle effects such as higher
harmonics and general-relativistic precession in the loudest individual signals,
as well as tentative trends in the astrophysical population, that have already
been detected. These events were found by search pipelines that made simplifying
assumptions about the signals, i.e., included only a subset of the relevant
physical effects; the most important assumption being that the sources are
quasi-circular binaries with component spins that are aligned with the orbital
angular momentum, and that the waveform is composed of a single harmonic. The
aim is to develop a new search that incorporates the effects of higher
harmonics, and possibly even precession, and hence is sensitive to a wider range
of signals. This will require revisiting all search algorithms in order to
achieve the increased sensitivity without paying too large a computational
price. The main tasks are to (a) organize templates to account for the diversity
in the space of signals, while still retaining the ability to maximize over
several geometric parameters, which will control the template bank’s size, and
(b) devise methods of optimally combining the individual harmonics, as well as
data from multiple detectors. This step is crucial to do correctly to avoid
losing sensitivity to existing signals due to enlarging the search space. The
methods build on existing full-physics waveform models that are routinely used
for parameter inference, and insights from previous searches that used
simplified waveform models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.