* 2309672
* CREST Phase I Center for Advanced Magnets and Semiconductors
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Willie Rockward, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2028
* USD 4,607,643.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST), this project aims to launch a CREST Center for Advanced Magnets and
Semiconductors at Morgan State University. The center will advance scientific
knowledge in advanced magnets and semiconductors, a field of great importance to
modern technologies and the nationâ€™s economy. The center will support the
establishment of a new research and education hub by consolidation of
collaborations with neighboring institutions. This CREST center consists of
three integrated research groups and one education and outreach group. The
Center will conduct education and outreach activities through the following
programs: (1) hosting summer institutes for high school students and science
teachers, (2) launching new graduate programs in materials science, (3)
organizing collaborative materials symposia and seminars, and (4) sending
students to external internships for new research experiences.

The proposed research aims to address three emerging areas of fundamental and
technological importance in the field of advanced magnets and semiconductors and
will be conducted by three research groups: (1) Magnetoelectric materials; (2)
Radiative and radiation active quantum material heterostructures; and (3) Wide
bandgap semiconductor quantum devices. The outcomes of this center are expected
to be: 1) creating new knowledge in advanced magnets and semiconductors for
national technology advances; 2) creating graduate programs for underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in materials science; 3) preparing high school and
undergraduate URMs for STEM careers; 4) creating a research hub for advanced
materials leveraging the proximity to governmental laboratories and
universities; (5) establishing competitive research in advanced magnets and
semiconductors at Morgan State University. The Centers of Research Excellence in
Science and Technology (CREST) program provides support to enhance the research
capabilities of minority-serving institutions through the establishment of
centers that effectively integrate education and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.