* 2309314
* Structured Electron Interferometry
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Benjamin McMorran, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 604,164.00

The goal of this project is to enable and expand quantum-inspired measurements
with electrons. The vast majority of modern developments in quantum measurement
and quantum information technologies use photons, the smallest unit of light, as
a central component. Yet the wavelike nature of photons still places fundamental
limits on the smallest lengthscale at which this can be applied. Many of these
quantum measurement protocols can be implemented with matter waves as well, but
the technologies used to generate, manipulate, apply, and detect matter waves
are not as well-developed as those for photons. This project develops new
quantum techniques in the electron microscope, such as interaction-free
measurements using electrons, and applies them to explore various phenomenon at
the nanoscale. This will provide new quantum electron microscopy tools that can
be used to reduce the size of quantum devices, similar to how conventional
electron microscopes enabled the reduction in size of classical computing
components. In addition to providing training to graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced microscopy and nanoscience, this project will engage first-
year STEM majors as well, providing a “bridge” over the summer into their second
year by introducing them to programming, data analysis, electron microscopy,
nanofabrication, and optical physics. The project develops and uses tools to
both prepare and measure coherence and phase of free electron wavefunctions
inside electron microscopes. Nanoscale diffraction holograms provide a way to
coherently manipulate the phase profile of individiual electrons as well as
measure them. For example, diffraction holograms can produce free electron
wavefunctions with helical phase profiles that provide a new way to probe the
chirality and spatial coherence of nanoscale plasmonics. Electron-transparent
phase gratings can also serve as optimized beamsplitters for electrons, which
are used in this project to create electron interferometers with large path
separation, useful for measuring electric and magnetic fields at the nanoscale.
Interaction-free measurement protocols are also explored, which could enable
high resolution electron microscopy of easily damaged materials. The project
connects with a broad spectrum of sciences and applications, enabling unique
opportunities for project participants in a range of disciplines and industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.