* 2309197
* Tensorial Reduced Order Models: Development, Analysis, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Maxim Olshanskiy, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 268,851.00

Large-scale numerical simulation of dynamical systems is ubiquitous in all areas
of computational science and engineering. With many computational tasks in
biomedical or Earth sciences involving billions of degrees of freedom, model
order reduction is necessary to scale the problem of interest down to a
tractable size that fits onto the available computing platforms. Model order
reduction techniques allow to construct a reduced order model (ROM) that retains
the key features of a high-fidelity computational model while being much cheaper
to simulate. Conventionally, a ROM represents a specific instance of the system
and needs to be recomputed from scratch should the system experience significant
changes to its properties. Thus, the question of constructing a ROM that
captures the dependence of the system on its parameters arises. This is the main
objective of the so-called parametric model reduction. Its main challenge is to
develop efficient ROMs that can accurately predict solutions of parametrized
high-fidelity models for parameter values that lie outside of the "training"
set. The project will include training of graduate students.

This project aims at addressing the above-mentioned challenges by developing a
ROM that extends the ideas of conventional projection-based model order
reduction to parametric systems using the concepts and tools of modern numerical
multi-linear algebra. The main techniques utilized are tensor decompositions,
low-rank tensor approximation and completion. In particular, low-rank tensor
approximations such as canonical polyadic, Tucker (a.k.a. high order SVD, HOSVD)
and tensor train are employed in place of truncated SVD, a key conventional
dimension-reduction technique. The resulting reduced model is referred to as
tensorial ROM (TROM). The three main objectives of the project are: (1)
developing a two-stage (training/evaluation) TROM for non-linear dynamical
systems, including a tensor version of the Discrete Empirical Interpolation
Method; (2) developing novel low-rank tensor completion methods for use with
TROM to ease the burden of the training stage by working with a sparse sampling
of the parameter space; (3) integrating TROM into inverse modeling workflows, in
particular, parameter estimation of the phase-field model for a multi-component
lipid membrane modeled by surface Cahn-Hilliard equations, and quantitative
imaging with waves for medical imaging and geophysical monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.