* 2309838
* A Spin Torque Oscillator Maser Device Enabled by Spin-Microwave Photon Coupling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Luqiao Liu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Devices that can generated signals in the microwave frequency range are vital
for now a days for telecommunication, radar and quantum computing technologies.
There is a critical need for compact and high-performance devices that can be
easily combined with other classical or quantum circuit. This proposal proposes
to explore the possibility of realizing a new microwave source device that will
have superior performance over existing ones, by applying new mechanisms
resulting from the interactions between microwave signal and magnetic materials.
The proposed research, if successful, will not only lead to advancement in the
scientific areas, but also have educational impact by developing course modules
that will enhance students’ understanding on quantum science by attracting
students at all levels, particularly from socio-economically disadvantaged
groups, into the study of applied physics and electronic engineering. Outreach
activities include inspiring broad public awareness in the exciting
opportunities in magnetic device domains.

The approach used in the project is based on the phenomenon of spin torque
oscillator, which is one promising technique for realizing on-chip microwave
sources, detectors, and neuromorphic computing devices. Existing spin torque
oscillators suffer from challenges in low output power, broad linewidth as well
as the requirement for complicated external supporting circuits, which greatly
limits their practical applications. In this project, to overcome these
difficulties, a new approach for realizing coherent magnetic self-oscillation in
a large area ferromagnetic thin film by placing a spin torque oscillator into a
microwave resonator is conceived. The mutual interactions between the magnet and
microwave resonator will lead to a coupling between their oscillation dynamics,
which will further result in macroscopic phase coherence in magnetic free layer
with very large area. By fabricating the proposed device structures and testing
on the microwave input-output relationship, the proposed device structure will
not only result in a novel coherent, high power, on-chip microwave source, but
also enrich people’s understanding on spin dynamics and the coupling physics
between magnets and microwave.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.