* 2309591
* Collaborative Research: Arbitrary Order Structure-Preserving Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Compressible Euler Equations With Self-Gravity in Astrophysical Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eirik Endeve, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 189,999.00

The project aims to develop effective and efficient computational methods to
model self-gravitating astrophysical flows, including the core-collapse
supernovae. The research will have a direct impact on a wide range of
applications, including astrophysics, climate modeling, fluid and gas dynamics,
and hydraulic engineering. The project will bring together expertise in
mathematics, astrophysics, and computational science to develop novel
mathematical and computational tools that will improve our ability to model some
of the most energetic events in the Universe. The investigators will leverage
ongoing research activities at their respective institutions to train students
in an interdisciplinary environment. In this collaborative project, the
investigators will design novel arbitrary order discontinuous Galerkin finite
element methods for astrophysical flows governed by the compressible Euler and
ideal magnetohydrodynamics equations with self-gravity. These model systems will
be applicable to many astrophysical settings, including the late-stage evolution
and explosion of massive stars, and the study of their compact remnants known as
neutron stars. The project will exploit structure-preserving numerical methods,
i.e., preserving fundamental continuum properties of the underlying physical
model, such as energy conservation, asymptotic limits, and maximum principles,
at the discrete level. The research aims to design such structure-preserving
methods in order to provide stable and efficient numerical methods for the model
problem and its astrophysical applications on relatively coarse meshes, and to
mitigate potential issues with standard numerical methods, including the
appearance of non-physical and ill-conditioned solutions, numerical instability,
and code breakdown.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.