* 2309929
* Environmental controls over tropical cyclone formation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Chanh Kieu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2026
* USD 357,059.00

Tropical cyclones (TCs, also known as hurricanes in the North Atlantic basin)
are among the major extreme weather events that pose a high risk to the economy
and society every year. Despite great progress in studying TC development over
the last several decades, our current understanding of TC processes is still
inadequate. A direct consequence of this lack of understanding of TC formation
is our limited capability in predicting TC formation in practice. Thus,
improving the understanding of TC formation processes and TC subsequent
development is of significance for both the advance of science and social safety
and risk management. Using numerical simulations along with recent machine
learning techniques, this project introduces a new approach to TC research that
can help unfold the dominant mechanisms underlying TC formation in different
ocean basins. Unlike the traditional vortex tracking methods in the current TC
research and operation, the approach in this project offers an alternative way
to search for new environmental factors governing TC formation. By exploring the
practicality of these machine learning methods for TC research, this project
will not only introduce an innovative way of studying tropical cyclogenesis but
also help train a new generation of workforce in the area of artificial
intelligence applications for atmospheric research.

This project combines several new modelling and machine learning methods to
investigate two key scientific questions: 1) what are the key environmental
factors that control different TC formation pathways in different ocean basins,
and 2) whether global tropical cyclogenesis possesses an episodic development,
and if so, what environmental factors determine the frequency of this global TC
formation. Using a combination of model simulations, physical diagnostic
analyses, and machine learning algorithms, this project will look into major
environmental conditions and their dynamical constraints in the tropical
atmosphere that are insufficiently represented in the current TC genesis
potential index framework. These environmental constraints will help determine
different favorable conditions for TC formation and how to use these factors for
studying the shift of TC climatology in the past and future climates. The
outcomes from this project will also bring more insights into the physical
mechanisms behind the maximum capacity of the tropical atmosphere in generating
TCs annually in our current Earthâ€™s atmosphere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.