* 2309885
* RCN-UBE: Failure as a part of Learning, A Mindset Education Network (FLAMEnet)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Heemstra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2024
* USD 261,364.00

Failure is widely accepted as an integral component of STEM research, yet
current college STEM instructors rarely take intentional steps to help students
develop the resilience and perseverance they need to cope with and overcome
failures. While psychologists and education researchers have insights into how
perseverance and resilience develop in general, deeply understanding these
processes for STEM students and creating practical tools to help students
achieve these outcomes will require input from scientists and science faculty.
Failure as a part of Learning, A Mindset Education Network (FLAMEnet) brings
together a diverse group of researchers and stakeholders to design, implement,
and evaluate new approaches to cultivating resilience and challenge-seeking
attitudes in undergraduate STEM students. These approaches broadly impact
society by contributing to the training of a highly skilled workforce that is
prepared to advance science and technology to meet our increasingly complex
needs.

FLAMEnet's diversified membership includes psychology and education researchers
to ensure that the resources developed are solidly grounded in current
theoretical frameworks, and STEM instructors who provide valuable input and
secure buy-in from the STEM community. Furthermore, the diversity of the network
members inspires the creation of an equally diverse set of resources and
intervention strategies that are applicable within and beyond the biological
sciences and across institutional contexts. Building on previous RCN-UBE
incubator funding (DBI 1827160), we will: 1) Develop resources and instructional
materials to aid students in cultivating academic resilience; 2) Support travel
for network members during implementation and dissemination of interventions; 3)
Expand FLAMEnet membership with annual workshops to share results, develop and
refine academic interventions, and promote dissemination of interventions to
colleagues at network member institutions. Taken together, these activities will
enhance our ability to impact STEM education and the development of the future
STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.