* 2309942
* RUI: Discerning the Balance of Intermolecular Forces and the Enantiomeric Composition of Chiral Samples from the Structures of Gas-Phase Heterodimers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Helen Leung, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 377,047.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Helen Leung and Mark Marshall
of Amherst College are using Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectroscopy and
computational methods to study intermolecular forces operative between gas-phase
heterodimers formed by protic acids and halo-olefins and are developing a chiral
tagging method. Intermolecular forces have profound influence on chemical and
physical processes, making it important to understand the delicate balance and
competition between different contributions, such as electrostatic and steric
effects. Professors Leung and Marshall and their undergraduate students will
generate molecular species held together solely by intermolecular interactions
and examine their rotational spectra using two types of complementary
spectrometers, one with large bandwidth (several thousand MHz) and a narrowband
(1 MHz) instrument that also provides enhanced sensitivity. The experimental
work, guided and supplemented by computational methods, is expected to reveal
the shape of the complexes and hence the nature of the intermolecular forces.
This work could lead to a better understanding of the subtle interplay among the
intermolecular forces that results in a preferred binding geometry, and could
identify useful chiral tags that enable effective conversion of a sample of
enantiomers (molecules that are mirror images of each other) into distinct
molecular species that have different rotational spectra. This research provides
meaningful hands-on experience in modern, state-of-the-art physical chemistry
for undergraduate students. With up-to-date, relevant, modern instrumentation,
this research will engage the next generation of scientists in pedagogically
effective ways, better prepare them to be responsible citizens in an
increasingly technological world, and better position them to contribute in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields.

Building on a foundational understanding of the intermolecular interactions
between haloethylenes and protic acids, the extension from haloethylenes to
halopropenes results in greater structural flexibility, with the potential for a
finer understanding of the subtle interplay among the forces that lead to a
preferred binding geometry for the protic acids. The chiral tagging technique
being investigated relies on the conversion of enantiomers, which have identical
microwave rotational spectra, into spectroscopically distinct and readily
identifiable diastereomers upon complexation via non-covalent interactions to
form a heterodimer with a tag molecule of known chirality. Given the known
absolute stereochemistry of the tag, the absolute configuration of the analyte
and the enantiomeric excess of a sample can be determined in a background free
manner. Through a detailed study of the rotational spectrum and the intensities
of the transitions of these complexes, this work could provide the benchmarking
critical for adoption of chiral tagging as a routine analytical method for
determining the enantiomeric purity of a chiral analyte sample. With the ability
to obtain a large bandwidth rotational spectrum with consistent source
conditions, the chirped pulse technique is particularly advantageous for these
studies. The use of computational methods and the narrowband Balle-Flygare
spectrometer adds powerful, complementary strength to the work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.