* 2309124
* Broadening Participation Research Center: Center for the Advancement of STEM Leadership
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Camille McKayle, University of The Virgin Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,209,208.00

Broadening Participation Research Centers provide support to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to conduct broadening participation research
and serve as national hubs for the rigorous study and broad dissemination of the
critical theories, structures and pedagogies, as well as culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. In an effort to address the national priority to
prepare sufficient numbers of its citizens to fill STEM workforce needs, HBCU
administrative and faculty leaders are seeking to make strategic decisions that
will position their institutions, as well as the Nation, for continued
broadening participation success. The HBCU historical record demonstrates the
importance of a nurturing academic environment, high expectations, and access to
role models to increase the participation of African Americans in STEM. However,
closer examination reveals the significant role of HBCU leaders, at various
organizational levels, in creating the conditions for achieving these outcomes.
Today’s HBCU leaders are not only expected to create these ideal institutional
conditions, but to do so while navigating realities that are often ambiguous,
volatile, and complex. This reality is exacerbated by three factors: 1) the
scarcity of knowledge about how HBCU leaders have advanced broadening
participation; 2) limited adoption of HBCU broadening participation processes
into mainstream undergraduate STEM reform outlets; and 3) a proliferation of
ineffective leadership development efforts that do not serve today’s HBCU STEM
leaders. To this end, the Center for the Advancement of STEM Leadership (CASL)
will leverage its research findings and innovations to empower STEM leaders for
increased broadening participation success and meaningfully informing mainstream
STEM higher education reform to create institutional conditions necessary to
broaden participation.

Designed to be the Nation's premier research center examining and determining
the kind of academic leadership that broadens the participation of African
Americans and other underrepresented groups in STEM, the University of the
Virgin Islands, in collaboration with its institutional/organizational partners
– North Carolina Agricultural and Technological State University, Fielding
Graduate University, and the American Association of Colleges and Universities –
has designed a unique approach to broadening participation research.
Specifically, CASL’s strategic approach engages the power of established
theoretical frameworks, considers the complex cultural and institutional
contexts of HBCUs grounded in African American heritage, and examines how HBCU
STEM leaders navigate their institutions to achieve successful broadening
participation outcomes. Undergirding the Center’s collective research,
education, and knowledge transfer/outreach agendas is the systems model of
creativity, which offers a lens for gaining deeper insights into the creative
processes that HBCU leaders of various types and levels have and continue to use
to broaden participation. Guided by principles of andragogy, Socratic
questioning, and the theoretical foundations of knowledge transfer science,
these insights will be integrated into and promulgated throughout the entire
undergraduate STEM reform community. A robust external evaluation will monitor
and assess progress on all objectives, providing both formative and summative
assessment of all Center activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.