* 2309091
* Conference: The 6th Stevens Conference on Bacteria-Material Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2024
* USD 6,000.00

Non-technical Description: This award supports the 6th Stevens Conference on
Bacteria-Material Interactions to be held in May 2023 on the campus of Stevens
Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey. This conference attracts about
100 scientists, engineers, and clinician from across the country and world to
better understand the problem of infection associated with tissue-contacting
biomedical devices such as hip and knee replacements, heart valves, pacemakers,
and hernia mesh, among many others. Implant infection is a very significant
problem because it usually cannot be cured simply by taking antibiotics.
Instead, the implanted device typically must be removed, and this can lead to a
range of debilitating complications including death. NSF funding is being used
to partially support the travel of a diverse group of as many as ten doctoral
research students or advanced undergraduate research students who will present
their research findings at the Conference. Participating in the Conference will
help further their research and education and provide valuable networking and
professional-development opportunities for them.

Technical Description: This award supports the 6th Stevens Conference on
Bacteria-Material Interactions to be held in May 2023 on the campus of Stevens
Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey. This conference series began in
2011 and has developed into one of the more visible scientific venues for
advancing the field of device-associated infection. The Conference addresses
such topics as: clinical needs and challenges; fundamentals of bacteria/material
and cell/material interactions; the design and testing of differentially
interactive surfaces; and translational issues associated with the development
of combination medical devices. The Conference convergently assembles leading
experts in the various disciplines addressing this problem to define current and
anticipated challenges that must be overcome in order to advance the field. Its
specific aims are to: assess contemporary cross-disciplinary thinking; define
multiple perspectives needs/directions for the overall field; train stakeholders
across basic and translational thinking; and provide broad networking and
teambuilding opportunities for all stakeholder groups. NSF funds will be used to
partially support the travel costs for a diverse and interdisciplinary group of
as many as ten doctoral and advanced-undergraduate research students to attend
the Conference to present their research findings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.