* 2309362
* Quantum Simulation of an FFLO Superconductor
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 197,258.00

The discovery of superconductivity was a watershed moment in 20th century
physics, sparking the new field of condensed matter physics, as well as enabling
new technologies. The essence of superconductivity is that some materials become
perfect conductors of electricity when cooled below a critical temperature Tc.
Tc is typically below the temperature where air liquifies. The mechanisms that
underlie superconductivity are not fully known, nor do we know the upper limit
of Tc. We do know that the charge-carrying particles are pairs of electrons that
are weakly bound to each other by various effective interactions. One of the
proposed pairing mechanisms is the “FFLO superconductor,” named after the
initials of the four proposers, in which the pairs may survive the presence of a
strong magnetic field. Despite many searches, the FFLO superconductor remains
elusive. Its existence, however, would give physicists more insight into the
inner workings of superconductivity and it would unlock new applications, such
as ultra-fast electronic computers and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The PI
will use quantum simulation to realize a model of the FFLO superconductor, for
which ultra-cold atoms stand-in for the electrons, which move in a periodic
crystal lattice made from standing waves of light. This type of quantum
simulation faithfully realizes a model of the FFLO superconductor and will
enable the PI and students to test the theoretical predictions. Several students
are expected to earn PhD degrees working on this project with the PI, and likely
some of these will gain employment at innovative start-up companies contributing
their expertise to develop new technologies for quantum computation.

Superconductivity and magnetism are phases of matter commonly found in
electronic materials that do not coexist. The FFLO superconductor may adapt to a
co-existing magnetic field if the Cooper pairs acquire a finite center-of-mass
momentum rather than forming zero momentum pairs as in the standard theory of
superconductivity. It is believed that FFLO is most favored in low-dimensions,
either in quasi-1D or 2D. As of yet, there is no direct evidence for finite
momentum Cooper pairs. The PI will resolve whether the FFLO state, with finite-
momentum pairing, is a legitimate phase of matter by simulating the actual
electronic materials subjected to a magnetic field, with a spin-imbalanced
atomic Fermi gas confined to a two-dimensional array of one-dimensional
waveguides formed using a 2D optical lattice. The lattice potential is weak
enough that atoms in adjacent waveguides interact via tunnel coupling. The
resulting domain walls, the definitive signature of the FFLO state, will be
directly imaged.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.