* 2309172
* WoU-MMA: Inference About Gravitational Wave Sources and Source Populations in the Era of Perpetual Discovery
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Richard O'Shaughnessy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2026
* USD 97,175.00

The discovery of the first gravitational waves by NSF's Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) began a revolution in understanding of the
universe. These gravitational waves are the inevitable consequence of Einstein's
model of space and time, General Relativity, which predicts that rapidly
accelerating objects will produce ripples in spacetime, carrying unobscured
information about the most energetic astrophysical phenomena like colliding
black holes or neutron stars. Substantial ongoing investment has allowed the
gravitational wave network to increase rapidly in sensitivity, accumulating
events that enable the first census of such objects throughout the Universe.
This census has identified never before seen systems and physics, challenging
theories about how these objects form while enabling transformative multi-
messenger science. The hundreds of binary systems that will be detected during
LIGO's next observing run provide unique opportunities but also challenges. This
award supports ongoing work to enhance this census, focusing on disentangling
signatures of new populations and new astrophysics. More broadly, it supports
the team's ongoing contributions to mission-critical tasks and publications of
the LIGO Scientific Collaboration.

The RIT group's contributions will focus on interpreting sources both in
isolation and collectively as part of the census, parameter and population
inference. In one major thrust, the group will focus on enhancing and operating
two existing pieces of cyberinfrastructure, parameter and population inference
codes RIFT and PopModels, respectively. These improvements will enhance the
capability to perform rapid and low-cost source and population parameter
inference, targeting exceptional events and previously unidentified
astrophysical phenomena. In parallel, the group will assess pertinent
astrophysical models for several of the most tantalizing candidates for near-
term discovery, emphasizing opportunities enabled by low-mass or eccentric
binaries. The award will benefit from strong synergies at the RIT Center for
Computational Relativity and Gravitation through its core scientific objectives,
where the team benefits from deep expertise from other federally supported
initiatives in relativistic astrophysics. The award will support training of the
STEM workforce, including underrepresented groups, as well as initiatives with
REU and high-school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.