* 2309183
* Conference: 3rd US - Africa Conference Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable Energy, Environment, Climate Change and Health
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Isabel Escobar, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2025
* USD 119,990.00

Following the success of the first and second US-Africa conferences, which were
in-person 2019 and virtual 2022, convening a third US-North Africa conference
in-person in Egypt 2023 will result in solidifying established connections. This
conference will further stimulate international collaboration, and contribute to
advancing US-STEM science, Technology, Engineering, and Math graduate education,
training, and research. The overarching goal of this conference is to bring
scientists and engineers including undergraduate, graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, and faculty together from the United States and North Africa
countries to encourage future collaborations through this conference focused on
nanotechnology convergence for sustainable energy, environment, climate change
and health. During the conference, state-of-the-art research, recent
achievements, and global trends in nanotechnology will be presented to promote
cross-disciplinary interactions that can spur the development of this exciting
research field. The conference will stimulate engaged group discussions among
diverse participants including students, postdocs, and early career faculty to
create new ideas that serve applications in energy, health, and environment in
both countries. This will include convergence of researchers from many countries
in North Africa including Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Angola, Ghana, and
others who will meet and build collaboration channels with researchers and
scientists from USA. The conference will be held on August 6-11, 2023, in Cairo,
Egypt. The hotel venue will be determined in the next few months; the first
suggestions include Grand Nile Tower Hotel, or, Tolip Algalaa Hotel, or, Hotel
of Electronic research center, Cairo, Egypt

This US-North Africa conference will stimulate and encourage international
research collaborations which will advance science and promote diversity. This
will be achieved by the increase in diversity, equity, and inclusion, generated
by fostering these connections, which will subsequently improve STEM fields. A
significant number of US- students, young and senior scientists including those
from under-represented groups in STEM will be supported to participate in this
conference. This will include researchers from many countries in North Africa
including Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Angola, Ghana, and others who will
meet and build collaboration channels with researchers and scientists from USA.
The conference will be held on August 6-11, 2023, in Cairo, Egypt. The
conference will stimulate engaged group discussions with diverse participants
including students, postdocs, and early career faculty to create innovative
ideas that serve applications in energy, health, and the environment. The
conference will encourage communication and dialogue between North African and
US researchers which can address complex and critical challenges facing our
society. To address research convergence, the PIs will invite researchers from
different fields within nano, including theoretical and modeling, education,
societal impacts, economic analyses, applications, sustainability, and others,
to participate in the Scientific Organizing Committee. Members of this committee
will be tasked with recruiting attendees through their societies and networks.
The PIsâ€™ instructive approach will immerse young scientists in a learning
intensive environment with established investigators. The conference will
advance research via international increasing collaborations with diverse and
interdisciplinary collaborators. The conference will provide new ideas to
improve and revolutionize many technology and industry sectors in USA such as
quantum information technology, nanomedicine for cancer therapy and diagnosis,
energy harvesting, climate change and environmental science. The agenda of the
conference will include opening talks followed by keynote presentations and
breakout sessions for energy, health, climate change and environment. Students
will present their current research in poster sessions as well as short talks.
There will be daily open discussions among attendees through short group
meetings that includes students, postdocs, and keynote speakers. The PIs
anticipate a successful conference which will contribute to the advancement of
convergence research and education in the USA and African countries using
nanotechnology as a convergence platform and a transdisciplinary perspective
that integrates fundamental science, engineering, and medical applications to
address global challenges in sustainable energy, environment, and health. The
event is also expected to serve as a catalyst to facilitate research
collaborations and broader networking among participants and their home
institutions

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.