* 2309990
* HCC: Small: Understanding Situational and Individual Factors in Adaptation to Cybersickness
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jonathan Kelly, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

One barrier to virtual reality (VR) playing a central role in the future of
work, education, and entertainment is the fact that many VR users experience
cybersickness. Symptoms of cybersickness are similar to those of motion
sickness, and often include nausea, sweating, dizziness, headache, and
eyestrain. Cybersickness can affect more than half of VR users within just 10
minutes of exposure, depending on details of the VR experience. Such a high rate
of cybersickness will limit the accessibility of VR and its many applications,
especially for the most susceptible people. However, people can adapt through
repeated experiences with VR to reduce cybersickness symptoms over time. For
instance, a person who is susceptible to cybersickness could experience a VR
application (for example, an entertainment application) that gently exposes them
to cybersickness over a short period of time so that they can later experience
VR applications (for example, a job training application) without sickness. But
questions remain. How much adaptation is needed? How sick do people have to be
before they adapt? How does this vary by software application or by person? This
project uses multi-day adaptation studies to explore whether the ideal scenario
is plausible and what roadblocks exist.

This research studies human adaptation to cybersickness to develop techniques
that will make adaptation a useful tool to reduce cybersickness. One goal is to
learn when and to what extent cybersickness adaptation in one VR application
will lead to lower cybersickness in a different application. This carryover of
adaptation across applications is referred to as generalization, and it would
make cybersickness adaptation a more useful tool. The research will investigate
whether generalization of adaptation depends on the method used to move through
the virtual environment, such as real walking or using a joystick. Another goal
of the research is to learn whether adaptation to cybersickness requires the
user to initially experience substantial cybersickness, or whether adaptation
can occur while minimizing the userâ€™s discomfort using existing techniques for
reducing the intensity of virtual environments. Finally, the research will
examine whether all individuals equally benefit from adaptation, or whether
characteristics of the person affect the rate of adaptation and whether
adaptation generalizes across VR applications. These research goals are central
to building our knowledge about cybersickness adaptation as well as developing
realistic techniques that will help VR designers minimize the unpleasant
experience of cybersickness for users and increase access to VR technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.