* 2309505
* Searching for Magnetic Monopoles and Other Exotics with MoEDAL
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Igor Ostrovskiy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2026
* USD 712,153.00

MoEDAL, or Monopole and other Exotics Detector at the LHC, is an experiment that
searches for particles with isolated magnetic charge and other indicators of new
physics. Detection of magnetic monopoles would constitute a major discovery and
have a profound effect on our understanding of fundamental physics. Their
existence would help explain the current model of a single unified field that
describes strong and electroweak particle interactions. Magnetic monopoles are
expected to be produced in strong magnetic fields, and MoEDAL will search the
strongest magnetic fields in the known universe, which are generated during the
brief moments of heavy-ion collisions at the LHC. A recent addition to the
experiment, the MoEDAL Apparatus for Penetrating Particles (MAPP), will expand
the quest for new physics by searching for feebly interacting particles. Such
particles are predicted by some dark matter theories. This award will support
the University of Alabama group's leading contributions to the searches for
magnetic monopoles and other exotic particles, from data analysis and
simulations to detector commissioning and operations. Additionally, it will
support the group's outreach effort aimed to help improve STEM education of high
school kids in the county and statewide. The main goals of the project are to a)
lead analysis of the MoEDAL Run-3 data to search for production of magnetic
monopoles and other exotics in lead-lead and proton-proton collisions; b)
participate in the simulation and analysis of the MAPP data; c) develop novel
machine learning based approaches to analysis and simulation of the NTD data;
and d) support operation of MoEDAL by organizing NTD calibrations and
contributing to the planned upgrade of MAPP. The outreach goal is to develop and
deploy to local schools a physics experiment related to the field of study.
Depending on the outcome, judged in part by the feedback from teachers and
students, the experiment may be included in the standard roaster of Alabama
Science in Motion labs. This project is jointly funded by PHY/EPP and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.