* 2309261
* Laser-Assisted Electron and Positronium Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ilya Fabrikant, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 277,644.00

Low-energy electrons and their antiparticles, positrons, play a critical role in
many environments and many fundamental processes. Collisions involving these
particles are important in many applied fields including technological plasmas,
astrophysics, atmospheric physics, and radiation damage. Collisions involving
positronium, the simplest matter-antimatter atom consisting of electron and
positron, are under intense studies in several experimental groups around the
world. Answers to the big question why matter dominates over antimatter in our
universe require studies involving the simplest antimatter atom, antihydrogen.
Creation of antihydrogen atoms can be accomplished by colliding antiprotons with
positronium atoms. These processes are currently investigated at the Large
Hadron Collider, which provides the powerful source of antiprotons. The present
project will include theoretical studies of collisions involving electrons,
positrons and positronium atoms and their control by laser fields. It will have
impact in studies of fundamental properties of antimatter. The proposal involves
interdisciplinary efforts and international collaborations. Supervision of
graduate students will promote their training in diverse areas of physics.

A variety of classical, semiclassical and quantum methods will be employed to
study theoretically electron and positronium (Ps) collisions with atoms,
molecules, protons and antiprotons. These studies will be supplemented by
investigation of laser-assisted electron and Ps collisions, particularly laser-
assisted radiative recombination, dissociative recombination, Ps formation, and
charge transfer in Ps collisions with protons and antiprotons. In the area of
electron and Ps collisions with protons the project will focus on development of
classical and semiclassical methods which were justified in previous
calculations. Ps-molecule collisions will be treated quantum-mechanically with
the use of free-electron-gas model with orthogonality constraints for
description of exchange and correlations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.