* 2309635
* Computational modeling to determine strategies to optimize self-limited assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Hagan, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 06/30/2026
* USD 280,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Self-assembly is a process by which basic subunits come together to form
structures with increased size and complexity. Many self-assembly processes in
biology are ‘self-limited’, meaning that assembly automatically stops at a
particular size and structure. These self-limited assemblies perform important
functions in biological cells, and thus understanding how they work would
advance our understanding of life and diseases. Moreover, learning to design
self-limited assembly processes in synthetic systems could enable important
technological applications. However, the achievable sizes and yields of
assembled structures are currently much smaller than those of natural systems.
This limitation arises because the field lacks theoretical principles to guide
designing the subunits and reaction conditions to ensure robust, efficient
assembly.

This project aims to develop such theoretical principles, by using computation
and theory to understand mechanisms that biology uses make self-limited assembly
efficient, and to learn how to apply them to synthetic assemblies. The project
will undertake three thrusts, each of which investigates a different mechanism.
The first thrust will study how using multiple species of subunits with
different interactions can increase achievable assembly sizes and yield. The
second thrust will investigate how varying reaction conditions in time can
increase assembly rates and yields. The investigators will combine new
computational methods with a theoretical framework called optimal control theory
to develop efficient algorithms to determine time-sequences of reaction
conditions that maximize yields. The third thrust will study self-assembly
within phase-separated droplets. Liquid-liquid phase separation refers to the
de-mixing of a solution into droplets with different chemical compositions, such
as when oil and water separate. During some virus infections, the virus remodels
its host cell to form phase-separated droplets within which new viral particles
assemble. This project will study how assembly rates and yields depend on
properties of the phase-separated droplets, such as their size and the tendency
of subunits to locally concentrate inside of the droplets. Results from each
thrust will be tested against experiments performed by collaborators, in which
DNA origami or protein design is used to create subunits that assemble into
symmetric shells, helical tubules, and other structures.

The research will provide interdisciplinary science technology engineering and
mathematical (STEM) training for undergraduate and graduate students, at the
interface between physics and biology. The research program is designed to
recruit diverse students, and train them in computational research as well as
effective scientific communication to expert and non-expert audiences. The
project will also include programs in which the researchers describe their
results to the public. These efforts will include a program integrated in the
physics curriculum of a local high school, in which students engage in a hands-
on activity that explains the physics and geometry of self-assembly in viruses
and technology, while conveying the wonder, excitement, and impact on society of
scientific research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The self-limited assembly of protein subunits into finite-sized structures with
well-defined architectures is a hallmark of life. Such structures abound in
nature, where they perform essential functions of cells and the pathogens that
infect them. Recently, advances in DNA origami and protein design have enabled
engineering synthetic subunits that are programmed for self-limited assembly,
with atomic-scale precision rivaling that of natural proteins. Yet, achievable
sizes and yields of assembled structures fall far short of nature, due to a lack
of theoretical principles to guide designing subunits and reaction conditions
for robust, efficient assembly. This project aims to overcome this limitation,
by using computation to understand mechanisms that biology uses to circumvent
constraints on assembly timescales: tunable ‘subunit complexity’, by having
multiple subunit species with specific interactions, and nonequilibrium
spatiotemporally varying assembly driving forces. The project will undertake
three complementary thrusts. Thrust 1 investigates how self-limited assembly
depends on subunit complexity, to identify general strategies to increase
yields. Thrust 2 combines Markov state models with optimal control theory to
develop efficient algorithms for optimizing time-dependent assembly protocols.
Thrust 3 will use simulations to understand how self-assembly is affected by a
prominent form of spatial control in cells – liquid-liquid phase separation. The
research will investigate how liquid-liquid phase separation can accelerate
assembly and enhance robustness against parameter variations. Results from each
thrust will be tested against experiments performed by collaborators, in which
DNA origami or protein design is used to create subunits that assemble into
icosahedral capsids, helical tubules, and other structures.

Assembling large target structures is challenging because assembly rates are
constrained by competing thermodynamic and kinetic effects. The scientific
community lacks strategies to engineer assembly reactions that simultaneously
satisfy these trade-offs, due to crucial gaps in self-assembly theory: (1)
Previous models have focused on minimal subunit complexity (assembly from one
subunit species) or maximal complexity (addressable assembly, in which each
subunit is unique); (2) Optimizing time-dependent assembly protocols for three-
dimensional systems has been computationally intractable for most systems; (3)
Despite intensive research on liquid-liquid phase separation, its effect on
self-assembly has received relatively little attention. This project aims to
develop computational models and tools that overcome these limitations. Thrust 1
will provide the first systematic study across the full range of subunit
complexity, to identify optimal levels of complexity and the effects of
geometric frustration or redundant interactions that arise at low or high
complexity. Thrust 2 will leverage the properties of Markov state models to
develop a highly efficient optimization framework that is applicable to diverse
self-assembly systems. The investigators will use this framework to determine
optimal time-dependent protocols for three-dimensional self-limited assembly.
Thrust 3 will provide the first models for self-limited assembly coupled to
liquid-liquid phase separation.

By establishing design principles for engineering subunits that can be
preprogrammed to assemble into arbitrary three-dimensional structures, this
research will pave the way to highly scalable manufacturing of nanostructured
materials for biomedical and technological applications. The results also make a
key step toward a theory of living matter, by elucidating self-assembly
mechanisms that underlie essential functions in biological cells and pathogens.
The computational algorithms developed for this research will be broadly
applicable to self-assembly.

The research will provide interdisciplinary STEM training for undergraduate and
graduate students, at the interface between soft matter physics and cell
biology. The research program will recruit diverse students, and train them in
computational research as well as effective scientific communication to expert
and non-expert audiences. Public outreach will include a program integrated in
the physics curriculum of a local high school, in which students engage in a
hands-on activity that explains the physics and geometry of self-assembly in
viruses and technology, while conveying the wonder, excitement, and impact on
society of scientific research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.