* 2309344
* I-Corps:  Megaton carbon capture technology for point-source emitters
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Melany Hunt, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a large-scale carbon capture technology. Current commercial
large-scale carbon capture technologies (amine scrubbing and calcium looping)
have a high operational cost of $50/ton or higher. Emerging carbon capture
technologies such as metal organic framework and composite sorbent generally do
not possess the mechanical properties such as crush resistance required for
megaton-scale deployment. The proposed technology is designed to achieve
megaton-scale carbon capture with an estimated operational cost of $30/ton. This
is a deep technology innovation that works with an industrially-proven
subscription model. The proposed technology will reduce the emissions when the
powerplant does not already have a carbon capture unit, and reduce the cost if
the power plant already has an existing carbon capture unit.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of development of granular
metal carbonate (GMC) as a single-ingredient solid adsorbent for point-source
carbon dioxide (CO2) capture. Abrased GMC particles are recycled through
granulation. The recyclability of GMC limits the waste of sorbent while
maintaining a low heat capacity, achieving the lowest cost per ton of CO2
captured. The proposed technology may remove >90% of the CO2 from flue gases
containing 5%-40% CO2 in humid and dry environments. This approach leverages the
high CO2 concentration in the flue gas (>5%) and excess heat to achieve
economical carbon capture with a small footprint (<10% of the plant’s surface
area).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.