* 2309271
* Number-Theory-Inspired Effects in Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Maxim Olchanyi, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 212,358.00

Recent experimental advances in creating tailored traps for individual atoms
have allowed for complete control of the quantum energy levels in those traps.
One of the potential applications of these techniques is "experimental number
theory". In such applications, the physical effects of a quantum system are
engineered based on the validity of a particular conjecture or a particular
theorem of the number theory. Under this grant, the PI will address a
mathematical identity that is related to sums of squares of integers and also a
mathematical conjecture which states that any even number is a sum of two prime
numbers. In both cases, an appearance of previously unknown physical effects is
foreseen, such as a new example of a violation of the quantum-classical
correspondence. Broader impacts of the project include collaboration with the
DoD STARBASE Academy youth outreach program at the Hanscom Air Force Base and
the development of an educational program which introduces five out of the nine
NSF Key Concepts for Future QIS Learners, aimed at Title I school districts in
northeastern Massachusetts.

The following quantum systems relevant to the number theory are addressed. (a) A
potential whose one-particle spectrum is the logarithms of all natural numbers.
This potential is expected to demonstrate a resonant transition cascade, absent
in its classical counterpart. Population dynamics in a resonant cascade will be
sensitive to the properties of the prime factorization of the energy levels
involved. (b) A potential whose one particle spectrum is given by the logarithms
of sums of two squares of the naturals. This set also supports resonant cascades
via the so-called Diophantus-Brahmagupta–Fibonacci identity. (c) Two weakly
interacting atoms in an external potential whose spectrum is the primes, plus a
small periodic perturbation whose frequency is 2. The existence of a resonant
cascade in this system is predicated on the validity of Goldbach’s conjecture,
which is famously still unproven.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.