* 2309405
* H and O isotopes in bone and tooth protein for paleoenvironmental reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Linda Reynard, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 153,028.00

The study of past environments is an important focus for several disciplines,
including archaeology. This research develops analytical tools to reconstruct
paleoenvironments using molecular-based techniques; specifically, understanding
the strengths and limitations of the analysis of hydrogen and oxygen isotopes
from the protein in animal bones. Hydrogen and oxygen isotope ratios in the
earthâ€™s surface water vary with environmental parameters like temperature and
aridity; subsequently these atoms are incorporated into animal tissues through
food and water intake, and to some degree can be used as tracers of those
original environmental variables. The advantages of understanding the
systematics of hydrogen and oxygen isotopic records in animal bones include
providing local environmental information at sites with direct human use; the
integration of up to five isotope ratios (hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen,
sulfur), radiocarbon ages, and protein-based species identification; and the
ability to use legacy collections and fragmentary bone samples where other
materials like teeth are rare. This approach can be applied at archaeological
and paleontological sites anywhere worldwide where protein is preserved in
bones. Overall this work supports and complements more traditional
archaeological approaches to understand the past. This research is conducted in
and supports the infrastructure of the Stable Isotope Laboratory at Boise State
University, a university facility serving the geosciences, archaeology, and
biology. Outreach activities include participation in a campus science and
engineering open day and science outreach with young tribal members.

This project has three main components. First, assesses how hydrogen and oxygen
isotopes in bone protein (collagen) of medium/large mammals change over time at
long-duration cave sites and their utility for paleoenvironmental
reconstruction, including integration with carbon and nitrogen isotopes and
newly-generated radiocarbon dates. Second, furthers the use of peptide mass
fingerprinting (ZooMS/MALDI-TOF) to identify the animal species of fragmentary
bone material. Third, testing how these protein-based isotopic approaches
compare to oxygen and carbon isotopic work on inorganic hard tissues like tooth
enamel, which then allows comparison of old and new data sets. This project also
investigate sites that range in age over the last few thousands of years and
assesses multi-isotopic change over time. Sequential samples of modern faunal
teeth are studied to generate comparisons between the organic protein-based and
inorganic isotope records.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.