* 2309305
* Neutron Stars and Gravitational Waves from LIGO to Cosmic Explorer
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Benjamin Owen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 345,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. NSF
LIGOâ€™s detection of gravitational waves from a binary neutron star merger in
coincidence with electromagnetic signals from gamma-rays to radio opened a
window into the interiors of neutron stars. These stars contain matter under the
most extreme conditions since the Big Bang. Long-lived continuous gravitational
waves associated with pulsars and supernova remnants and short bursts associated
with gamma-ray flares of highly magnetized neutron stars, once detected, will
yield even more information on neutron star interiors. The planned Cosmic
Explorer detector will push the frontiers forward by enabling detection of many
neutron star mergers and probably a variety of other signals. The science goals
of this award are to conduct cutting edge searches for these novel signals and
improve the extraction of astrophysical information from present and future
signals. This award supports the training of graduate and undergraduate students
at a Hispanic Serving Institution. Students will be trained not only in
gravitational physics, data analysis, and astrophysics, but in cutting edge
computational and statistical techniques that are transferable to many areas of
science and technology. This award also supports public outreach through the
Cosmic Explorer web site.

The main research activity of this award is searches for continuous
gravitational waves from young neutron stars, including r-mode oscillations of
known pulsars as well as searches of supernova remnants and other likely
locations of non-pulsing neutron stars. This award also contributes to searches
for a variety of signals including neutron star binary mergers and bursts
associated with magnetar flares and to the extraction of astrophysical
information from detections present and future. In preparation for the detection
of non-merger signals the award supports exploration of detectability and what
can be learned about neutron stars now and in the era of Cosmic Explorer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.