* 2309651
* Collaborative Research: New perspectives from applied and computational time-frequency analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christina Frederick, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2026
* USD 124,306.00

The project explores new theories and algorithms that address fundamental
challenges in time-frequency analysis with significant societal implications,
including those in industrial and scientific sectors, medical technology, and
big data analytics where the outcomes have far-reaching effects. The primary
objective is to develop mathematical insights that enable the design of
algorithms capable of efficiently handling the increasing demands of modern
technologies which generate extensive and intricate datasets. Specifically, the
project emphasizes the investigation of data sparsity of complex wave signals
aiming to identify the optimal mathematical components, or "building blocks,"
for expressing and simplifying the data. By uncovering the underlying patterns
and structures within the data, the project aims to enable more accurate and
insightful analysis. At an institutional level this project offers a valuable
opportunity to train undergraduate students and graduate students, integrate
research activities into teaching and course development, and widely disseminate
and divulge findings through academic and public channels. This project enables
STEM leadership development, enhancements in educational curricula, and
advancements in equity and inclusion in scientific pursuits.

This three-year project aims to develop computational methods that reduce the
cost and improve the accuracy of capturing wave phenomena. The project seeks to
discover sparsity in multi-scale representations, computational time-frequency
analysis, and robust, high-dimensional sampling strategies. By combining frame
theory, linear algebra, information theory, and insights from computational
science, the project aims to develop numerical algorithms that enhance speed,
precision, and cost-efficiency in computation and storage. The research
objectives include constructing sparse time-frequency representations,
developing optimal sampling strategies for high-dimensional signals,
demonstrating the potential of these ideas for numerical approximation and
signal recovery, and investigating unresolved problems in applied harmonic
analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.