* 2309219
* RAPID: Study Ocean-Ionosphere-Thermosphere Connections Using Data from Transportable Dynasonde System Deployed in Marina, California
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Nikolay Zabotin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 12/31/2023
* USD 152,789.00

This award will allow the continuation of operating a Transportable Dynasonde
System (TDS) that was deployed in Marina, CA as part of an AFOSR/DURIP project.
The TDS provides unique capabilities in detecting and measuring wave and km-
scale irregularity activities at ionospheric altitudes. This operation of the
system in Marina, CA is unique in that there are no other research ionosondes on
the US west coast, and this is the first time a Dynasonde system is able to
collect data near the Pacific Ocean. The project expects to obtain strong
evidence of the very significant role the ocean plays in moderating day-to-day
wave activity at thermospheric altitudes. The project is multi-discipline in
nature and transformative by itself. The results can be of great value to
atmospheric modeling, HF propagation field, infrasound applications, planning of
ocean observations, and environmental research.

This award extends the TDS operation in Marina, CA beyond December 2022 until
the end of May 2023. The extended observational period will enable the study of
long-term correlations between the ~0.2 Hz infrasound (microbaroms) generated by
the ocean and km-scale irregularities in the ionosphere with the goal to reveal
causal relationships between the two phenomena. To study the gravity wave
coupling between the ocean and the atmosphere the Lomb-Scargle spectral
correlation technique will be used. Wave packet detection techniques and reverse
ray tracing will also be applied to resolve the positions of wave sources in
select cases. The investigators will look into the correlation between the
ionospheric wave activity and the tropospheric wind to distinguish ocean-
generated atmospheric gravity waves from mountain-generated atmospheric gravity
waves. Spectral analysis of the data obtained by the TDS’s infrasound station
will be conducted to reveal the microbarom component.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.