* 2309249
* High Order Schemes: Bound Preserving, Moving Boundary, Stochastic Effects and Efficient Time Discretization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The project aims to develop efficient and high-precision numerical methods for
solving partial differential equations in various important scientific and
engineering applications, such as aerospace engineering, semiconductor device
design, astrophysics, and biological applications. Even with today's fast
supercomputers, it is still essential to design efficient and reliable
algorithms to obtain accurate solutions to these applications where high
precision can improve the safety and performance of those devices. These
algorithms will make positive contributions to computer simulations of the
complicated solution structure in these applications. The project will include
workforce development for students from underrepresented groups in STEM.

The project aims to investigate algorithm development, analysis, and application
of high-order numerical methods, including discontinuous Galerkin (DG) finite
element methods and finite difference and finite volume weighted essentially
non-oscillatory (WENO) schemes. The algorithms will be designed to solve linear
and nonlinear convection-dominated partial differential equations (PDEs),
emphasizing bound preserving, moving boundary, stochastic effects and efficient
time discretization. Topics of the research investigations will include an
inverse Lax-Wendroff procedure for numerical boundary conditions with moving
boundaries and interfaces, mathematical properties and efficient solvers for
forward-backward coupled PDE systems from traffic flow modeling, high order
numerical methods for hysteretic flows, robust high order Lagrangian methods,
efficient and stable time-stepping techniques for DG schemes and other spatial
discretizations, high order accurate bound-preserving schemes and applications
including problems involving highly nonlinear constraints and one step Lax-
Wendroff type time discretizations, problems with stiff source terms, high order
DG schemes for stationary hyperbolic equations and radiative transfer equations,
oscillation-free DG methods, and numerical solutions of stochastic differential
equations. The research will provide guidelines for the algorithms'
applicability and limitations while enhancing their accuracy, stability, and
robustness. The research will include collaborations with engineers and other
applied scientists to enable the efficient application of these new algorithms
or new features in existing algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.