* 2309602
* Multidimensional and Compressive Super-Resolution: Theory, Computation, and Fundamental Limits
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Weilin Li, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 176,476.00

Novel imaging methods that produce high resolution images are indispensable
tools that have enabled important scientific discoveries and technological
advancements. Imaging devices have fundamental resolution limits, and super-
resolution techniques are computational methods that are used to bypass such
limits by leveraging prior information about an imaged object. For many
applications including remote sensing, super-resolution fluorescence microscopy
and quantum information theory, the imaged objects can be modeled as a
collection of point sources and the collected information is a superposition of
sinusoidal waves. This project develops novel super-resolution algorithms that
will be used for imaging and signal processing and provides their performance
guarantees. The City College of New York is one of the most diverse universities
in the United States, and this project will support students through research
opportunities.

Existing super-resolution theory and computational methods primarily pertain to
the one-dimensional uniform sampling case. On the other hand many applications
are inherently multidimensional and collecting samples may be expensive while
new imaging technology allows for the acquisition of specialized information.
This project focuses on three themes with the goal of bridging theory and
practice. (1) It introduces novel and efficient multidimensional super-
resolution algorithms and analyzes their stability and resolution limits. (2) It
formulates novel compressive super-resolution algorithms that require fewer
samples and rigorously derives their sampling complexities and stability. (3)
Use of fluorescence molecules has revolutionized imaging of biological samples
and this project formulates a novel model with an accompanying expected min-max
error, studying candidate algorithms in search of an optimal one. The
theoretical performance guarantees that accompany these methods will provide
valuable guidelines for practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.