* 2309731
* Collaborative Research: Models, algorithms, simulations and applications for dendritic solidifications of two-phase multi-component alloys in the mushy zone
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* XIAOFENG YANG, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 246,734.00

Alloys, typically formed by solidifying a molten mixture of multiple metal and
non-metal components, find extensive applications in various fields and are
vital to our economy. Unlike pure metals, solidification of alloys occurs in a
mushy zone where phase change, solution diffusion, thermal diffusion, volume
change, and melt convection interact and strongly influence the mechanical,
physical, and chemical properties of the solidified alloy. This project aims to
develop mathematical models and numerical algorithms for the solidification
process in the mushy zone. The numerical results will advance the understanding
on the complex physical processes in the mushy zone and provide guidance to the
design of alloys with desirable properties. The team of PIs consists of the
three researchers from three different institutions, where training of graduate
students on the topics of the project is expected.

This research project focuses on mathematical modeling, algorithm development
and analysis, numerical simulations, and engineering applications of dendritic
solidification of two-phase multi-component alloys in the mushy zone. The
investigators will address these challenging problems numerically with the
following goals: (i) to develop a general two-phase multi-component phase-field
model for the solidification of alloys in the mushy zone, with the consideration
of thermal diffusion, solute diffusion, convection, density variation, and
energy law; (ii) to develop and analyze efficient, easy-to-implement, and
energy-stable numerical schemes to accurately capture the solidification
dynamics; and (iii) to perform numerical simulations to validate the models and
numerical schemes, and further study physically motivated problems. The obtained
modeling and numerical tools allow the investigators to simulate relevant
physical problems of practical interest in a variety of applications due to the
wide applicability of the models and algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.