* 2309800
* Collaborative Research: : Mathematical modeling and computation of morphological instabilities in reactive fluids driven out of equilibrium
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Lowengrub, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 273,133.00

Novel morphological instabilities and phase changes generated by localized
reactions in interfacial regions between reacting fluids can be found in
physical, biological and engineering systems such as smoldering flame fronts,
biomembrane formation, and oil recovery systems. For instance, the formation of
solid-like gels at water-oil interfaces during oil recovery processes can be
unfavorable because gel build-up can clog wells and pipelines. On the other
hand, gel formation can actually be beneficial in flow diversion processes by
diverting the flow away from porous rocks and enhancing oil recovery. The
interface dynamics and morphologies of this open system cannot be predicted
solely by an equilibrium phase diagram, and mathematical models and numerical
simulations are needed to fully characterize the nonlinear, out-of-equilibrium
dynamics. This project aims to establish a computational framework for models of
non-equilibrium phenomena, and design algorithms and experiments to investigate
the interface dynamics of complex, reactive fluids. This project will also
provide interdisciplinary training for students, and research activities will
help develop the next generation of mathematicians, scientists and engineers.
The team of PIs consists of the three researchers from three different
institutions, where training of graduate students on the topics of the project
is expected.

Studies of two or more fluids that are reactive, and flow through a porous
medium, are fundamental to many fields. At equilibrium, the mixture may behave
like a liquid or a gel (viscoelastic solid) depending on the concentrations of
the components according to an equilibrium phase diagram. When driven out of
equilibrium by, for instance, injection of one fluid into another, the
morphology of the expanding interface between them can be very complex and
strongly depends on an interplay between thermodynamic phase behavior and
hydrodynamic forces. This project builds upon breakthroughs in modeling,
computation, and experimental techniques to develop a unified mathematical
framework that resolves the interface dynamics of reactive fluids driven out of
equilibrium. Thermodynamically consistent equations governing the non-
equilibrium dynamics of ternary reacting systems of immiscible fluids will be
derived, focusing on the radial Hele-Shaw geometry as a prototype. Both sharp
interface and diffuse interface numerical schemes (energy-stable, adaptive
finite-difference methods using scalar auxiliary variables) will be developed
and validated against asymptotic reductions to sharp interface models and new
experimental data generated from this project. The integrated mathematical,
computational and experimental approach will provide a framework for
understanding the nonequilibrium dynamics, predicting the emergence of complex
patterns and developing strategies for controlling the pattern formation process
in fundamental multiphysics interface problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.