* 2309313
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Priorities for Future US-led Physical Oceanography Fieldwork in the Sub-polar Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Sarah Purkey, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 06/30/2024
* USD 38,857.00

The Southern Ocean play a key role in regulating sea level rise and our global
climate. These regions are also some of the most challenging to conduct
sustained observational programs due to the immense logistical difficulties in
accessing them. Building on the success of large international ongoing
observations efforts (such as Southern Ocean Carbon Climate Observations and
Modelling and the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration), the need to
reassess and align future US-led research and observational priorities for
Southern Ocean physical oceanography is pressing. This project will host a
workshop to discuss priorities for future US-led Southern Ocean science,
emphasizing year-round observational approaches that can monitor the rapidly
evolving sea ice-covered regions and Antarctic margins.

While there have been substantial advances in our understanding of the Southern
Ocean’s dynamics in recent years, local processes that govern the uptake of heat
and carbon uptake, sea ice variability, and ice sheet stability are among the
greatest sources of uncertainty in global climate models. A critical gap is the
lack of consistent year-round observational measurements of the subpolar
Southern Ocean. This workshop will facilitate community discussion concerning
(1) key scientific and logistic needs to sustain the US’s leadership in
Antarctic oceanography; (2) promising new observational approaches that extend
measurements into traditionally limited winter periods; (3) ways to strengthen
the research community, both by enhancing participation from traditionally
underrepresented groups (including early career researchers) and improving the
level coordination with international partners. The workshop, while primarily
focused on physical oceanography, will convene researchers from various Southern
Ocean subdisciplines and ensure participation that reflects the diversity of the
broader scientific community. A summary document of the workshop’s activities
and recommendations will be compiled and disseminated within two months of the
event’s conclusion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.