* 2309945
* Experimental Particle Physics Research at High Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Emanuela Barberis, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 09/30/2026
* USD 700,000.00

Experimental Particle Physics Research at High Energies Northeastern University
The high energy frontier of particle collisions provides one of the best
opportunities to discover new particles and gain new understanding of how
particles interact at the smallest distance scale. The standard model of
particle physics provides theoretical predictions for these interactions, but
this model is known to be incomplete, and experiments are needed to find what
lies beyond those predictions. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN
laboratory houses the worldâ€™s highest energy human-made particle collisions. The
Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the LHC is a powerful multipurpose
particle detector that acts like a complex camera, which aims to observe and
record what happens in such collisions. This project supports the work of three
faculty members at Northeastern University plus several postdoctoral researchers
and students to conduct experimental particle physics research with the CMS
experiment. With the combined power of data already recorded and new data being
recorded, they use modern statistical and machine-learning techniques to compare
theoretical predictions with the observed data in areas tailored to their
expertise: standard model physics, Higgs studies, and search for physics beyond
the standard model. The knowledge gained from these studies will refine the
predictions of particle theory and further the quest for understanding our
universe at the smallest distance scales. The project also includes operation of
the CMS detector during LHC Run 3, as well as development of detector upgrades
that will advance the sophisticated instrumentation that is used in particle
detection and has broader applications. These upgrades will enable CMS to
exploit future high luminosity running of the LHC (HL-LHC) and ensure that the
instruments are available to future generations of scientists.

In the three years spanned in the proposed work, the analysis of the full data
set from CMS from Run 2 will reach completion, and several analysis projects
will develop that will target or include the data accumulated in Run 3. The
Northeastern University CMS group will pursue some targeted searches for new
physics motivated by recent anomalies or compelling theoretical questions:
Leptoquark searches, which could address anomalies observed in the measurement
of g-2 of the muon; the production of pairs of Higgs bosons in multiple decay
channels, which can signal new physics in production or couplings, and will
ultimately give insight into the form of the Higgs potential. At the same time,
the group will use the well-understood Run 2 CMS data to increase the precision
and scope of measurements of standard model production of the Higgs boson, as
well as W+jets and ZZ pairs. The results of these measurements will be very
important for making precise predictions of background processes for searches at
the HL-LHC. Critical support provided by the group to the CMS experiment to
continue the high-efficiency operation of the muon detection and triggering, and
of the electromagnetic calorimetry systems will help to provide data used by the
entire CMS collaboration for an even broader program of particle physics
investigations. In the preparation for the HL- LHC, the work of the group will
implement new capabilities for extracting physics in the high-rate environment
through upgrades to the electronics of the muon system, muon trigger, and
electromagnetic calorimeter to accommodate a much higher rate of data, and
through the realization of a new timing detector to disambiguate the large
number of multiple interaction vertices. The Northeastern University CMS group
will also pursue broader impact through efforts to improve diversity, inclusion,
and mentoring, and through outreach and engagement to the wider scientific
community and general public. The group will provide special opportunities for
interactions by bringing physicists from around the world to the LHCP Conference
hosted at the Northeastern University campus in 2024.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.