* 2309336
* I-Corps:  Curve safety assessment solution to help transportation agencies with road curve safety management
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Yichang Tsai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cost-effective solution to improve roadway curve safety of
transportation networks, particularly curve safety assessment and compliance
checking of curve warning signage. The proposed solution may help transportation
agencies transform the management practices of roadway safety from reactive to
proactive to save lives and improve overall roadway safety. The proposed
technology may help save time and effort for transportation agencies, and also
promote transportation safety equity, especially for local agencies and
underrepresented communities that have limited resources to improve their
roadway safety. The proposed technology may offer a more cost-effective and
efficient alternative that enhances state-of-art practices to help agencies meet
federal regulations and avoid potential liabilities from roadway collisions.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technologies to improve the
roadway curve safety of transportation networks. The technologies use mobile and
Internet of Things data, computer vision and machine learning, and advanced
computation models to perform curve safety assessments, inventory and monitor
curve warning signage, and evaluate compliance with federal regulations. The
proposed technology uses intra-agency crowdsourcing and advanced computation
models for curve geometric property extraction and advisory speed determination.
The solution also uses global positioning systems (GPS) and imagery data
combined with computer vision and deep learning methods for automated curve
warning sign detection and compliance analysis. Previous results show the
potential for these technologies to significantly improve the efficiency and
cost-effectiveness of safety management practices by enabling routine assessment
of curve safety, routinely inventorying existing curve warning signage, and
conducting compliance analyses to identify deficiencies and support safety
improvement planning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.