* 2309665
* EAGER: Comparative single cell transcriptomics and regulomics: A proof-of-concept application of cutting-edge -omics techniques with non-model systems
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Carol Buell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,072.00

Plants produce diverse chemicals, known as natural products, that function to
deter pests, attract pollinators, and interact with microbes. While recent
technologies have enabled the discovery of the enzymes responsible for natural
product production, there is limited knowledge of how plants regulate production
of these compounds. Emerging studies have shown that a growing number of plant
natural products are produced in distinct cell types, suggesting strict
regulation of their biosynthesis. This project will focus on the monoterpene
indole alkaloids, a class of diverse specialized metabolites, some of which have
potent biological and pharmaceutical activities. The goal will be to discover
the regulatory components of monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis in
Catharanthus roseus, Madagascar periwinkle, and its relative, Camptotheca
acuminata. Through this project, data and methods will be developed to elucidate
the molecular mechanisms by which genes are regulated. Undergraduates will be
trained in state-of-the-art genetic methods, computational analyses, and data
analysis methods associated with plant biology. Through this project, new tools
for biotechnology and engineering the production of natural products in plants
will be created.

Accumulating evidence suggests plant specialized metabolism is under exquisite
and strict regulation at the organ, tissue, and cell type levels, thereby
leading to distinct cell type and subcellular localization of natural products.
How the genes responsible for the biosynthesis of natural products are regulated
is not well understood. Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIA) are a class of
diverse specialized metabolites produced by plants in the Order Gentianales,
including C. roseus and the Asterid species C. acumuinata. In C. roseus, the MIA
biosynthetic pathway is sequentially partitioned into three discrete cell types,
suggestive of complex regulatory networks controlling the biosynthesis and
transport of intermediates. In other species, however, the localization and cell
type specificity of MIA remain an enigma. While the early steps of the MIA
biosynthetic pathway are conserved among C. roseus and C. acuminata, the
downstream stages are divergent. The knowledge of two related MIA biosynthetic
pathways at the gene, cell type, and regulatory levels will shed light on the
regulation and evolution of these complex natural products, as well as how the
pathway can be reconstructed and modified in heterologous systems. This project
will demonstrate the viability of single cell transcriptomics and chromatin
accessibility profiling for C. acuminata to understand the cell type specificity
of MIA biosynthetic genes across leaf cells and the extent of conservation
between C. roseus and C. acuminata. This project will also demonstrate the
viability of DNA affinity sequencing (DAP-seq) in C. roseus and C. acuminata as
a method of bridging transcription factors and cis-regulatory elements
identified by computational methods. Taken together, this project will establish
best practices for two cutting edge genomics technologies for plants and
potentially deepen our understanding of the regulatory landscapes of plant
specialized metabolism.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.