* 2309891
* Conference: Workshop on Sports Analytics to Strengthen Data Science Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Timothy Chartier, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2025
* USD 49,576.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by fostering the growing
interactions between the mathematics and computer science communities with
interests in improving undergraduate education in data science through sports
analytics. The project, led by faculty from Davidson College and Johnson C.
Smith University, will support the development of a framework of evidence-based
practices that support success of mathematics and computer science majors from
diverse communities to help them feel included and valued in the field of data
analytics. Project components include the formation of an expert advisory board,
a pre-conference meeting with sports industry professionals, a two-day working
virtual workshop with participants from various types and sizes of institutions
of higher education, and a post-conference report with resources and a framework
for future collaboration among institutions.

Project activities will consider: 1) institutional and cultural barriers to
creating multiple educational pathways in data science, 2) tools and
infrastructure needed to adapt or implement curriculum innovations, 3) differing
challenges and opportunities across varied institution types and student
populations, 4) approaches to fairness, ethics, accountability and transparency
(FEAT) and 5) leveraging partnerships and bridging gaps through faculty and
professional networks across institutions/organizations. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.