* 2309364
* PM: Enhancing BSM Searches with Cold Atom Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Hamilton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 641,347.00

While the Standard Model of particle physics has been remarkably successful,
there are many lines of evidence, both from particle colliders and from
astrophysical measurements, that suggest that there is new fundamental physics
Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) that remains almost completely unknown. This
research program will focus on using precision methods of atomic physics to
search for new BSM particles and forces in a laboratory environment. One
research project will search for heavier versions of the lightest known
particles of matter (neutrinos), which may help to explain the origin of the
light neutrino masses that are currently unexplained in the Standard Model. If
they are found, the so-called "heavy sterile neutrinos" may explain the
existence of "dark matter" in the universe. A second research project will use a
laser to directly probe the matter waves of trapped atoms, using them as ultra-
precise detectors to search for new forces predicted in various models of dark
matter and dark energy. This technique could find use in compact, precision
atomic-based acceleration sensors with applications including GPS-free
navigation, geodesy, and geologic studies. Unlike particle physics experiments,
these projects are both tabletop in scale. They will provide skills training in
a variety of quantum mechanical, optical, and electrical techniques for a small
team of graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher. The heavy neutrino
project will be part of the HUNTER (Heavy Unseen Neutrino Total Energy-Momentum
Reconstruction) collaboration which aims to surpass present laboratory limits on
the sterile neutrino mixing angle in the 30–280 keV/c2 mass range. HUNTER will
increase the precision of the RIMS (recoil-ion momentum spectroscopy) techniques
that have been previously used to examine atomic and molecular reactions,
showing how the improvement of atomic techniques can lead to tests of the most
fundamental laws of nature. Specifically the research team will develop a system
to optically polarize the Cs-131 nuclear spins enabling a search for a BSM
asymmetry in electron capture decay, and work to commission the HUNTER
apparatus. The atomic sensor project, BOSSY (Bloch OScillation Sensing with
Ytterbium), previously demonstrated sensitivity to atomic motion over tens of
nanometers and in microsecond time scales. This research project will focus on
the addition of an evaporative cooling stage of ytterbium atoms to increase the
matter wave coherence length and time. Using a quantum detection method (cavity
QED) to detect a quantum effect (Bloch oscillations) will provide a rich
playground for quantum sensing. For example, the cavity QED platform also
enables investigations into improved sensitivity using squeezing techniques and
may be used for trapped atom interferometry. Finally, measurement of unique
magic and tune-out wavelengths on a narrow intercombination transition can
provide inputs for atomic structure calculations of ytterbium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.