* 2309242
* Research Towards Future Gravitational-Wave Observatories: Lasers, Optics, Materials, Devices, and Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Beginning with the September 2015 discovery of gravitational waves from the
inspiral of two black holes, NSF's Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LIGO), in conjunction with Virgo, have carried out observational
campaigns for gravitational waves, with more than 90 mergers of compact objects
(black holes and/or neutron stars) reported from three observing runs. A fourth
observing run, with significant improvements in sensitivity and performance will
begin in Spring 2023. This A+ upgrade of the detectors includes six low-loss
Faraday isolators designed and manufactured at the University of Florida.
Ongoing research aims at contributing to further improvements as well as to
third-generation gravitational-wave detectors. This work will positively
influence the national and international scientific infrastructure through the
direct participation of the University of Florida LIGO group in research and
operations at the LIGO Observatories. The research will go beyond gravitational-
wave science. High-power optical isolators developed in this project have
commercial applications to the laser and optics industries. A single-frequency
2.1 μm laser, tunable over GHz of frequency, can affect many areas of precision
science. The Florida group also contributes service activities to the LIGO-
Virgo-KAGRA collaborations by serving on a variety of standing committees. The
Florida group also gives students and postdoctoral scientists the opportunity to
develop scientific skills from a diverse set of disciplines spanning lasers and
optics, electronics and feedback control systems, vacuum and cryogenics, and
large-scale detector commissioning and operation. In addition, the group places
high value on the education of undergraduate students and each year has involved
undergraduates in research.

Advanced LIGO was designed for a tenfold sensitivity improvement and much better
low-frequency response than initial LIGO. With the introduction of squeezing and
the A+ upgrade, the sensitivity will be increased further. These gains require
improved performance in all aspects of the detector, including the Input Optics,
a responsibility of the Florida LIGO group for many years. Work will address
high-power optical isolation, improved modulation of laser beams, and improved
simulations of the suspensions used for in the input optics and in the core
interferometer. It also addresses basic research needed for next generation
detectors aimed at increased science reach. This longer-ranged research includes
studies of modulators and isolators at longer wavelengths than the 1064 nm
wavelength currently used, completion of analysis of impurities in silicon, a
nearly ideal material for the test masses of cryogenic detectors, and the
characterization of a single-frequency non-planar ring oscillator laser
operating at 2.1 μm wavelength.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.