* 2309057
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Novel computational approaches for neural speech prostheses and causal dynamics of language processing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 949,995.00

This project aims to develop computational approaches that will allow for a
deeper understanding of the neurobiology of language and translate to novel
clinical applications for speech and language. The computational research is
necessary to enable future speech neuroprostheses, which would allow patients
with degenerative conditions or neurological damage to drive a speech
synthesizer using their intact cortical structures. Additionally, the
combination of tools for analyzing connectivity and regions critical for
language in individual brains will provide insight into the network dynamics of
language cortex and open the door to replacing the clinical practice of using
electrical stimulation to map language-critical regions, which is not well
tolerated by all patients.

The research is framed across three intertwining thrusts. The first thrust will
explore the use of deep learning for decoding produced speech from various
neural signals captured by intracranial depth and surface electrodes. This
thrust will develop models within and across multiple patients that robustly
decode speech while overcoming current limitations in the field, leading to
potential integration into speech neuroprostheses. The second thrust will
explore efficient algorithms for estimating brain connectivity dynamics from the
recorded signals. This thrust will develop novel techniques that estimate
directed connectivity among a large number of recording sites, which is
essential for understanding the dynamic interactions across cortex during
cognitive processing. The third thrust will develop deep-learning models that
can predict brain regions that are causally critical for language processing
based on the neural recordings alone. These models will serve to pinpoint brain
regions that are critical for language processing without needing to
electrically stimulate the brain. Taken together, the proposed research
leverages recent innovations in deep learning (e.g. transformers, graph neural
networks, self-supervised learning) to overcome challenges stemming from the
non-structured and varied placements of electrodes across patients, data
scarcity, scalability and stability. These new approaches will be shared with
the scientific community as open-source and replicable technologies.

This project is jointly funded by the Collaborative Research in Computational
Neuroscience (CRCNS) program and the Disabilities and Rehabilitation Engineering
Program (DARE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.