* 2310548
* Elements: An initial value solver for the era of multi-messenger astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Roland Haas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 597,233.00

The advent of "multimessenger” astronomy promises to resolve a number of long-
standing astrophysical puzzles, such as the origin of short gamma-ray bursts and
r-process elements, as well as the nature of matter at supranuclear densities.
As already established by event GW170817, the sites where these phenomena take
place are mergers of binary neutron stars, and/or black hole--neutron stars.
Essential to any general relativistic simulation is the construction of the
initial values that will be evolved and which describe the astrophysical system
under consideration at an initial moment. This award supports the development of
a community open source, general relativistic initial value code useful in the
era of multimessenger astronomy. The new code, which will be based on the
private Compact Object CALculator code will focus on providing to the
astrophysics community modern and accurate modeling tools that are currently not
available to them. This system of modules will work together and give users the
capability to set up new initial data types. Special attention will be paid to
long term sustainability and interconnectivity with current NSF supported
cyberinfrastructure. The research and outreach activities supported by this
grant help promote the use of computers at all levels of education, as well as
the public awareness of some of the latest and most exciting developments in
gravitational physics and astrophysics.

Modeling of strongly gravitating magnetized compact objects either in isolation
or in a binary system is the focus of this award. In addition to numerical
modeling, this program involves also analytical treatment of such
astrophysically relevant systems in general relativity, relativistic
hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics. At the same time the necessary
infrastructure to connect the new initial data with a variety of evolution codes
that are currently used (and in some cases funded by the NSF), will be
developed. Extensive documentation will be produced that will lower the entrance
barrier of new researchers in this field. As more sensitive gravitational wave
detectors ---such as the NSF-led LIGO Voyager that will provide exquisite
observations of neutron stars and stellar mass black holes, or LISA that will
target supermassive black holes--- come into operation, the necessity for more
realistic and accurate modeling of strongly gravitating multimessenger sources
will become imperative. Providing a tool for such modeling is the motivation for
this award.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments. The award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of
Physics within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.