* 2310243
* Taming Non-Perturbative Dynamics in High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Monin, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Alexander Monin at the
University of South Carolina.

Quantum Field Theory (QFT) has played a pivotal role in our understanding of the
fundamental nature of the universe for nearly a century. The Standard Model of
particle physics, which is based on QFT, has been a remarkable achievement.
However, there are still unresolved questions within the Standard Model that
require further investigation. The complexity of QFT poses a challenge in
answering these questions. While systems with a small number of weakly
interacting particles can be effectively studied, systems influenced by strong
forces, such as the constituents of a proton, or systems with large numbers of
particles, present significant obstacles to systematic description. Such systems
are called "non-perturbative", and addressing these non-perturbative systems
represents one of the biggest challenges in 21st-century theoretical physics. In
this project, Professor Monin will develop new methods and improve existing
methods that are specifically tailored to addressing these non-perturbative
systems. By advancing our understanding of the structure of QFT and employing
these methods, insight is gained into the unanswered questions within the
Standard Model of particle physics. This research endeavors to promote the
progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the theoretical
understanding of nature and the mechanisms underlying its laws. By shedding
light on these mysteries, this project serves the national interest by advancing
our knowledge and contributing to the overall progress of scientific discovery.
Furthermore, this project aims to attract and involve students, providing them
with valuable training and fostering their growth as successful researchers.

More technically, this project is divided into three parts: QFT Structure, New
Methods and Techniques, and Particle Physics. The milestones of this project
include studying processes involving multiple quanta, enhancing existing
techniques like Hamiltonian truncation and resurgence to address realistic
systems, and applying known methods such as dispersion relations to study
phenomena accessible by current and future Intensity Frontier experiments.
Through these efforts, Professor Monin seeks to advance our theoretical
understanding of QFT, thereby enabling the analysis of non-perturbative
phenomena. Additionally, this research project is designed to have a broader
impact beyond high-energy physics. A deeper understanding of the structure of
QFT will benefit any field utilizing QFT.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.