* 2310136
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Photolysis and Advanced Oxidation Processes by Novel KrCl* (222 nm) Irradiation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ching-Hua Huang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) such as the commercial UV/AOP process are
increasingly being utilized as a final treatment barrier to remove organic
micropollutants (OMPs) in advanced water reclamation and reuse plants in the
United States and worldwide. In a typical UV/AOP process, UV-C light (254 nm in
wavelength) is combined with an oxidant (e.g., hydrogen peroxide) to generate OH
free radicals that can destroy and mineralize OMPs including personal care
products, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, herbicides, etc. Krypton chloride excimer
lamps (KrCl* excilamps) are novel and promising mercury-free UV sources that
emit radiation with a wavelength of 222 nm. Compared to low-pressure mercury
lamps that are utilized in commercial UV/AOPs, only limited research has been
devoted to the characterization of the photochemical properties and performance
of KrCl* excilamps. In addition, more research is needed to assess and benchmark
the performance of KrCl* excilamps against those of low-pressure UV-C lamps used
in commercial UV/AOP systems to degrade and mineralize OMPs from contaminated
drinking water sources and wastewater. The overarching goal of this project is
to address these knowledge gaps. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) propose to carry out a fundamental investigation of the
degradation and mineralization of OMPs in aqueous solutions and environmentally
relevant water/wastewater samples using UV photolysis and UV/AOP with a KrCl*
excilamp that emits UV radiation at 222 nm. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of the foundational
knowledge required to advance the design and implementation of KrCl* exilamp-
based UV processes for the removal of OMPs during water treatment and wastewater
reclamation. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student and one
undergraduate at Georgia Tech and one graduate student at North Dakota State
University.

Krypton chloride excimer lamp (KrCl* excilamp) emitting light at 222 nm is a
promising ultraviolet (UV) source for water treatment. Because of the high-
energy photons at 222 nm, KrCl* excilamps exhibit effective disinfection
performance and have the potential to enhance removal of organic micropollutants
(OMPs) in photolysis and UV-based advanced oxidation processes (UV/AOPs).
However, limited fundamental knowledge is available on the photolysis and UV/AOP
of OMPs under a KrCl* excilamp. To address this critical knowledge gap, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to systematically investigate the KrCl*
excilamp based photolysis and UV/AOP at 222 nm to degrade OMPs in aqueous
solutions with the goal of elucidating the relevant reaction mechanisms and the
impact of water matrix composition on performance. The specific objectives of
the research are to 1) measure the direct photolysis rate constants, molar
extinction coefficients, and quantum yields of KrCl* excilamps at 222 nm for a
wide range of structurally-diverse OMPs, and compare the measured properties
with those at 254 nm; 2) quantify and model the generation of reactive species
in a UV/AOP at 222 nm using hydrogen peroxide, peroxydisulfate, and peracetic
acid, and determine the degradation efficiency of selected OMPs using UV/AOP at
222 nm; 3) evaluate the effect of water matrix composition on the photolysis and
degradation of OMPs using UV/AOP at 222 nm, with a focus on nitrate which
strongly absorbs UV light and is highly reactive at 222 nm; and 4) identify
organic micropollutant transformation products and elucidate the mechanisms of
photolysis and AOP at 222 nm including the generation of disinfection byproduct
precursors. To implement the education and training goals of the project, the
PIs propose to leverage existing programs at Georgia Tech and North Dakota State
University (NDSU) to recruit and mentor undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to work on the project. In addition, the PIs plan to
integrate the research findings into existing environmental engineering
graduate/undergraduate courses and outreach activities (e.g., STEM science fairs
and summer camps for K-12 students) at Georgia Tech and NDSU.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.