* 2310948
* IUCRC Phase II+ Virginia Tech: Center to Advance the Science of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining (CASERM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* John Hole, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2028
* USD 150,000.00

Mining is essential to modern society's transition to a sustainable future.
Meeting the global demand for earth resources is a grand challenge. The
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) to Advance the Science
of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining (CASERM) is a collaborative effort
between Virginia Tech and the Colorado School of Mines, industry partners, and
government agencies. The Center is interdisciplinary. It strengthens and
promotes cross-disciplinary discoveries in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy,
computational science and statistics, and mining operations and engineering.
Knowledge transfer to all areas of the mining and related geoscience sectors is
a core Center mission. The Center's activities transform the way geoscience data
are used in the exploration and mining industry sector beginning with the
mineral exploration stage and continuing through mine closure and environmental
remediation. Center research activities focus on dramatically improving the way
global mineral exploration and mining of ores and other natural resources are
done, replacing industry experience- and empiricism-based decisions with
innovative science and technology-based solutions that inform decision making,
increase the chances of exploration success, and reduce financial risk. Center
goals include promoting socio-economic prosperity and helping reduce the
environmental impact of mining. Broader impacts include workforce development,
an essential element of Center activities. It includes not only graduate and
undergraduate students training and involvement in industry-relevant research
but also invites industry participation in university research activities
focused on advancing the state of the mining sector of the economy; and not
simply responding to the needs of a single company. The Center also engages with
community college instructors and students who work with university faculty and
students on projects of mining sector importance further advancing its workforce
training goals by engaging students working toward two-year degrees or
certificates.

The Center to Advance the Science of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining
(CASERM) is focused on advancing the exploration/mining industry sector through
the establishment of a cooperative partnership with industry that conducts pre-
competitive research and workforce development of benefit to the mining
industry, academia, and society. The purpose and long-term vision of the Center
is for addressing serious research challenges and providing an engine of
knowledge creation in the development of 3-D subsurface geologic models for
mineral deposits; integrating diverse geoscience data to inform decision making
and minimize geological risk; devising new, faster, and more accurate
assessments of the economic potential of drill core and other geological
specimen taken from the field; advancing the science of mineral exploration; and
improving mining operations and safety. It has five industry-driven research
thrusts: (1) mineral exploration and mineral system models; (2) geological
modeling and resource characterization; (3) advanced technology solutions; (4)
mine development and operations; and (5) social and environmental impacts of
mining. The Center's vision requires collaborations across a broad range of
disciplines. For the Virginia Tech Site, the intellectual foundation stems from
its unique focus on AI and machine learning that it applies to mine exploration
and development needs. Its part in the Center is to develop new and novel means
of increasing safety of underground mining, improving yields requiring blasting,
and exploring the use of digital twins in the mining sector. Its collaboration
with its partner Site, the Colorado School of Mines, brings expertise in mineral
exploration, sample analysis, and integration of new knowledge into established
models of ore generation that increase the possibility of finding new ore
deposits and harvesting essential elements from mine waste dumps and remediating
them to bring them back to environmental health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.