* 2310570
* Physical Structure and Inter-Species Interactions in Gut Microbial Communities
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Karen Guillemin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2026
* USD 225,001.00

Resident within each of our intestines are trillions of microbes representing
hundreds of species. These microorganisms compete, cooperate, and interact with
each other and with our human cells and organs, and in doing so influence both
normal physiological processes and a wide range of challenging diseases. Our
understanding of how intestinal ecosystems are structured, how structure
influences function, and how structure and composition can be altered remain
minimal, in part because these ecosystems are not easily recapitulated in in
“petri dish” studies. The gut microbiome operates under strong physical
constraints. Species coexist at high densities, forcing them close to boundaries
as well as competitors, and are subject to vigorous flows as the gut transports
and processes food. Understanding the structure of the gut microbiome therefore
requires observation and quantitative characterization of real intestinal
environments, motivating this award. The investigators’ labs have pioneered the
use of three-dimensional microscopy of larval zebrafish to gain insights into
physical aspects of the gut microbiome. Zebrafish share many physiological
similarities with humans and other vertebrates, making them an excellent animal
model. At young ages they are quite transparent, and the recently developed
technique of “light sheet fluorescence microscopy” enables fast, three-
dimensional imaging over fields of view spanning the entire intestine, with
resolution capable of discerning individual gut bacteria. Past work has shown
that many gut bacterial species form aggregates: three-dimensional colonies with
populations ranging from a few cells to tens of thousands of members. These
observations raise fundamental questions about the nature and consequences of
intestinal aggregation that this project aims to answer. First: Are there
structural signatures of interactions among bacterial species? In zebrafish
prepared such that only a single bacterial species is resident in the gut, the
investigators have shown that the statistical distribution of aggregate sizes
reflects physical processes of coalescence, fragmentation, and intestinal
transport. In addition, multi-species communities coexist to a much greater
degree than would be expected, for reasons that remain mysterious. The
investigators suspect that the characteristics of aggregates, for example how
aggregates of competing species are situated in the intestinal landscape and how
species alter other species’ aggregation behaviors, can explain gut bacterial
community structure. Second: Can aggregation state predict susceptibility to
invasion? Intestinal microbes are constantly visited by new bacteria, but the
reasons for resistance or susceptibility to invaders are poorly understood. This
project focuses on a bacterial invader capable of altering the physical
environment of the gut, namely a strain that enhances the strength of gut
mechanical contractions. The investigators hypothesize that aggregation state is
a major factor in invasion susceptibility, as large aggregates are readily
transported and expelled by the contractions of the gut. This award involves the
construction of intestinal communities in zebrafish composed of different
numbers and types of species, linking observations of microbiome organization
with invasion outcomes. In addition, experiments that select for invasion-
resistant communities may be of particular importance for generating intestinal
resilience in other animal species, including humans.

In addition to the experiments and analyses described above, the investigators
will design educational activities that use microbiome data to illustrate the
intersection between biological imaging and computational analysis. These will
be implemented in a day camp that targets low socio-economic status high school
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.