* 2310288
* Uniform inference on continuous treatment effects via artificial neural networks in digital health
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shujie Ma, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This research project will provide a general formulation and a deep learning-
powered toolbox for conducting causal analysis of continuous treatment effects
in observational research. Digital health innovations have paved the way for the
collection of large-scale observational data. In practice, many empirical
applications in healthcare programs involve continuous treatments. This project
meets the immediate needs of practitioners seeking flexible and powerful
statistical tools for conducting causal inference of continuous treatment
effects based on large and heterogeneous digital health data. Students,
especially from underrepresented groups, will be recruited to participate in the
research. Easy-to-implement software packages will be developed and made
publicly available. The research results will equip scientists and healthcare
providers with principled analysis for making treatment recommendations, so as
to improve patient care and reduce costs. Advanced digital technologies powered
with a reliable deep learning toolbox will revolutionize healthcare analytics.
The research will also promote collaborations with scientists from Medicine,
Public Health, Engineering, and Social Sciences. In addition, the project will
provide research training for graduate students.

This project will develop new statistical methodologies and the associated
theories for conducting uniform causal inference of continuous treatment effects
via deep learning. It will pursue three specific research topics, and the
developed methods will be used to solve a wide range of causal problems.
Specifically, in the first topic, the project will develop a variety of neural
network architectures to approximate the nuisance function for suitable data
applications in digital health. In the second topic, the project will estimate
the balancing weight using neural networks through generalized optimization, and
construct simultaneous confidence bands for the dose-response curve for
inference. In the third topic, the project will apply the proposed optimization
procedure to the estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects, and to the
longitudinal data setting. The research will provide a new perspective on
estimating general continuous treatment effects using deep neural networks. It
will provide a powerful tool for causal analysis that combines the advantages of
deep learning, direct covariate balancing, and generalized optimization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.