* 2310794
* Quantum Walks and Cellular Automata for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Todd Brun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum field theories underlie our deepest theories of nature, including the
standard model of particle physics and its extensions. These theories unite
quantum mechanics and special relativity, and have been very successful in
understanding fundamental physics. However, they have many mathematical
challenges and open questions that make them hard to solve in closed form, and
they can also be very difficult to simulate with computers. This proposed
research explores an intriguing relationship between quantum walks and
relativistic quantum equations (like the Dirac equation), which suggests that
quantum field theories may arise as low-energy limits of models called quantum
cellular automata, giving a different approach to deriving quantum field
theories. This relationship raises many very interesting questions. This project
will provide topics for Ph.D. research for graduate students, and play a role in
developing the research community, and courses in quantum information
processing, at USC. The PI will develop educational materials for undergraduates
and a master's degree program in Quantum Information Science which aims to serve
the growing number of companies working on quantum computers.

Quantum walks are quantum-mechanical analogues of classical random walks. In
random walks, particles move in discrete steps along the edges of graphs,
choosing randomly which edge to take at each step. Quantum walks have a similar
mathematical description, but instead of moving randomly they can make
superpositions of different moves, with each step being a unitary
transformation. This difference leads to dramatically different behavior than
random walks, with interference effects, wave-like propagation and a rich array
of other quantum phenomena. Quantum walks have connections to quantum
algorithms, such as search and element distinctness; they also form models for
fundamental physical systems. Quantum cellular automata are a natural many-body
generalization of quantum walks, where the vertices of the graph become
localized quantum systems, evolving in discrete time steps by interacting
locally with neighboring sites. This project will explore several aspects of
quantum walks and quantum cellular automata: as discrete models of relativistic
quantum wave functions and quantum field theories; potential applications to
simulations on quantum computers (which can simulate quantum walks and quantum
cellular automata efficiently); how continuous symmetries such as rotational
symmetry and Lorentz invariance can arise as a limit of a discrete theory; the
tension between local evolution, Fermi statistics, and positive energies; and
multiparticle quantum walks as an alternative model of quantum computation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.