* 2310462
* Conference: Ventotene International Workshops VI, GRAZP: Groups and Rigidity Around the Zimmer Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* David Fisher, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports participation of US based mathematicians in the workshop
"GRAZP: Groups and Rigidity Around the Zimmer Program" which will take place
from September 11-16, 2023 in Ventotene, Italy. In light of the recent major
advances in the Zimmer program, the main goal of the conference is to have a
timely meeting of researchers to educate participants on these advances and
discuss new directions. The conference will help educate junior mathematicians
about these advances and help bring them to the forefront of this active
research area. The workshop will consist of three minicourses on different
aspects of Groups and Rigidity Around the Zimmer Program, together with research
talks, a lightning talks session for grad students, some discussion sessions and
plenty of time for informal discussions. Participants will include leading U.S.
and European researchers from the different areas related to the centerpiece of
the workshop, as well as younger researchers, both graduate students and
postdocs. The lecture series will provide an opportunity for the researchers to
educate each other and the workshop participants about techniques and recent
advances in the area. By the end of the workshop we expect the participants to
be able to draw enough parallels between the different techniques to be able to
put them to use and open new directions of research stemming from the
interaction among the topics. The conference will help to educate graduate
students and recent PhDs on the latest developments in the field and bring them
to the forefront of research. The majority of funding will support junior
participants coming from the USA. The organizing committee will encourage and
support broad and diverse participation. In particular, women mathematicians and
members of other under-represented groups are especially encouraged to apply for
support.

The workshop include the following three minicourses on topics related to recent
advances in the Zimmer program: 1) An update on the current state of the Zimmer
program (David Fisher, Rice University), 2) Actions of lattices on geometric and
Furstenberg boundaries (Thang Nguyen, Florida State University) and 3)
Centralizer rigidity (Amie Wilkinson, University of Chicago). The workshop will
also feature research talks and informal discussions and a lightning talk
session for junior researchers. Participants will include leading U.S. and
European researchers from different areas relevant to the centerpiece of the
workshop as well as junior researchers, both graduate students and postdocs. The
website for the workshop may be found at
https://www.ventoteneinternationalworkshops.net/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.