* 2310056
* RUI: Searches for New Physics with the CMS Detector at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Matthew Bellis, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 252,000.00

This award supports the Siena group as part of the CMS collaboration, one of the
four general-purpose detectors at the Large Hadron Collider, the largest
particle accelerator in the world. The work, largely done by undergraduate
students, will be on three fronts: searches for new physics beyond the Standard
Model, open data, and outreach and education. The group is contributing to a
mature analysis searching for forbidden decays of the top quark, the heaviest
known elementary particles, and has recently proposed using the CMS detector to
look for particles coming from outside of the detector, possibly from dark
matter annihilations. The group makes regular contributions to the data
preservation and open access efforts, primarily by helping organize workshops to
teach others how to access and analyze these rich datasets. Lastly, the Siena
group has a history of exciting outreach efforts including building cloud
chambers for high schools and maintaining a website that allows others to access
simplified data and computational exercises for use in the classroom.

The scientific work will be on 3 fronts: 1) the search for Baryon-number
violating decays of the top quark. This search involves reconstructing a top-
quark from the fully hadronic decay mode and then looking for a partner top-
quark which has decayed to two jets and a charged lepton, the latter of which
violates both baryon- and lepton-number conservation. A similar search with B
mesons is being finalized using data from the BaBar dataset. 2.) An indirect
detection of Dark matter. This group proposes using the CMS detector to search
for muons traveling up from the ground and produced by the annihilation of dark
matter particles that are gravitationally bound in the Earth. 3) Open data. The
group will continue to contribute to data preservation and open access efforts
by organizing and facilitating workshops and writing the required tutorial
documents to teach others how to analyze the open datasets. Furthermore, in his
role as co-coordinator of the US-CMS MREFC-EPO effort the PI will organize an
annual summer internship program for underrepresented minority undergrads,
placing them with institutions contributing to the CMS upgrade. Building on the
past education and public outreach effort the PI will continue this work while
encouraging Siena students to do the same by building Peltier-powered cloud
chambers for local schools and will revive a latent workshop program for high
school teachers. Data and resources for python instruction will be provided for
teachers who want to introduce real data in the classroom.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.