* 2310177
* Characterizing CmodAA-Containing Biosynthetic Pathways of Nonribosomal Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Bo Li, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pumtiwitt McCarthy
* 06/30/2027
* USD 577,690.00

With the support of the Chemistry in Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Bo Li of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is studying
the formation of dehydroamino acids in the biosynthesis of nonribosomal
peptides. Nonribosomal peptides are a major class of biologically and
industrially important natural products and they are synthesized by
microorganisms using enzyme assembly lines known as nonribosomal peptide
synthetases (NRPSs). Dehydroamino acids are critical for the biological
activities of the natural products that contain them; however, how NRPSs
incorporate these amino acids had not been experimentally studied until
recently. The PI will study how NRPSs integrate dehydroamino acids into diverse
natural products using biochemical, structural, and bioinformatic approaches.
The work is expected to advance understanding of the molecular details of the
biosynthesis of natural products, particularly the novel biofilm-forming natural
products under study here. The proposed study will allow graduate students to
acquire specialize training in biological and natural product chemistry and
provide summer research opportunities to undergraduates.

This research project seeks to understand the biosynthesis of α,β-dehydroamino
acids in natural products, which is catalyzed by a unique subgroup of NRPS
condensation domains (CmodAA). The research will focus on bicyclic alkaloids,
including pyrrolizidines and cyclocarbamates that exhibit diverse bioactivities.
In the biosynthesis of these natural products, the function of CmodAA domains
and flavin-dependent monooxygenases will be characterized. An uncharacterized
CmodAA-containing biosynthetic gene cluster will be investigated to identify
potentially novel natural products. This project will use a combination of
approaches in biochemistry, structural biology, synthetic chemistry, and
bioinformatics. As an important scientific broader impact, this research is
expected to enable the incorporation of dehydroamino acids into nonribosomal
peptides for engineered biosynthesis and synthetic biology, in general.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.