* 2310725
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Multiparticle collision dynamics simulations of mesoscale hydrodynamic interactions in complex soft materials and environments
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jeremy Palmer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 166,264.00

Accurate prediction of the properties and behavior of soft materials, such as
nanoparticles and polymers, suspended in a solvent (e.g., water) is critical for
addressing numerous societal challenges, including improving the efficiency of
wastewater treatment technologies, processing advanced materials for energy
applications, and effectively delivering drugs to specific locations within the
body. This project will significantly improve publicly available software for
modeling these systems by implementing state-of-the-art algorithms to represent
the behavior of many types of nanoparticles that can currently be fabricated, to
describe fluid flows near the complex solid surfaces encountered in many
engineering applications, and to predict important mechanical properties of soft
materials and complex fluids that are needed for process design. This software
will provide scientists around the world with new modeling capabilities that
advance capabilities for predicting properties of soft materials and accelerate
scientific discovery. The research team will engage with other scientists and
the broader public by organizing workshops on using the software, making
training materials freely available online, and conducting a variety of outreach
activities. This project will also help create an inclusive workforce with the
necessary skills for developing sustainable scientific cyberinfrastructure by
training and mentoring graduate & undergraduate students from underrepresented
backgrounds on software development, high-performance computing, and advanced
modeling methods.

This project will add transformative new features for performing multiparticle
collision dynamics (MPCD) simulations to HOOMD-blue, a general-purpose particle-
based simulation package. MPCD is a state-of-the-art mesoscale method for
efficiently modeling solvent-mediated hydrodynamic interactions in soft
materials and complex fluids. The project will focus on three important area-
specific aims that are expected to have a significant impact on scientific
applications and broader adoption of the MPCD method: (1) to implement MPCD-
compatible rigid-body integrators for simulating complex solutes; (2) to
implement a new algorithm, adapted from graphics processing, for modeling
geometrically complex solid boundaries that simulate transport in confined
geometries; and (3) to implement nonequilibrium methods that employ time-
dependent boundary conditions to characterize the rheological properties of soft
materials. The primary outcome will be open-source software with advanced
features that will supplant the private, in-house codes that are currently used
by different researchers, thereby enhancing the transparency and reproducibility
of MPCD simulations. The project will also lead to innovation in
cyberinfrastructure by integrating approaches and tools from different spaces
(e.g., graphics processing) into physics-based modeling and by developing
optimal parallel algorithms and implementations for state-of-the-art MPCD
methods for both CPU and GPU computing architectures.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems within the NSF Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.