* 2310021
* Connecting Parton Cascade to QCDS Shear Viscosity for a Dynamical Model of Finite Temperature Kinetic Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zi-Wei Lin, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

Experiments involving high-energy heavy-ion collisions at world-leading
accelerator facilities such as the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) in the
U.S. and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in Europe, are being used to study the
constitutive blocks of extreme states matter at high density and temperature.
Such studies provide insights regarding the properties of the Universe right
after the Big Bang, when elementary particles such as gluons and quarks formed a
state of matter known as the quark gluon plasma (QGP) or quark soup. This
project will support the development of theory, models and simulations needed to
improve our understanding of the QGP formation and its dynamical properties. The
project will also support the training of students at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. Under the PI’s mentorship the students will acquire
practical and analytical skills that will serve them well in their future
careers in academia or industry. The computer codes developed by the PI and
their students are open source and will provide a testbed for future research
for the benefit of the nuclear physics community.

The main goal of this project is to develop the current ZPC parton cascade,
which solves the nonlinear relativistic Boltzmann equation, into a dynamical
model of finite temperature QCD kinetic theory. Currently ZPC only includes
elastic scatterings and treats all flavors with the same two-gluon scattering
cross section. In addition, its cross section is determined by a fixed screening
mass throughout the parton evolution; this leads to a decrease of the ZPC eta/s
with temperature, contrary to the results from pQCD or the Bayesian analysis of
available experimental data. Making the screening mass temperature-dependent
will lead to the correct temperature-dependence of eta/s. Leading-order
inelastic parton processes will be included to describe the chemical
equilibration, and flavor-dependent cross sections will be used to properly
describe the plasma equilibration. After a determination of the accurate
relationship between eta and the parton cross sections, the PI will adjust the
screening masses to enable the parton cascade to match the expected QCD shear
viscosity including its temperature dependence down to the QCD phase transition
temperature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.