* 2310326
* RAPID: Filming the Erupting Mauna Loa Volcano to Extend the Impact of Geoscience Research to Large Diverse Audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Doug Prose, EARTH IMAGES FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,967.00

The eruption of Mauna Loa, Earth’s largest volcano, is an opportunity to greatly
increase new information about natural hazards, and how scientists and students
learn about volcanoes. By acquiring new footage of the eruption and
surroundings, interviews with Native Hawaiian scientists, students, and others,
this project hopes to extend the impact of geoscience research, outreach, and
education by providing timely and effective media products that are distributed
to a wide audience via public television and the internet. The goal is to
provide a better understanding geological phenomena and their impact on diverse
communities as well as the scientific research and indigenous knowledge of
Native Hawaiian scientists.

The goal of the project is to work on updating earth science’s fundamental
theory of plate tectonics by studying the eruption of the Mauna Loa volcano. By
showing the lessons learned and the indigenous knowledge of Native Hawaiian
scientists, the knowledge base in the geosciences becomes better informed
regarding geological hazards like volcanos, earthquakes, landslides, and floods.
Additionally, this project can address the need for diversity in the field by
inspiring youth from underrepresented communities to pursue careers in
geoscience. The activities and products include filming new footage in Hawaii,
incorporating new content into a one-hour documentary film (Planet of the
Plates), creating a website that contains a series of short videos and learning
materials, and conducting formative and summative evaluation to determine the
effectiveness of the products. The video footage and educational content will be
formatively evaluated using focus groups and surveys of diverse scientists,
educators, and community members. An overall assessment, summative evaluation,
of whether the project goals are being achieved will be determined by analyzing
viewer data from PBS, the companion website, and the Internet (YouTube channel).

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which
supports projects committed to: (a) research and practice that illuminates
informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) personal and
educational success in STEM; (c) advancing public engagement in scientific
discovery; (d) fostering interest in STEM careers; (e) creating and enhancing
the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning;
(f) improving community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhancing science communication and
the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.