* 2310325
* Collaborative Research: As above so below: Quantifying the role of simultaneous LLSVPs and continents on Earth's cooling history using numerical simulations of mantle convection
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Catherine Cooper, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2026
* USD 173,436.00

Earth’s cooling rate affects many processes necessary for a dynamic, living
world, from plate tectonics to generation of the planet’s magnetic field.
Understanding the establishment, evolution, and continued functioning of such
processes requires knowledge of the planet’s thermal history, but much of that
history remains unconstrained in part because several controlling mechanisms
have yet to be quantified. As such, this award aims to study how Earth’s cooling
rate may be altered through variable insulation of the planet’s interior by
continents along the surface and large, continent-sized piles of anomalous
material (Large Low Shear Velocity Provinces; LLSVPs) covering portions of the
outer core. Previous studies separately examined the insulating effects of
continents and LLSVPs, but none focused on the potentially counteracting effects
of simultaneous insulating bodies: continents are predicted to increase the
mantle’s internal temperature while LLSVPs decrease it. This study will quantify
the resulting dynamic and thermal effects of such bodies and the implications
for the Earth’s cooling history, plate tectonics, and magnetic field.
Furthermore, both continents and LLSVPs act as chemical reservoirs that isolate
critical elements from participating in global cycling for potentially long
portions of Earth’s history. However, the formation and evolution of LLSVPs is
still actively debated. This study will identify their likely thermal and
chemical fingerprints as an additional means of testing their potential
formation timing and duration. In addition to scientific advances, this project
will expand educational opportunities centered on the deep Earth through an
interdisciplinary game development program that will produce a new, widely
distributed, educationally focused video game designed to combat several
geoscience misconceptions while supporting a diverse, interdisciplinary group of
ten undergraduate student developers. Finally, this award supports two graduate
students and a post-doctoral scholar at two rural, land-grant universities,
Washington State University and University of Idaho.

This award supports a novel study that will systematically evaluate how
simultaneous surface and basal insulating bodies in Earth’s mantle (continents +
LLSVPs) jointly alter the thermal evolution and internal mantle dynamics of the
Earth. Two-dimensional spherical numerical simulations will be used to quantify
the impacts of simulated LLSVP and continental materials in models of increasing
rheological, thermal, and temporal complexity to address three research
objectives: (1) isolate the fundamental processes governing interactions of
surface (continent) and basal (LLSVP) insulators, (2) quantify the influence of
complex rheology and internal heating on the basal and surface insulator
convective system, and (3) examine impacts of time-evolving basal and surface
insulators through Earth’s history. Numerical simulations of the Earth’s mantle
subject to surface (continent) and basal (LLSVP) insulators will be conducted
using the highly parallel finite-element code ASPECT (Advanced Solver for
Problems in Earth’s ConvecTion). Simulations will be solved in parallel across
~32-256 computational cores on University of Idaho’s Falcon supercomputer (>33k
cores, 1.17 Petaflop) or Washington State University’s Kamiak high performance
computer cluster. For each of the ~200 planned simulations, the conservation
equations will be discretized across a dynamically refined grid of ~2 million
finite elements with enhanced element resolution near strong thermal and
compositional gradients, allowing an accurate quantification of heat transfer
through the model system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.