* 2310567
* Quantum Computational Advantage via Contextual Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Akimasa Miyake, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 275,096.00

Information processing devices, like computers, have become ubiquitous and
indispensable in our modern life. A new promising paradigm, called quantum
information science (QIS), takes advantage of microscopic quantum states, for
instance spins of electrons, to encode information. Counterintuitive quantum
effects, such as superposition and quantum correlation called entanglement,
enable us to process information with shades of gray beyond the conventional
black-or-white (so-called 0-or-1) logic, and to attain drastic improvements over
conventional devices. The progress of QIS also enables us to start manipulating
quantum many-body systems and utilizing artificially synthetic quantum systems
for quantum computation and simulation. While quantum control of the register of
several qubits is feasible in several physical architectures, there remain
formidable challenges, including how to build macroscopic entanglement robustly
with well-scalable control, and how to achieve quantum simulation of complex
quantum systems beyond possible classical simulation. It has been recently
discovered that strongly frustrated quantum spin systems which manifest certain
symmetries and topological phenomena possess intrinsic capability as a quantum
computer. Through this concrete example, the project seeks a deep connection
between macroscopic quantum orders and quantum advantage in computation and
simulation, by utilizing mid-circuit measurements which emerge as new capacity
of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) prototype computers. In a general
sense, the research will contribute to promote the progress of science,
primarily the knowledge base of quantum information science, and to train future
scientists in this highly interdisciplinary field. A fundamental interplay
between entanglement and measurement lies at the heart of QIS. While the
complexity of entanglement represents a uniquely quantum resource, its
characteristic nonclassical features only reveal themselves through measurement.
From Bell’s theorem on nonlocality (or more generally contextuality) to recent
quantum simulations of the boson-sampling problem, most landmark results of QIS
have relied upon innovative means of balancing these two contrasting ingredients
to great practical effect. The framework of measurement-based quantum
computation (MBQC) is convenient to study such an interplay and the origin of
quantum speed-up in computation and simulation. On one hand, a symmetry-
protected topological order (SPTO), such as the ground states of quantum spin
systems with geometrically frustrated interactions which exhibit exotic
magnetism of quantum spin liquid, not only realizes many-body entanglement of
interest but also has been a recent target of quantum simulation. On the other
hand, mid-circuit measurements emerge as new capacity of NISQ computers. While
it is widely known that mid-circuit measurements and adaptations based on
measurement outcomes are crucial for quantum error correction, it is less
understood how measurements can empower quantum computation, particularly when
quantum resources are limited as in the NISQ era. The project deepens
understanding of the scenarios for quantum computational advantage, by extending
a class of many-body entanglement through SPTO, contextual observables of
measurements, and causal relations among measurements. Broadly, the project
cross-fertilizes further two research fields, QIS and quantum many-body physics,
timely at the coming age of quantum simulation when quantum many-body physics
suggests many problems which quantum computers should be more efficient to solve
than conventional computers.

This project is jointly funded by the QIS program in the Division of Physics and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.