* 2310574
* Self-Assembly and Dynamic Reconstruction of Expanded Biomolecular Co-Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Christopher Snow, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2026
* USD 436,772.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Dynamic renewal is a key feature of natural self-healing or adaptive materials.
This fundamental research program aims to create biomaterials that combine this
dynamic reconstruction capacity with the extraordinarily precise organization of
a crystal. Specifically, this project will use crystals composed of engineered
protein, DNA, and RNA building blocks. The designed crystals will have pores
large enough to permit the infiltration or controlled release of protein and
nucleic acid components. Ideally, the resulting living materials will allow
active addition or substitution of molecular building blocks. To unlock a
variety of practical material science applications, scaffold crystals made out
of biomolecules must be fortified after self-assembly. Therefore, one aspect of
the project is the optimization of methods for adding bonds throughout the
crystals and the quantification of the resulting stability increases. Precise
control of the 3-D position of functional molecules within a scaffold crystal
opens the door for materials with unprecedented performance for diverse
additional applications including biosensing, catalysis, energy conversion,
biomedicine, and biotechnology. For example, porous co-crystals that anchor,
protect, and release functional RNAs will have applications in therapeutic RNA
delivery. To partially explore these applications, the team will provide
mentorship and funding for 3 years of undergraduate-led biomolecular design
teams (2023, 2024, and 2025). Inspiring and training the next generation of
students to innovate at the biomaterials design frontier will directly
accelerate the pace of discovery, to the benefit of the scientific community and
the nation.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This research program will develop a new class of crystalline biomaterials
composed of both protein and DNA building blocks, with solvent channels large
enough to permit intra-crystal transport of macromolecules. The limits of co-
crystal expansion modularity will be tested through assembly trials with struts
composed of dsRNA, hybrid RNA:DNA, and a mixture of varying dsDNA blocks. This
project explores "living" materials with actively replaceable molecular
components. Confocal microscopy will be used to track the incorporation of
fluorescent building blocks, as well as the site-specific capture of functional
RNA added after crystal growth. Engineered co-crystals will be stabilized via
chemical ligation and disulfide-based protein polymerization. Crystal stability
when challenged with high temperature will be quantified via microscopy,
spectroscopy, and nanopore sequencing. To demonstrate biomolecular infiltration
and substitution, ligase and endonuclease domains will be diffused into the
crystal interior to verify that enzymatic ligation stabilizes the crystals, but
subsequent nuclease attack reverses stabilization via controlled crystal
demolition. This project will then determine if endonuclease and ligase can work
together to gradually excise and substitute scaffold crystal components. This
project establishes a foundation for subsequent applied research. For example,
porous co-crystals that anchor, protect, and release functional RNAs will have
applications in therapeutic RNA delivery. Education and outreach activities
associated with this project include support for a semi-autonomous undergraduate
research organization, REU students, underrepresented students, first-generation
college students, and high school interns. This education plan is intertwined
with the research plan since a large team of mentees is critical to pursue, in
parallel, the large number of proposed biomolecular crystal variants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.