* 2310764
* Theory and Methods for Modern Predictive Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jing Lei, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

In statistics and machine learning, a central inferential task is to predict the
values of future data given past observations. Prediction algorithms are widely
used on a daily basis, such as spam detection, health risk evaluation, weather
forecasting, economy, etc., making it one of the most fundamental and important
classes of statistical inference tasks. In the past decade, the emergence of
deep neural networks and powerful computers have made major progress in
designing and implementing prediction algorithms, resulting in an explosive
development of methods and applications. These new applications call for novel
statistically principled methods with mathematical justifications to fully and
correctly exploit the power of such new tools. However, the unseen level of
complexity in both the algorithms and datasets poses fundamental challenges to
classical statistical and learning-theoretical frameworks that rely on simple
problem structures. Motivated by the algorithmic and computational advances in
the modern data science era, in this research project, we plan to take on
several new methodological challenges and fill theoretical gaps in statistical
predictive inference, including simultaneous accuracy evaluation for a large
collection of prediction models, and valid statistical inference using
calibrated prediction. The project also provides research training opportunities
for graduate students.

The research project consists of two parts. The first part will provide new
insights into cross-validation, one of the most widely used methods for model
and tuning parameter selection. The theoretical development will contribute to
the understanding of the joint randomness of cross-validated risks, not only
explaining the widely observed overfitting tendency of cross-validation but also
pointing out potential solutions to correct it. This research work will further
enrich and connect multiple areas of active research, including cross-
validation, high-dimensional Gaussian comparison, model confidence set, and
online learning. The second part aims at filling an important gap in the
conformal prediction literature by developing a conformal-based hypothesis
testing method beyond ex-changeability. We plan to explore connections between
conformal prediction and classical topics such as Mann-Whitney rank-sum
statistic, two-sample U-statistics, and semiparametric inference. The expected
results will lead to new applications of conformal inference and create a new
array of research problems across these related research topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.