* 2310222
* Adaptive Bayesian Models for Entity Resolution with Heterogeneous Data
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Brenda Betancourt, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 159,594.00

Methods for integrating information from multiple sources have become critical
in order to perform complete and accurate data analyses on streams of data. The
process of merging and removing duplicate information from noisy data is known
as entity resolution or record linkage. Entity resolution tasks are prevalent in
many areas, including public health, human rights, official statistics, social
networks, fraud detection, and national security, among others. Although
probabilistic approaches for entity resolution have become more pervasive in
recent years, principled approaches that are also computationally tractable and
scalable for large data sets are limited. This project aims to develop Bayesian
models and efficient computational algorithms suited for entity resolution tasks
with heterogeneous types of data. The methods will be made accessible to
practitioners and other researchers through open-source software. Entity
resolution with multiple files can be treated as a clustering task in which
similar records that represent the same latent entity are grouped together. In
this context, a large number of small clusters or microclusters is expected. The
following three general avenues of research will be explored: (a) adaptive prior
distributions for random partitions that display microclustering properties and
permit straightforward incorporation of prior information at different scales;
(b) integrated Bayesian models suited for entity resolution tasks with social
network data that are easily adaptable according to the nature of the available
information; and (c) computational algorithms for model acceleration of entity
resolution applications on big data. A variety of Markov Chain Monte Carlo
algorithms and efficient alternatives for posterior inference in the
microclustering setting of entity resolution will be explored to overcome the
known practical limitations of Bayesian inference in high-dimensional discrete
spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.