* 2310126
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Ultrahigh Energy Neutrinos with the Radio Neutrino Observatory in Greenland
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Dave Besson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 181,285.00

Ultra-high-energy neutrinos are unique astrophysical messengers as they interact
only weakly with intervening matter and can therefore be used to probe high
energy sources and extreme conditions throughout the universe, and to test
physics at energies beyond the standard models. With support from this award,
the PIs will expand the currently operating Radio Neutrino Observatory in
Greenland (RNO-G) to enable observations of the highest-energy neutrinos. When
combined with observations from other messengers like photons, cosmic rays, and
gravitational waves, observations of neutrinos made with RNO-G can further
advance our understanding of the most powerful cosmic ray accelerators and
explosive events in the universe. This award will engage people from a broad
range of backgrounds in multi-messenger astrophysics through this research and
through dedicated student workshops and activities. This award addresses the
priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. RNO-Gâ€™s design is
optimized to search for the radio flash generated by neutrino interactions in
polar ice using modular stations that act as their own independent experiments.
With the large footprint of the full array, RNO-G will have an unprecedented
sensitivity and will be the first ultra-high energy neutrino observatory with a
view of the Northern sky. This two-year program will continue to build the RNO-G
array beyond the seven stations currently installed and operating in Greenland.
The supported groups will improve the drill reliability and efficiency to more
rapidly install stations in the ice. They will construct and install the
instrumentation and commission the stations. They will study radio wave
propagation in ice, crucial for accurate modeling of the instrument. They will
operate the RNO-G stations in science data-taking mode and study the performance
of the instrument.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.