* 2310298
* SaTC: EDU: Enhancing Cybersecurity Training for Next Generation Healthcare Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Huanmei Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Digital health has transformed the way health professionals operate, enabling
them to improve patient experiences by delivering more efficient and effective
care. Collecting and utilizing health data has become a routine part of
providing care and conducting research to enhance evidence-based medicine.
However, it is essential for health professionals to adapt and receive proper
training to ensure the effective and ethical use of digital health technologies
and tools. Current training programs have not kept pace with the rapid
advancements in the healthcare landscape driven by smart technologies like
smartwatches, mobile apps, and application of artificial intelligence to health
data. These developments introduce new threats and vulnerabilities that can
impact the privacy, security, and ethical use of health data. Health
professionals who are trained in developing technologies play a crucial role in
safeguarding the confidentiality and privacy of health data on a national scale.
This project aims to bridge the gaps between cybersecurity advancements and the
lack of practical understanding of real-world applications in the health
professions. Specifically, it focuses on developing comprehensive training
materials for students in master's level programs in health informatics, social
work, and public health.

The project will develop three cybersecurity training modules tailored to health
professionals. The training focuses on crucial areas, namely (1) foundations of
applied cybersecurity customized for health data, (2) ethics, bias, and fairness
in analysis and machine learning applied to health data, and (3) security and
privacy on smart devices such as smartwatches and mobile health apps.
Additionally, this project will develop sample interprofessional cybersecurity
projects (use cases) that can be seamlessly integrated into capstone projects or
fieldwork courses in health-related master’s level programs. These use cases
will serve as practical demonstrations of cybersecurity principles and their
application in real-world scenarios. The training modules and use cases will be
shared with outside collaborators in health informatics, social work, public
health, and other health-related degree programs, as well as with the broader
research community via a dedicated website. The research outcomes and findings
will be disseminated in relevant conferences and journals within the fields of
applied AI/ML, cybersecurity, and health sciences. This project will also
increase participation of underrepresented groups in cybersecurity and health-
related disciplines by providing tailored training, mentorship with role models
and mentors “who look like me,” and opportunities for meaningful engagement.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.