* 2310092
* Cosmic Ray Physics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Paolo Desiati, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 09/30/2024
* USD 60,000.00

This project will advance the understanding of cosmic rays, enigmatic particles
from space that continuously bombard our planet. Cosmic rays carry valuable
information about the nature of the universe, and unlocking their secrets is
crucial for understanding their origin and journey from their sources to Earth.
The project aims to analyze nearly a decade of data collected by the High
Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Observatory in Mexico to create detailed maps of
the cosmic ray arrival direction distribution. By studying cosmic ray anisotropy
and integrating it with their energy spectrum and mass composition, the project
can uncover insights into their propagation across the Milky Way and pinpoint
the potential existence of a nearby source. This knowledge is also crucial for
unraveling the properties of astrophysical plasmas in the interstellar medium,
including the very local environment, such as the heliosphere. Through outreach
efforts, including engagement with underrepresented communities and the
development of educational programs, the project will inspire the next
generation of scientists and foster a diverse and inclusive scientific
community.

The research analyzes cosmic ray data collected by the HAWC Observatory to study
cosmic ray anisotropy. Cosmic rays, high-energy particles originating from
distant unresolved sources, pose numerous challenges in their study due to the
poorly understood acceleration mechanisms and interactions with magnetic fields
while propagating in space. The analysis aims to produce high-resolution sky
maps of cosmic ray arrival direction distribution across a wide energy range
(1-100 TeV) and investigate its temporal stability, energy spectral features,
and angular structure. Combining data from HAWC and IceCube will provide all-sky
maps of cosmic ray anisotropy from 10 TeV to 100 TeV, enabling unprecedented
insights into their origins and propagation mechanisms. The research will
contribute to advancements in understanding the properties of interstellar
magnetized plasma turbulence. This knowledge will help uncover the mechanisms
behind cosmic ray acceleration and propagation, shedding light on the nature of
their galactic sources and the structure of the interstellar medium.
Furthermore, the study of cosmic ray anisotropy has practical implications, such
as space weather forecasting and radiation protection for astronauts. The
project takes advantage of the large data volume available to develop analyses
and investigate the origin of the observation, promoting the education and
outreach goals by exposing students to scientific research and educating the
next generation of scientists. In addition, the published results will be
relevant to study the heliosphere's effects on TeV cosmic rays reaching Earth
from space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.