* 2310227
* Operational Quantum Mereology: an Information Scrambling Approach
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paolo Zanardi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The ability of dividing a physical system into its smaller parts is a key aspect
of the scientific reductionist method. It allows one to understand the behavior
of complex systems in terms of fundamental, simpler components and their
interrelations and dynamical interactions. For quantum systems this division can
be performed in a multitude of ways depending on the experimental resources
available, the operational constraints and on the pursued objectives. The aim of
this project is the development of a unified, conceptual and mathematical,
framework for the optimal selection of quantum "subsystems”. This will help the
progress of Quantum Sciences and possibly the deployment of transformative novel
quantum technologies. The project has also important educational and training
components as it will involve, in an essential fashion, graduate students. This
will facilitate their future enrollment into the national, academic as well
industrial, quantum workforces.

The technical approach will be based on the notion of "information scrambling”
which is the way in which information, initially encoded on a definite and
localized set of degrees of freedoms, gets quickly "lost” by its uncontrollable
spreading over an increasingly large and delocalized set of degrees of freedom.
A toolkit of novel mathematical tools will be designed to quantitatively measure
the character, the speed and strength of this scrambling processes. Once this is
achieved, the tools will be deployed to determine the optimal division of
interesting many body systems into parts based on a minimal scrambling
criterion. The latter is conceptually a sort of “minimal entropy production”
principle telling us that the "emergent” subsystems are those more resilient to
environmental noise and can then preserve their informational identity for the
longest times.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.