* 2310386
* INCLUDES Collaborative Change Consortia: Developing and Strengthening Partnerships to Better Support Women of Color in the Engineering Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Roberta Rincon, Society of Women Engineers
* Continuing Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,893,997.00

The broader impact of this NSF INCLUDES Collaborative Change Consortia project
is to increase the diversity of the engineering workforce at the intersections
of gender and race by improving the retention of women of color. In the
workforce, women of color comprise less than 6% of engineering professionals.
Research shows women leave the profession at higher rates than men, highlighting
real-world experiences of bias and discrimination in hiring, promotion, and
compensation decisions, which have particularly dire consequences for women of
color. Professional STEM societies, academic institutions, and employers have
developed numerous programs and services for women engineers and engineers of
color, but women of color engineers are often left underserved by these efforts.
This project supports the Women of Color in Engineering Collaborative (WCEC), a
consortium addressing the unique challenges facing women engineers of color.
Through a cohesive support system of organizations from across sectors, the WCEC
will leverage resources to promote systemic change while collectively removing
barriers that lead to the attrition of women engineers of color. The WCEC adds
to the NSF INCLUDES National Network’s STEM equity knowledge base, centering an
often cited, yet understudied and under addressed, challenge of retaining women
of color in the engineering workforce.

The proposed project addresses one overarching question: How impactful are
promising practices in retaining women of color in the engineering profession?
To answer this question, the WCEC will share case studies of promising practices
with member organizations, support women of color in their pursuit of
professional development opportunities, and increase access and exposure of
existing programs and services to women engineers of color and the organizations
with which they engage. The WCEC will expand from its current membership of 29
organizations to include more partners from industry, government, higher
education, and professional STEM societies to create a support system that
systematically impacts women’s transition from college to career to promotion
through their networks in higher education and the public and private sectors.
Using a collective impact approach, the WCEC will tackle the systemic barriers
that exist for women engineers of color through innovative solutions and the
sharing of collective knowledge. The impact of the project will be measured
through participant feedback, increased awareness and perspective, stronger
relationships, greater confidence, and more effective leadership. WCEC project
resources will be shared across the collaborative and with the NSF INCLUDES
National Network and the public through the WCEC website, podcasts, webinars,
and conferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.