* 2310362
* WoU-MMA: The Evolution, Destruction, and Gravitational-wave Sources of Dense Star Clusters in Cosmological Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Carl Rodriguez, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 215,918.00

The merger of two heavy black holes was the first event observed through the
detection of gravitational waves (GWs), or ripples in spacetime. How these
binary black holes (BBHs) form is an important question in astrophysics. One
promising scenario is that they form through dynamical interactions of stars in
dense stellar clusters (DSCs), in which stars are closer together than in other
parts of a galaxy and can frequently interact through their mutual gravity. A
research team at Carnegie Mellon University will create the first self-
consistent, star-by-star models of dense star clusters with realistic initial
conditions taken from cosmological simulations, or simulations of how large
groups of stars form from giant clouds of gas. The scientists will then use
these models to create a population of the BBH mergers arising in star clusters
and also from binaries formed in isolation, using identical initial conditions
and stellar physics. The team will then make detailed predictions for future
observations from GW detectors such as Advanced LIGO and Virgo, and establish
the connection between our understanding of cosmology and galaxy assembly and
the new field of gravitational-wave astronomy. This project will also be used to
introduce GW astronomy to a larger community. During the course of the research,
the lead scientists will work with at least two undergraduate students, who will
be supported by summer programs at Carnegie Mellon. The principal investigator
(PI) will also continue to visit conferences dedicated to under-represented
students in STEM, both to present the work and recruit students.

The researchers will examine several galaxy models created as part of the
Feedback in Realistic Environments (FIRE) project, which has recently developed
sufficient resolution to resolve the formation and collapse of giant molecular
clouds, the progenitors of DSCs. These initial conditions will be integrated
forward to the present day using direct N-body and Monte Carlo methods for
modeling star clusters, which include all the necessary physics (stellar
evolution, gravitational waves, etc.) to predict the present-day appearance of
these DSCs and the binary black hole (BBH) mergers that they produce during
their evolution. The PI has demonstrated before that there are unique features
of BBHs formed in DSCs which will allow them to be distinguished from other
formation channels. These features, such as the masses and the orbital
eccentricities, depend sensitively on the initial masses, metallicities, and
core concentrations of the DSCs. By using the same stellar physics and realistic
cosmological initial conditions, this work will show how different galaxy
properties, such as the galaxy type and star-formation history influence the
gravitational-wave landscape of the local universe. The group plans to make
their data public and easily accessible, which will have broad utility in many
fields. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.