* 2310426
* NSF-BSF: New Approaches to Conformal Field Theory - Codes, Ensembles, and Complexity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Anatoly Dymarsky, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 74,999.00

This NSF-BSF award funds the research activities of Professor Anatoly Dymarsky
at the University of Kentucky.

Quantum field theory is the theoretical framework underlying our modern
understanding of the elementary particles and their interactions. For many
decades it has enjoyed the constant attention of the scientific community which
has attempted to lay out its most basic principles and implications. This quest
continues to this day. However, as it turns out, quantum field theory exhibits
extraordinarily rich mathematical structures, constantly giving rise to new
insights and connections with other branches of science. One of the areas
exhibiting rapid development recently is the connection between quantum field
theory and quantum information theory --- a branch of science studying ways in
which quantum systems can contain and process information. As part of his
research, Professor Dymarsky will investigate how quantum fields --- the
building blocks of quantum field theory --- can be described and characterized
in terms of quantum and classical information. This project focuses on several
questions within this area and will be pursued jointly with scientists from
Israel, with NSF supporting the American side of this collaboration. This
project also contributes to goals of national interest by extending the
frontiers of knowledge regarding the fundamental laws of physics. Finally, this
project will also contribute to physics education and increase the participation
of members of underrepresented groups in STEM research. Broader-impact goals of
this research include the professional training of undergraduate physics
students through the framework of the NSF "Research Experiences for
Undergraduates" program.

More technically, this research project addresses applications of several key
concepts stretching from information theory and theoretical computer science to
quantum field theory. First is the notion of "codes", a mathematical framework
for compressing and preserving information routinely utilized in conventional
telecommunications systems. Specifically, as part of this project, Professor
Dymarsky will investigate how codes can be used to describe and study two-
dimensional conformal field theory. Second is the notion of complexity, which
characterizes the practical difficulty involved in implementing an algorithm or
deciphering a piece of information. This notion finds many applications in field
theory, and as part of this project Professor Dymarsky will study how different
definitions and prescriptions for evaluating complexity are related to each
other. Other specific goals of this project include applying information theory
to the recently-introduced ensemble-based interpretation of the holographic
correspondence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.