* 2310202
* Conference: 7th International Volvox Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Stephen Miller, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,482.00

The 7th International Volvox Conference will be held in Baltimore, MD on the
campus of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, from June 11-14, 2023.
This meeting will be attended by undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, as well as senior researchers to discuss and advance our
understanding of all aspects of the biology of the photosynthetic green alga
Volvox and its close relatives, which include single-celled species and colonial
forms that swim as a unit. The conference will contain sessions on development,
the evolution of organisms with more than one cell, reproduction, swimming
appendages and responses to light, and the DNA and RNA of these organisms. The
application of novel techniques for studying these creatures will also be
presented and discussed. The interactions of faculty members at all levels and
from a diversity of educational institutions will increase understanding of
these organisms, and their engagement with students at all levels, will increase
the number of future scientists working on this organism important for
understanding algal function, including its ability to increase its
photosynthetic output through behavioral responses to light. This engagement
will be facilitated by two poster sessions to allow interactions between senior
and junior scientists. NSF support will be used to defray registration fees
and/or travel costs to allow attendance of participants from early stages of
their careers, especially for members of groups historically under-represented
in this field.

The science presented at the 7th International Volvox Conference will cover the
biochemistry, genomics and transcriptomics, and cell biology of a species
fundamental to understanding the evolution of multicellular organisms from
single-celled green algae. The meeting will include talks and poster sessions on
the development and reproduction of these creatures (which span the range from
unicellular to undifferentiated multicellular to differentiated multicellular),
their behavioral photoresponses, and analyses of their genomes and
transcriptomes. The diversity of disciplines represented among invited speakers
and graduate and post-graduate students will offer abundant opportunities for
interactions among all conference participants, and is expected to inspire
innovative thinking about mechanisms of evolution of multicellular organisms,
ciliary function, and behavior in response to changing light levels as a means
to optimize photosynthetic output. Education of a wide range of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will increase the critical mass of future
independent investigators studying these organisms, which are critical to
understanding algal growth function, photosynthesis, and ciliary function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.