* 2310149
* Hadronic Physics for Neutrino-Nucleon Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Emilie Passemar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Modern nuclear and particle physics are concerned with understanding the
fundamental parameters and symmetries of nature. Quarks are particles that
interact via the strong force, which binds them together in an atomic nucleus.
Leptons do not feel this force; the most familiar example of a lepton is the
electron that binds to the nucleus by the electromagnetic interaction. A more
exotic lepton is the neutrino, which has no electric charge and interacts only
weakly.  Yet, this elusive particle is proving to be a crucial link in our
search for new physics phenomena. Exquisite experimental measurements over the
last two decades revealed that the neutrinos have small but nonzero
masses. Today, the field of neutrino physics enters a precision era, with
accelerator-based neutrino oscillation experiments taking center stage in the
experimental program in the US and in the world. It is hoped that the combined
precision data from the quark and lepton sectors will one day provide a key to
the nature of the underlying physics. This project provides theoretical
foundations needed to support these experimental breakthroughs, in particular,
by giving a more rigorous description of neutrino-nucleus interactions. It also
serves as an excellent training ground for students.

This research focuses on a specific piece of physics that plays a crucial role
in modelling neutrino interactions at GeV energies: the nucleon axial form
factor. It describes the structure of the nucleon which is not a point-like
particle but has a structure that is still not well known. The PI and her
collaborators develop an analytical framework to accurately model this form
factor, based on the methods of chiral perturbation theory and dispersive
techniques. Moreover, a bridge to numerical evaluations on the lattice is
established by applications of various analytical constraints, such as current
conservation. Agreement with various electron scattering data is also explored.
These studies are extended to pion production in neutrino-nucleon scattering
where a bridge between the low energy knowledge relying on chiral perturbation
symmetry and higher energies needs to be established. This research supports the
state-of-the-art nuclear physics experiments at Thomas Jefferson Laboratory,
particularly GlueX or CLAS, as well as the upcoming precision neutrino-nucleus
scattering experiments at Fermilab and worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.