* 2310097
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Askaryan Radio Array: A World-Class, Forward-Looking, and Dynamic Neutrino Astrophysics Observatory From 100 PeV
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* John Kelley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2026
* USD 171,330.00

This award funds the continued operation of the Askaryan Radio Array (ARA)
experiment at the South Pole. ARA consists of five stations of antennas embedded
up to 200m deep in the ice that are designed to detect radio “Askaryan” emission
from neutrinos interacting in the ice. ARA’s dataset is the world’s most
sensitive to ultra-high energy neutrinos from astrophysical sources. ARA has the
potential to make a first discovery of UHE neutrinos, which are key to answering
the century-old question of the origin of high energy cosmic rays. This award
also funds the development of next-generation electronics, which will enable the
identification of the radio emission with any of the variety of signatures
brought about by complex properties of the ice that have been observed by ARA.
This award also funds ARA’s broader impacts activities. ARA will continue to
engage secondary-school, undergraduate, and graduate students in its cutting-
edge research.

This award funds continued operations and data taking for the Askaryan Radio
Array (ARA), a neutrino astrophysics experiment with world-leading sensitivity
to ultra-high energy (UHE, >10^17 eV) neutrinos expected from astrophysical
sources and cosmic-ray induced cosmogenic interactions. ARA has the potential to
make a first discovery of UHE neutrinos over the term of this award, which would
be the highest energy neutrinos ever observed, provide a first glimpse of the
universe at cosmic distances in this energy regime, and be the first observation
of interactions at higher center-of-mass energies than those produced the LHC.
This award will also enable the development of the new ARA-Next triggering
system, a multi-channel triggering system based on the state-of-the-art Radio
Frequency System on a Chip (RFSoC). ARA-Next would increase ARA’s sensitivity to
unique signatures of radio emission from neutrino interactions that are expected
based on ARA’s measurements of radio impulses in the South Pole ice. This award
also funds ARA’s broader impacts activities. ARA will continue to engage
secondary-school, undergraduate, and graduate students in its cutting-edge
research. In addition, ARA will develop a new IceCube Masterclass program where
high school students will learn about identifying signatures of UHE neutrinos by
identifying the same signatures as ARA-Next. The program will serve as a
pipeline for students who will themselves contribute to ARA research as
undergraduates.

The award is aligned with the NSF Big Idea of Windows on the Universe: the Era
of Multi-messenger Astrophysics as it coordinates the use of multi-messenger
observations utilizing potentially the highest energy neutrinos ever detected
which might arise from the universe's highest energy cosmic sources of
particles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.