* 2310842
* Continued Curation of the Antarctic Core Collection in the OSU/CEOAS Marine and Geology Repository
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Porter
* 06/30/2028
* USD 450,980.00

The College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences at Oregon State University
established the Marine and Geology Repository (OSU-MGR) in 1971 as an NSF-
sponsored community facility. For more than 50 years the mission of the OSU-MGR
has remained to archive and distribute geological samples and associated
metadata from sediment cores, rocks, nodules, and sediment trap samples
collected as part of research cruises, for research and education. Since 2019,
this collection has been expanded with the NSF’s Antarctic Core Collection
including 15,429 m of marine sediments from 5,283 cores and 7,603 m of drill
core from 94 sites. Through high quality archiving of rocks and sediment under
continuous refrigeration, these one-of-a-kind materials are preserved for the
scientific community. Over the past 30 years, more than 190,000 samples have
been distributed to scientists, educators, and museums throughout the United
States and around the world. To date, driven by opportunities, capabilities, and
community needs, OSU-MGR has expanded its mandate to include data captured from
field programs, the acquisition of high-quality non-destructive data within the
OSU-MGR laboratories that are archived and distributed upon request, and a range
of educational products from tours to undergraduate and graduate courses to
summer Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) programs, and summers
schools. The OSU-MGR employs four curators and a software engineering
consultant, as well as a cohort of undergraduate student workers from diverse
backgrounds that provide a wide range of experiences and opportunities. The OSU-
MGR Antarctic core collection (ACC) consists of approximately 15,500 m of marine
sediments from more than 5,200 cores and 9,000 m of drill core from 96 sites,
including large drilling programs such as the Antarctic Drilling Project
(ANDRILL), Cape Roberts Project (CRP), Cenozoic Investigation in the Western
Ross Sea (CIROS), Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP). Along with an accompanying
award by Marine Geology & Geophysics program of the Division of Ocean Sciences,
this project will continue and expand the operation of OSU-MGR as a national
repository. Objectives include the continuation of primary repository duties
(e.g., sample acquisition, curation, cataloging, metadata management, quality
assurance and control, requests and accessions, etc.) and also to make progress
on series of long-term objectives, such as: (1) The continued development of the
OSU-MGR App, database, and website to improve services to the community,
including virtual capabilities, data acquisition and access, and remote
sampling. (2) Collect, capture, and serve non-destructive data from both
shipboard and repository sources with the development of the new FIESTA Core
Data Repository (CDR) funded through EarthCube, adding value to the OSU-MGR
collections and empowering the research community. (3) Support teaching,
training, and learning through use of the OSU-MGR repository in graduate,
undergraduate, K-12 classes, REU programs, summers schools, and employing
undergraduate student workers from diverse backgrounds, as well as by opening
the facility to the general public for tours, open houses, and presentations.
Products from the ACC Repository are disseminated widely through the OSU-MGR
website and national databases (National Center for Environmental Information,
NCEI; Core Data Repository, CDR). The OSU-MGR online data repository will be
FAIR—Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reproducible—by linking sample data to
unique identifiers including DOI, ORCID, IGSN, R2R Expedition IDs. Specific
actions for the next five years include: (1) Finalizing the metadata transfer
into OSU-MGR App and database following the transfer and needed recuration of
the ACC into the OSU-MGR. (2) Fully managing the sample request workflow through
the OSU-MGR web interface. (3) Setting up the OSU-MGR App for future re-use at
other repositories while working together with the Lamont-Doherty repository to
install this software for their use. (4) Improving and automating annual data
reporting to NSF using the OSU-MGR App. (5) Creating a data pipeline from the
OSU-MGR App into the CDR online data repository for MST, CT and XRF sensor
scanning data. (5) Organizing three OSU-MGR Antarctic Summer Schools in
collaboration with IODP to serve between 20-30 participants who are graduate
students, post-docs and early-career scientists from within the U.S. and
worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.