* 2310264
* Lamont-Doherty Core Repository: Curation, Service, Professional Development, Outreach
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Maureen Raymo, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2028
* USD 309,540.00

This project will support the ongoing operation of the Lamont-Doherty Core
Repository (LDCR). The LDCR is a national resource for geoscience research and
education. This repository houses one of the largest and geographically
expansive collections of deep-sea sediment cores in the world. It also includes
seafloor rocks, manganese nodules, corals, and wetland and river cores. Like a
library of mud, fossils, and rocks, the LDCR serves the Earth science community
by storing, distributing, and collecting samples and data. Scientists from all
over the world use this material to study the history and processes of the
Earth. The LDCR hosts hundreds of visitors every year. These visitors leave with
an understanding of the scientific and educational resources available at the
LDCR and the role the LDCR serves for the scientific community. The LDCR offers
a variety of outreach activities. These activities include professional training
opportunities, a community use sediment analysis laboratory, and permanent
exhibits for visitors.

The support provided through this project allows the LDCR to achieve its
mission: (a) to provide long-term curation and archiving of samples and cores
collected by the geoscience community to ensure their preservation and
usefulness to current and future generations of Earth scientists; (b) to serve
the needs of national and international scientists by fulfilling sample requests
as well as providing sample descriptions, core log measurements, and basic
sedimentological, geochemical, and geophysical analyses on materials of
interest; (c) to assist principal investigators from any institution in the
planning and execution of sample collection activities, including sea-going
activities, and providing short-term (2-year) exclusive access to sample
material and data in addition to long-term storage and curation of those
samples; (d) to add value to the existing collection through new and continuing
initiatives that include improving on-line data availability, sample
characterization, and documentation of subsets of the collection; (e) to mentor
and create professional development opportunities for students and early career
scientists, including summer internships; and (f) to continue development of
outreach and educational materials to educate teachers, students, and the
general public about the important role the LDCR plays in improving our
understanding of Earth processes such as climate change, ocean acidification,
evolution, and tectonics. Data from old and new materials in our collection are
a continuing resource for the development of novel techniques and the provision
of fresh scientific insights. Through the LDCR, students, early career
researchers, and other scientists are able to take advantage of existing and
archived materials, allowing them to seize research opportunities in a timely
fashion without having to mount costly expeditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.