* 2310844
* IUCRC Phase II UMBC: Center for Accelerated Real time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Karuna Joshi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2028
* USD 100,000.00

Accelerated and real-time data analytics is a leading edge of the smart data
revolution, pushed by advances in internet-connected sensor hardware on one side
and accelerated AI/ML analytics on the other. These technologies include machine
learning, cognitive, quantum, neuromorphic, and edge computing combined with new
classes of sensory and programmable hardware components, active storage,
advanced FPGA processors, in-memory cloud systems, and embedded sensors. They
address many pursuits of national defense and cybersecurity, weather and climate
prediction, health/disease monitoring, Industrial IoT, etc. In IUCRC/CARTA Phase
II, we develop new accelerated and real-time approaches to address these
advanced technologies and their integration relevant to our partners.

We leverage cutting-edge research in AI/ML and programmable cyber-systems to
conduct collaborative CARTA research. Our research areas include accelerated
medical image analytics, explainable and interpretable AI/ML for medical and
vision/language models, digital twins for real time dynamical systems, and
physics-informed AI/ML modeling for improved understanding. Our research will be
primarily “application neutral,” i.e., techniques that can be applied with
modifications across multiple disciplines, including cyber security, healthcare
and medical, dynamic systems, environment, and business intelligence. Our
exploration will include deep learning, semi/unsupervised learning, federated
learning, architectures, real-time simulations, data compliance, and
Blockchains. In this context, the CARTA/UMBC site will focus on developing next
generation self-learning systems that will leverage High Performance Computing
(HPC) platforms to facilitate real-time critical decision-making.

Our projects will benefit businesses by providing a larger pool of a highly
skilled diverse workforce. We disseminate results from our collaborative
research widely with industry by publishing in appropriate journals and
conferences; share our research outputs with other non-CARTA institutions that
want to duplicate this approach. We leverage specialized programs at UMBC, such
as our nationally recognized diverse Meyerhoff and Center for Women in
Technology (CWIT) scholars programs, to broaden student participation,
especially from underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.