* 2310654
* Doubly-robust variable selection in high dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eugene Katsevich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,000.00

The project will develop improved methodologies for the variable selection
problem. The goal is to choose which explanatory variables are associated with
an outcome variable of interest. Variable selection is a fundamental statistical
problem that arises in countless application areas: Which genes influence the
prevalence of a given human disease? Which demographic and socioeconomic
variables influence a person’s income? Which electronic health record entries
influence future medical costs? Especially when the number of potential
explanatory variables is large, it is difficult to separate the important
variables (the signal) from the irrelevant ones (the noise). The variable
selection problem is also computationally challenging. Both of these issues
hamper the progress of researchers in analyzing their data quickly and reliably.
The project will address these important challenges by developing several
methodological innovations and distributing the resulting improved methods in an
open-source software package. The project will also provide multiple training
opportunities to graduate students by involving them in the interdisciplinary
research activities.

A wealth of research has gone into the high dimensional variable selection
problem and the associated conditional independence (CI) testing problem,
including model-X (MX) inference, debiased lasso inference, double regression CI
testing, and semiparametric/causal inference. In the context of the CI testing
problem (i.e. the problem of assessing whether a single variable is associated
with the response given the others), the investigator has recently led an effort
to break down the barriers between the distinct lines of existing work. Moving
from the CI testing problem to the variable selection problem, the project will
develop a methodology satisfying an exhaustive set of concrete statistical and
computational requirements, all of which are not met by any existing
methodology. First, the project will develop a procedure to construct null
distributions for CI tests that are accurate in small samples (like the MX
conditional randomization test) but require only a limited number of resamples
(giving speed comparable to that of double regression approaches). Second, the
project will develop a variable selection method that requires only a single
machine learning step (like MX knockoffs) but is doubly robust (like double
regression methods). Third, the project will develop and comprehensively
evaluate Doubly Robust Variable Selection (DRVS), a best-of-all-worlds variable
selection methodology incorporating the above two innovations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.