* 2310935
* Molecular Doping of Semiconducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Chabinyc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 494,018.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Functional electronics can be made with polymers for
applications including wearable electronics and solar cells. Electronic polymers
can be coated or printed, like an ink, to make devices on plastics or even
stretchable materials. The electrical conductivity of these electronic polymers
can be controlled through the addition of materials called dopants. The
effectiveness of dopants depends how charges are transferred to the electronic
polymer and how many of them can be incorporated. For this project, which is
jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program and the
Polymers Program, both in NSFâ€™s Division of Materials Research, researchers at
the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB) study the structural and
electronic changes of electronic polymers during doping using both transport and
advanced structural analysis methods, such as X-ray scattering at national user
facilities. They also investigate how mechanical effects, such as bending or
stretching, impact the incorporation of dopants into electronic polymers. This
research in electronic polymers addresses the design of new materials towards
the manufacturing of low-cost electronic devices relevant for electronics and
energy conversion and storage, and the fundamental insights gained are expected
to be transferrable to solid-state organic materials in general. The project
helps train a diverse set of graduate students for careers in the US STEM
workforce through advanced research in electronic materials that incorporates
collaborative work. Undergraduate researchers involved in the research are
exposed to future career pathways at the forefront of materials science
including pathways to graduate study.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Controlling electrical doping of semiconducting polymers in
the solid state requires attention to energetic and structural disorder. This
project, which is jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program and the Polymers Program, enables researchers at UCSB to design new
molecular dopants that provide the ability to control the energetic distribution
of doping within semiconducting polymers. The dopants are based on stable
organic radical cations that have appropriate ionization energies to selectively
dope high performance semiconducting polymers. These dopants allow tuning of the
energetics of charge transfer for a given semiconducting polymer. The dopants
further enable the investigation of the temporal evolution of the location of
dopants within the nanostructure of semiconducting polymers. The structural
evolution of doped electronic polymers is interrogated by a combination of
advanced X-ray scattering methods and electron microscopy that are sensitive to
the chemical structure of the dopant. The coupling between mechanical stress and
doping of semiconducting polymers is then revealed by the systematic study of
changes in the electronic density of states as a function of mechanical forces
during doping. The comparison of both static and electrochemical doping provides
a means to further examine the evolution of electronic behavior as a function of
crystallinity and mechanical behavior. Graduate students involved in the
research gain skills in multidisciplinary research including data science tools.
The research outcomes are disseminated to the public through publications in
peer-reviewed journals and the data is available through online data archives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.