* 2310076
* RUI: Experimental Subatomic Physics at Virginia Union University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Narbe Kalantarians, Virginia Union University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 153,006.00

This award supports one Virginia Union University (VUU) professor and students
working with him in making important contributions to two high-impact
measurements aimed at understanding the fundamental structure and dynamics of
the neutron. The award will strengthen the research infrastructure available to
VUU faculty in physics by outfitting a slow controls development facility that
will be useful for subatomic physics and potential applications. Student
development will be enhanced by the added availability of research opportunities
and exposure to a world-leading research facility that hosts a multi-national
group of experienced scientists and engineers, and these participants will gain
training and experience in hardware and software that will be invaluable for
their future STEM careers. This award is jointly supported by the Division of
Physics and the HBCU-UP Program within the Division of Equity for Excellence in
STEM.

The planned research contributes to the BONuS12 and TDIS experiments at
Jefferson Lab, which enable the study of near-free neutron targets and seek to
further refine the neutron structure function. Knowledge of the neutron
structure function currently represents a gap in the community’s understanding,
and affects neutrino scattering measurements. The proposed work contributes to
the development of a slow controls system to monitor drift and target gas
systems for the TDIS experiment. In a separate line of inquiry, the PI will
collaborate on utilizing AI and published structure function data for a new F2A
calculation. Work to this end has proven interesting to the subatomic physics
community and this method will be complementary to the parameterizations that
are presently available, in that it utilizes an artificial neural network that
is trained to calculate this quantity, compared to interpolation/extrapolation
from fitting routines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.