* 2310592
* HCC: Medium: Seamful Design: Prototyping and Evaluating Collaborative Tools for Civic Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Carl DiSalvo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will develop an innovative framework for designing civic data
systems. The framework supports knowledge production, including policy,
governance, and advocacy, and that allows for dynamic coalitions to collaborate
and moderate boundaries over time. In the ecosystem of civic organizations there
are distinct accountabilities or modes of actions. Mission-driven organizations
act in their communities to address local issues. Municipal governments provide
services and manage the operations of the city. Policy makers set goals and
rules to achieve long-term priorities. Across this environment, data have become
a crucial material in how knowledge is produced and shared. However, striving
for integration and interoperability of data and data systems, often through a
one-size-fits-app approach, is a fundamental mismatch for how civic work
actually happens. There is a need to reexamine the base assumptions of what
collaboration means in civic work. This research will develop a novel approach
to designing civic data systems by advancing the notion of seamfulness as a
foundation for understanding supporting the ecosystem of organizations,
technology, people, and negotiated outcomes that comprise civic work.
Seamfulness recognizes the reality of interruptions and misalignments in data
sharing between very different organizations, and seams offer a way to
articulate the fluid assertion of gaps and integration in ways that more readily
map to how civic entities work together. This requires a distinct approach to
civic data system design, different than the aspirations of seamlessness common
to civic technology discourse where technical integration and interoperability
obviate social and organizational boundaries. The research follows an iterative
cycle over three core research strands (1) build an empirical foundation and
initial prototype systems to answer core research questions, (2) situate
individual tools across organizations, looking at how each manages action and
accountability within the issue-focused coalition, and (3) focus on how to
transfer and generalize the findings beyond the specific research sites of this
project. The outcome of this research will result in a taxonomy of data contexts
and knowledge production for civic data work, prototypes that link specific data
system architecture and human-interaction techniques to enable coalition-based
civic work across practice-based seams, and theoretical resolution to seamful
design as a foundation for human-centered civic technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.