* 2310496
* Deciphering Coarsening Dynamics and Cluster Migration using Experiments and Models
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Wouter-Jan Rappel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

During the process known as coarsening, smaller objects merge together into
larger and larger ones. This process occurs on many different length scales and
plays an important role in living systems: nuclear proteins coarsen into
condensed droplets, bacteria coalesce into multicellular aggregates, and animals
aggregate into large groups. The dynamics of these biological systems are
typically driven by long-range communication between the elements. It is
currently not clear, however, how this communication and the motion of the
elements are coupled and result in coarsening. This award will focus on the
coarsening dynamics of clusters of Dictyostelium discoideum cells, an amoeboid
system. These cells form small and isolated clusters that subsequently move
together and coarsen into larger and larger ones. The communication in this
system is provided by a secreted chemoattractant, a chemical that directs the
motion of the cells and clusters.

This award will quantify the dynamics of coarsening by measuring the number and
size of clusters and the secretion of the chemoattractant as a function of time.
In addition, the study will use traction force microscopy, a technique that uses
beads on deformable substrates, to quantify the forces exerted by the clusters
when they migrate and coalesce. Together, these measurements will provide a
better understanding of the mechanisms that are responsible for the collective
migration exhibited by clusters during coarsening. The experimental results will
also be used to develop comprehensive mathematical models, which will generate
predictions that can be experimentally verified, resulting in a two-way dialogue
between experiments and modeling.

In addition, this award will include the training of high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students who will be directly involved in the proposed research.
Finally, as part of this project, yearly â€œDicty Days" will be organized at two
local high schools. During these two-day events students will be able to perform
simple hands-on experiments to help stimulate their interest in biological
physics. These students will be integrated into the lab and taught how to
design, carry out, and interpret experiments and simulations, with the goal of
attracting diverse students to a career in the biophysical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.