* 2310608
* RUI: Holography of Balls, Branes, and Baryons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Matthew Lippert, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 120,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew Lippert at
SUNY Old Westbury.

Over the past two decades, string theory has developed into a powerful tool for
attacking challenging problems in a wide range of systems, from electrons in
high-temperature superconductors to the ultra-dense cores of neutron stars. The
key tool is "duality", a translation between two very different descriptions of
the same physical system. As such, dualities enable string theory to rephrase
many otherwise intractable problems into the form of questions that can be
answered with vastly simpler calculations. As part of his research, Professor
Lippert will conduct several research projects which use string theory models to
investigate open questions arising in a variety of interdisciplinary contexts.
This research advances the national interest of promoting scientific progress by
forging broad interdisciplinary connections between string theory, nuclear
physics, astrophysics, and condensed matter physics. Such bridges enable the
exchange of ideas and techniques between different fields of physics, enriching
and advancing them all. Furthermore, this RUI grant will enhance undergraduate
physics research at SUNY Old Westbury, an exceptionally diverse, federally
recognized minority-serving institution, with large Black and Hispanic
populations. Professor Lippert will involve students from severely
underrepresented groups in his research, allowing them to acquire valuable
experience, to improve their practical quantitative and computing skills, and to
gain a hands-on appreciation for how actual science is done. More specifically,
this research uses gauge/gravity duality to investigate open questions in
strongly coupled quantum field theories, organized around three topics. The
physics of strongly interacting fermions and the quantum Hall effect on a
spherical defect will be explored using a holographic probe brane model. The
topology and the lack of boundary are predicted to result in significantly
different behavior compared with a planar system. The poorly understood behavior
of cold, dense nuclear matter at the core of neutron stars will be investigated
using holographic models of QCD. Realistically and tractably including baryons
in holographic models of QCD continues to be a challenge. Far-from-equilibrium
dynamics within quantum systems will be studied using holographic methods.
Advances in ultra-fast techniques have resulted in unprecedented control of
quantum electronic systems, yielding a range of novel phenomena. This research
investigates the out-of-equilibrium dynamics of non-equilibrium steady states
resulting from periodic driving.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.