* 2310351
* The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) Conference: Structure, Function and Disease
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Carolyn Sevier, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,450.00

This award will support a FASEB Meeting on the structure, function, and
relationship to disease of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), to be held June
11-15, 2023 at the Crowne Plaza Melbourne-Oceanfront Hotel in Melbourne, FL.

Meeting attendees will include graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as
well as senior researchers, that will gather to discuss our understanding of all
aspects of the biology and function of the ER, the complex structure that
surrounds the cell nucleus and which regulates the formation and destruction of
proteins and fats in cells. Talks will be presented on topics such as how
proteins are formed and modified to function within and outside of cells, how
fat levels are regulated in the cell, and how the ER senses and responds to
stress to maintain its essential functions. In addition to formal talks,
engagement will be facilitated by two extended poster sessions to stimulate
interactions between researchers. NSF support will be used to defray travel and
registration costs, to provide childcare support for children of attendees, and
to allow attendance of participants during early stages of their careers,
especially members of groups underrepresented in this field.

The endoplasmic reticulum is an essential, and arguably the most complex,
organelle present within all eukaryotic cells. ER function is central to the
synthesis and turnover of both proteins and lipids, and the ER contains robust
stress response pathways that serve to augment ER function in response to
potentially toxic conditions or developmental cues. The meeting will bring
together seasoned investigators with students and early-career scientists in
both formal talks and discussion sessions to encourage informal discussion and
the sharing of the latest research results on the synthesis, folding, and
turnover of proteins, lipid dynamics and storage, ER structural remodeling and
ER-organellar communication, and the unfolded protein response. Recent advances
in the field, including new technological capabilities, will be highlighted.
This award is funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.