* 2310698
* Planning: Advancing Geosciences Cultural Change in Access, Diversity, and Inclusion via History of Geology and Environmental Justice (ADI Geo-History)
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Stephen Boss, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The Geosciences are one of the least diverse of the sciences, and representative
voices and stakeholders are needed as the discipline navigates scientific and
societal issues of national concern. The Advancing Geosciences’ Cultural Change
in Access, Diversity, and Inclusion via History of Geology and Environmental
Justice project (ADI Geo-History) supports participation of students with
diverse identities by engaging them in the history of Earth Sciences from non-
traditional perspectives. The Geological Society of America (GSA) and the
History of Earth Sciences Society (HESS) collaborate to involve students from
historically excluded groups in their professional societies, increasing not
only students’ participation in the Geosciences, but also broadening the culture
of the respective societies. ADI Geo-History recruits college students with
diverse identities and supports their participation in the Geological Society of
America annual conference, with accompanying field excursions that focus on
exposing full histories of resource extraction and its impact on humans and the
landscape. Students will experience virtual mentoring sessions before and after
the conference with professional geoscientists of diverse identities. Following
GSA, student scholars will prepare outreach materials for their home
institutions based on what they have learned through their conference
participation and fieldtrip experience. ADI Geo-History delivers a proof-of-
concept to engage Geosciences-associated professional societies in activities
that promote diversity and diversify society membership with the intention to
expand this effort in the near future.

The Advancing Geosciences’ Cultural Change in Access, Diversity, and Inclusion
via History of Geology and Environmental Justice project (ADI Geo-History) is a
2-year planning effort emerging from the Geosciences ASCEND RCN (NSF #2037271)
and spearheaded by the History of Earth Sciences Society (HESS), an affiliated
Geological Society of America (GSA) society. The proposed effort conceptualizes
a sustained initiative to diversify the HESS membership and encourage
participation of diverse identities in documenting and telling the history of
Earth Science from non-traditional perspectives. For this effort, the PIs will
implement experimental field trips/short courses and sessions for the 2023/2024
GSA Connects annual meetings (Pittsburgh, PA; Anaheim, CA), and engage students
with diverse identities to focus on acknowledging, understanding, and accurately
portraying the history of resource extraction and the legacy of extractive
activities in the geosciences. ADI Geo-History will demonstrate a proof-of-
concept to engage Geosciences-associated professional societies in activities
that promote diversity and diversify society membership. As such, Geosciences-
associated societies become active agents in developing their diversity profile,
build social capital among diverse communities, broaden professional networks,
and welcome diverse perspectives into professional societies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.