* 2310741
* Collaborative Research: Using the Physics of Living Systems Student Research Network to Transmit Techniques and Train Talent
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Harold Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

The Physics of Living Systems (PoLS) is a diverse field and is composed of
researchers and students from varied scientific backgrounds. No single
institution can offer the breadth and depth of research and courses that both
cover the relevant intellectual landscape and provide in-depth training for
students. Such training is critical to create the next generation of researchers
who can contribute to PoLS, with the ability to move between biology, physics,
mathematics, and engineering. In addition, no single institution has the range
of equipment needed to study PoLS on the enormous range of time and length
scales encountered in biological systems. Finally, few single institutions can
fruitfully integrate science and engineering to inspire biomedical,
pharmaceutical, robotic, and prosthetic technologies that will result from basic
PoLS research. This awardâ€™s activities will allow students to work across
institutions and among various disciplines on living systems while maintaining
the physics mindset (simplified systems, few parameters, predictive models) and
developing new physics.

The NSF Physics of Living Systems (PoLS) Student Research Network (SRN) strives
to unite students and faculty working on the physics of living
systems/biological physics at institutions ("nodes") within the US and
internationally. This virtual network gives students at local nodes the ability
to take advantage of global educational and research opportunities in PoLS.
During the last period of funding members of the SRN continued to advance their
respective PoLS programs and developed cohesive local communities. Students and
faculty also participated in the SRN-wide annual meetings and activities at the
American Physical Society (APS) March Meeting, the Biophysical Society (BPS)
meeting, and other scientific meetings. With this award, the team of
investigators will develop a focused set of activities that will generate
significant interactions and exchange between students from different nodes and
the POLS community. The primary activity of this award is to develop a set of
student-led, hands-on, short courses at node sites ("Hands-On PoLS Summer
Schools"). Short courses will be held for a week each summer at each node and
will train SRN students with both specialized and general techniques useful
across PoLS disciplines. Each node will develop a suite of summer-school courses
with themes that span different research interests and capabilities (e.g.,
microscopy, robophysics, image analysis), targeted for students from all nodes
and other institutions in the SRN. This award will aid development of and
sponsor travel support to the short courses. These activities will be augmented
by research exchange visits among nodes within this proposal as well as in the
broader iPOLS SRN. This award will also sponsor travel to diverse scientific
meetings important to the student's specific research areas as well as to gain a
broader perspective on PoLS.

While this SRN seek to maintain ties to and cultivate insights from biology,
medicine, and other relevant disciplines, a strong SRN will help demonstrate
that fundamental living systems research has been and will continue to be done
by physicists. The SRN students will be among the next generation of researchers
and educators who will continue this trajectory. PoLS topics form natural
recruitment vehicles for students into physics as well as interest the broader
public, workforce, and administration. The SRN activities and eager students
will leverage these strengths, for example disseminating such ideas to K-12
institutions, thereby increasing the flow of students into PoLS in universities.
This award will promote to synergize these activities by running seminars
showcasing SRN alumni with non-academic careers, thereby broadening the pool of
researchers with the PoLS mindset. Investigators in this project will continue
their commercialization efforts of technologies resulting from their research,
adding this aspect to the US PoLS "ecosystem".

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.