* 2310571
* Lattice Gauge Theory at the Intensity Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 46,263.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Carleton DeTar at the
University of Utah.

Our current understanding of the most fundamental elementary particles and
interactions in Nature is encapsulated in the "Standard Model". However, this
theory is incomplete. For example, it cannot explain the dark matter that
permeates the Universe. Thus physicists almost universally believe that still
more fundamental particles and interactions are yet to be discovered. A large
experimental search is underway at accelerators, such as the European Large
Hadron Collider, to find new particles. Even if the accelerator energy is not
high enough to find them, they will reveal their existence through discrepancies
between careful measurements and precise theoretical predictions based on the
Standard Model. Such comparisons are effective only if the residual
uncertainties in the predicted quantities are reduced in tandem with
improvements in the accuracy of experimental measurements. Professor DeTar and
his collaborators are using the most powerful computers and codes to make
precise predictions that can be compared with results of experimental
measurements with particular attention to those cases in which some tantalizing
discrepancies have already been found. This work is in the national interest in
that it furthers our understanding of the most fundamental laws of Nature. The
broader impacts of this work include training students and postdoctoral research
associates in programming and utilizing the highest-performance computers, in
the management of large data sets, and in the statistical analysis and
extraction of physically important information. This experience should prepare
students and postdoctoral research associates for jobs that utilize those
skills, both in industrial as well as academic settings.

More technically, this multiyear project will use methods of numerical lattice
quantum chromodynamics in a precision study of the hadronic environment of
heavy-quark decays --- particularly the bottom quark. The resulting hadronic
decay constants and form factors are then combined with measurements of the
decays of mesons containing those heavy quarks. The project will also calculate
the strong-interaction contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment of the
muon. The resulting value for the hadronic vacuum polarization will be compared
with results of ongoing high-precision experimental measurements of the magnetic
moment. Both comparisons provide stringent tests of the consistency of the
Standard Model and constraints on theoretical models of new physics. The
calculations are intended to be sufficiently precise that it is now necessary to
include the effects of virtual photons. This project will include them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.