* 2310594
* Quantum Integrability
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rafael Nepomechie, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 58,695.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Rafael Nepomechie in the
Department of Physics at the University of Miami.

This project lies at the intersection of two important developments. On the one
hand, the formulation of the Standard Model of elementary particles is one of
the greatest scientific accomplishments of the 20th century. However, this
model, as well as many other mathematical models, cannot be used to make
accurate predictions of processes involving strong interactions, as the
corresponding equations become too difficult to solve. So-called quantum
integrable models lie in the "sweet spot” of theoretical physics: they are
sufficiently complicated to describe interesting physics, yet they are
sufficiently simple to allow for exact analytical computations of some
quantities of physical interest. Integrability has therefore become one of the
main guiding principles in contemporary theoretical physics. On the other hand,
quantum computers, which operate on quantum bits (unlike conventional computers,
which operate on 0's and 1's), are advancing at an astonishing rate. Indeed, the
development and application of such devices are national priorities. The
simulation of quantum systems is widely regarded as one of the best shots at an
economically useful application of quantum computers. Under this grant award,
Professor Nepomechie will work on the simulation of quantum integrable models on
quantum computers. He will also work on the foundations and applications of
quantum integrability. This project is also envisioned to have significant
broader impacts. Professor Nepomechie will provide scientific training to the
next generation of scientists through teaching and mentoring, reaching Miami
high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as students in Africa
at centers of the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS). He will
also continue to give public lectures and engage in other outreach activities,
and will continue serving on the Editorial Board of Journal of Physics A and in
the Editorial College of SciPost Physics.

More technically, Professor Nepomechie and his coworkers will develop algorithms
for preparing Dicke states and their generalizations on quantum computers, and
explore their properties. These highly-entangled states are the starting points
of some algorithms for preparing Bethe states, and are also of interest in their
own right. He will also develop algorithms for preparing exact eigenstates of
integrable models. Professor Nepomechie will also continue working on the
foundations and applications of quantum integrability. Together with coworkers
in Europe, he will investigate integrable quantum spin chains whose continuum
limits are described by so-called black-hole conformal field theories, with non-
compact degrees of freedom. He will also work on computations of bipartite
entanglement entropies, the Quantum Spectral Curve (QSC), and algebraic Bethe
ansatz for higher-rank chains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.