* 2310881
* Multiplex Generalized Dot Product Graph  networks: theory and  applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marianna Pensky, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Stochastic network models appear in a variety of applications, including
genetics, proteomics, medical imaging, international relationships, brain
science and many more. This research project examines collections of such
networks, the so called multilayer network, where each of the individual
networks (layers) have the broadest possible organization and yet possess some
common features that allow meaningful stochastic inference. Examples include
brain networks of different individuals, protein interaction networks, and trade
networks between countries in various commodities. The current project presents
an integral effort of merging applications and theory and will develop
techniques that will be applicable for solution of a variety of real-life
problems involving graph-structured data. Results of this research will be
beneficial for many domains of knowledge that rely on analysis of stochastic
networks where layers belong to different groups: a) brain science research by
providing tools for analysis of brain networks and their variations under
various conditions; b) medical research and practice by providing model-based
explanations on what makes brain networks associated with particular diseases
different from normal; c) molecular biology by developing techniques for
analyzing the enzymatic influences between proteins related to various
functions; d) finance and international relations by analyzing worldâ€™s trade and
financial networks corresponding to various modalities; e) social sciences by
analyzing the similarities and the differences in communities related to
different types of social connections. In addition, the project will provide
ample opportunities for training through various educational activities,
including mentoring Ph.D., M.S. and undergraduate students, teaching a Special
Topics graduate courses, organizing interdisciplinary seminars, and promoting
interdisciplinary research and diversity.

In more detail, the project will study the multiplex network model where all
layers have the same set of nodes, and all the edges between nodes are drawn
within layers, which is true in the applications discussed above. The research
will be built on the notion that the matrices of probabilities of connections
between nodes in layers of the network follow the most versatile Generalized Dot
Product Graph (GDPG) model. GDPG includes all popular block network models as
its particular cases. Although there have been some efforts to extend GDPGs to
multilayer scenarios, the multilayer GDPG formulations have been limited to the
very restrictive case where all networks are generated by the same invariant
subspace. The latter is a direct extension of the SBM-equipped multiplex network
where communities persist in all layers. The deficiency of the above formulation
is that it prevents finding partitions of layers of the network into groups
according to some natural condition. Hence, it is imperative to advance the
multiplex GDPG to the case where groups of layers are embedded into different
subspaces. Finding those clusters of layers will allow to provide model-based
assessments of the differences between networks corresponding to different
conditions. In addition, GDPG will be further generalized to the multiplex
Signed GDPG (SGDPG) network setting, which allows more flexible modeling of a
variety of real life networks. The objective of the project is to provide
various extensions to the multilayer GDPG models, to develop scalable algorithms
and theoretical tools for their analysis, and to apply those findings to
analysis of brain networks. Furthermore, it aims to supplement statistical
procedures with precision guarantees via oracle inequalities and minimax
studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.