* 2310337
* Collaborative Research: EAGER--Initial Evaluation of Polarimetric Phased Array Radar for the Study of Storm Electrification and Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Eric Bruning, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 77,584.00

This project will make use of new weather radar technology to assess the role
that small-scale droplets and ice crystals in clouds have on the development of
lightning. Phased-array radar is a next-generation technology for weather radar
that can provide extremely fast scanning of clouds and precipitation. The fast-
scanning ability is key for detecting key lightning processes that happen on the
order of seconds. The potential societal impact of this project would be the
downstream improvement in lightning prediction, a significant public safety
problem. The project also includes plans for recruiting a diverse cohort of
students to participate in the deployment and data analysis, thereby ensuring
training of the next generation of scientists.

This study will use new phased array radar technology to provide dual-
polarization observations of thunderstorms at very short time scales to study
the storm electrification process. High temporal resolution and full
instantaneous vertical data are critical to characterizing the structures which
promote lightning initiations near storm updrafts, describing the interplay of
lightning channels with microphysical features such as ice crystal alignment
signatures, and exploring the direct scattering of radar signals from channels
within radar-sampled volumes. The S-band Horus radar and the C-band PAIR radar
will be deployed alongside the RaXPol X-band radar within reach of the Oklahoma
Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) network in 10 deployments across 2023 and 2024.
The researchers will conduct a scan sequence repeating every 80 s, including
storm-scale dual-Doppler scans over the full storm volume, to resolve updrafts
and downdrafts, while interleaving essentially continuous updates at lightning
and eddy time scales to provide fast-time and detailed spatial resolution within
mesoscale context. The team will also separate hydrometeors within resolution
volumes using Doppler spectral polarimetry methods to study microphysical
properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.