* 2310178
* Hybrid Bonding Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Samuel Stupp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2026
* USD 491,708.00

Part 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The development of new technologies relies on the discovery and design of new
materials. Polymers have been of critical importance over the past century for
the production of consumer goods, manufacturing systems, transportation,
construction, and medical products, among others. These lightweight soft
materials are produced with chemicals known as monomers that react to form
extremely large molecules (macromolecules) that have posed challenges in
sustainability such as the widely known problem of plastic pollution. Over the
past few decades, the opportunity has emerged to create new materials known as
“supramolecular polymers” in which monomers do not react to form macromolecules
but instead are designed to strongly interact and emulate properties of
traditional polymers. These structures tend not to be as mechanically robust as
traditional polymers but could facilitate recycling and biodegradation, and also
generate materials for advanced applications in energy, electronics, and
medicine. This project investigates strategies to develop new materials termed
“hybrid bonding polymers” which integrate traditional and supramolecular
polymers to create sustainable systems that have suitable mechanical properties
and potential for new technologies. The project will train undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students--including those from underrepresented
groups--in highly interdisciplinary research needed for future technical
challenges at the interface of synthetic organic chemistry, polymer chemistry,
and materials science. Researchers supported by the grant will be encouraged to
participate in science outreach programs for K-12 students in the Chicago area.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY The integration of macromolecules and supramolecular
polymers in which covalent and noncovalent bonds are rationally integrated has
great potential as a key innovation in soft materials. In these “hybrid bonding
polymers”, small molecules forming supramolecular domains could be co-
crystallized with covalent polymers functionalized with the same molecules. This
can generate functional structures in which polymer backbones with mechanical
benefits are covalently connected to sites of crystalline lattices. Hybrid
bonding could also generate more sustainable structures than fully covalent
polymers in which high value-added small molecules can be easily recycled. The
proposed work will develop and investigate these unique structures, their self-
assembly mechanisms, and also the properties of experimental materials.
Specifically, systems to be investigated will include crystallizable
chromophores such as electron donors and acceptors as well as photosensitizers
targeting properties such as photocatalysis, ferroelectricity, and
supramolecular chirality. It is envisioned that potential applications could
include light harvesting materials for photocatalytic solar fuel production,
energy-efficient data storage, and sensing, among others. Beyond the potential
technological impact, the studies proposed here will provide valuable cross
disciplinary training to undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students from
both chemistry and materials science and engineering programs. The cohort of
students will include members of underrepresented groups who will receive ample
support from the PI and other members of the laboratory. Additionally, students
and postdoctoral fellows working on this project will be encouraged to
participate in K-12 science outreach programs that are available through the
University. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.