* 2310000
* RUI: WoU-MMA: VERITAS Analysis Software and Active Galaxy Discovery Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jodi Christiansen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 291,962.00

Astrophysical gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic
radiation, and their observations provide the ability to study physical
conditions and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the
Universe. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope System (VERITAS),
located at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory in southern Arizona, is
designed to provide leading ground-based observations of very-high-energy (VHE)
gamma-rays. This award supports scientists at the California Polytechnic State
University to carry out research with VERITAS and the co-located Cherekov
Telescope Array prototype Schwartzchild-Couder Telescope (pSCT). The group will
conduct analyses of VERITAS data to improve the understanding of VHE gamma-rays
produced in active galaxies, which are favored sources of multiple astronomical
messengers. The supported team of undergraduate researchers will develop and
apply extensions of the VERITAS detection algorithms to conduct target-of-
opportunity observations, including those associated with high-energy
astrophysical neutrino alerts and contemporaneous observations of active
galactic nuclei (AGN) with the Event Horizon Telescope. In addition, the group
will partner with the Center for Engineering, Science and Mathematics Education
to connect with high school teachers in the state via a dedicated curriculum
that builds scientific abilities through investigations of spectra and active
galaxy morphology.

VERITAS and the pSCT utilize imaging Cherenkov telescopes to provide high-
sensitivity pointed VHE (100 GeV â€“ 30 TeV) gamma-ray observations of galactic
and extragalactic sources. AGNs harbor a super-massive black hole at their core
surrounded by an accretion disk and are of particular interest in VHE gamma-ray
studies. Little is yet known about the interaction between the accretion disk
and the black hole, which can produce some of the Universe's most powerful
beamed jets of highly energetic particles and radiation. Combining the
measurements of VHE gamma-rays with multi-messenger observations of neutrinos
and cosmic rays makes it possible to extend AGN science to constrain current
models of acceleration processes. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.