* 2310224
* Explorations in Dark Matter and Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Walter Tangarife, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2026
* USD 31,726.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Walter Tangarife at Loyola
University Chicago.

The research of Professor Tangarife focuses on the interface between two of the
most intriguing problems in particle physics: the nature of dark matter and the
properties of neutrinos. Dark matter refers to an ingredient of the Universe
whose astrophysical effects on galaxies and other astrophysical objects can be
measured, but no other property is yet known. Neutrinos are particles within the
so-called "Standard Model of particle physics‚Äù which are predicted to have no
mass. However, experiments have shown that neutrinos are incredibly light but
not massless. Research in these topics advances national interest by promoting
the progress of science through the efforts to discover and understand the laws
that govern the Universe. In his research, Professor Tangarife aims to explore
testable models where neutrino physics and the dark matter problem are
intertwined. This project will also have significant broader impacts. Professor
Tangarife will involve undergraduate students in his research, providing them
with critical skills of great utility in both academic and private-sector
careers. He will also give public lectures on his research results and organize
outreach events in local community high schools.

More technically, Professor Tangarife will investigate keV sterile-neutrino
dark-matter models in the presence of self-interactions. New interactions
enhance the production mechanism and provide signals to be probed in next-
generation experiments, including DUNE. Additionally, self-interacting sterile
neutrinos make good candidates for self-interacting dark matter, which may be
relevant for small-structure phenomena. This project will also study the effects
of secret neutrino interactions in astrophysical environments, such as the
energy loss in binary systems and the cooling of supernovae. This would allow
new constraints on the parameter space of new interactions. Finally, this
project will investigate probes of the two-neutrino-exchange force via parity
violation in atomic systems and new observable effects in intense neutrino
backgrounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.