* 2310018
* New Frontiers in Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* John Beacom, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Humanity has long been fascinated by the majesty of the night sky. Now, with
powerful scientific tools, scientists can better observe stars, galaxies, and
the universe itself. Researchers can also better understand the mechanisms
behind this majesty. Nuclear physics processes are especially important. Stars
are powered by fusion reactions, supernova explosions produce and disperse
chemical elements, and the remnants of these explosions accelerate high-energy
cosmic rays. A better understanding of these nuclear processes would help us
understand the origin, nature, and fate of the universe. A way forward is
possible using neutrinos, tiny particles with zero charge, almost no mass, and
only weak interactions. Neutrinos are abundantly produced in many astrophysical
objects. Detecting neutrinos is very difficult, but doing so can reveal physical
conditions deep within these sources, beyond the reach of observations with
light. The PI leads a broad program of theoretical work in neutrino astrophysics
designed to lead to breakthroughs in understanding astrophysical objects and
neutrino properties. Junior scientists will be trained on cutting-edge research
as well as career skills. The PI and junior scientists work to share results
with the public and to broaden participation by under-represented groups,
including the deaf and hard of hearing. The PIâ€™s ambitious research program has
three thrusts: solar neutrinos, supernova neutrinos, and high-energy neutrinos.
The central tenet of this project is that a broad, integrated program in
theoretical neutrino astronomy will powerfully address core questions in nuclear
physics while significantly advancing the science of multi-messenger astronomy
and beyond the standard model physics. For solar neutrinos, long-term outcomes
could include significantly reduced detector backgrounds and thus improvements
in the precision of signals from existing detectors, along with facilitating a
high-statistics solar-neutrino measurement in the DUNE detector. For supernova
neutrinos, these could include better observing a Milky Way supernova and
facilitating discovery of the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB). For
high-energy neutrinos, these could include improved probes of atmospheric
neutrinos and facilitating discoveries of astrophysical neutrino sources.
Individually, the main thrusts of this project could each have a very high
impact. Together, they could greatly advance neutrino astronomy, nuclear
astrophysics, and more.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.