* 2310223
* Exceptional Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Oscar Varela, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 225,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Oscar Varela at Utah State
University.

General relativity and quantum field theory have traditionally been thought to
be irreconcilable theories. The former governs the large scale structure of the
universe and is manifestly classical, while the latter describes the fundamental
interactions --- electromagnetic, weak, and strong --- that operate at a
subatomic level. But is it possible that these two seemingly different theories
are actually two different sides of the same coin? Could they be regarded as
"dual" manifestations of an overarching set of physical principles? If this were
the case, general relativity and quantum field theory would complement rather
than conflict with each other, as they would be equivalent albeit with different
applicability regimes. As part of his research project, Professor Varela will
develop aspects of this idea, generally known as the anti-deSitter/conformal
field theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence. This research advances the national
interest by promoting the development of science in a fundamental direction, by
developing relations among the laws of physics at deeper and deeper levels. This
research project will also have broader impacts by providing training for junior
physicists and by disseminating results both to the physics community at large
and to the general public.

More technically, new supergravity tools will be introduced and developed to
construct string theory backgrounds and study their holography. Supergravity
theories in lower dimensions will be analyzed and anti-de Sitter solutions to
those models constructed. Further, new techniques based on supergravity and its
Exceptional Field Theory extensions will be developed to track those lower-
dimensional solutions all the way up to ten and eleven dimensions, thereby
obtaining new fully-fledged string theory solutions. Also, the corresponding
field theory operator spectra and supergravity effective actions will be
computed using novel Exceptional Field Theory methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.