* 2310429
* Research in Particle Theory, Cosmology, and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Leonard Susskind, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 930,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Savas Dimopoulos, Peter
Graham, Renata Kallosh, Andrei Linde, Stephen Shenker, Eva Silverstein, and
Leonard Susskind at Stanford University.

This group of physicists studies a broad range of subjects all aimed at
answering two basic questions: Can we understand the origin and historical
evolution of our Universe? And can we determine the nature of the basic building
blocks --- the elementary particles --- that constitute the world around us? As
part of their research, these physicists will attempt to discover dark matter,
the mysterious substance that makes up most of the matter in the universe, by
designing new detectors based on quantum sensor technology. They will also
explore the beginnings of our universe using information contained in some of
the earliest ‘pictures’ from mere moments after the big bang. Finally, they will
investigate the nature of black holes in order to gain a better understanding of
the fundamental laws of nature. This research also has significant broader
impacts. New tools will be developed which can have applications in diverse
areas of science. Students and postdoctoral fellows who are trained in the
course of performing this research will move on to serve the nation in crucial
ways, whether by joining the next generation of leaders in research and
teaching, or by transferring their expertise to firms which develop important
new technologies in Silicon Valley and beyond. These faculty will also expend
considerable effort in outreach activities in order to bring the fruits of
modern science to the general public through public lectures, videos, and
popular publications, including books accessible to the general public.

At a more technical level, Dimopoulos will search for innovative approaches for
manipulating and detecting the Cosmic Neutrino Background (CnuB). This includes
the construction of a Diffraction Grating for the CnuB, which involves
structures approximately ten meters in size. This technique significantly
amplifies the net neutrino excess by several orders of magnitude, potentially
serving as a crucial initial step towards uncovering the CnuB. Graham will
design and optimize dark matter detectors using electron and ion traps to search
for millicharged particles, axions, and dark photons. Graham will also discover
the science available with gravitational wave observations in the ‘mid-band’,
roughly 0.01 – 10 Hz, which will help in the design and operation of previously
proposed atomic gravitational wave detectors such as MAGIS. Kallosh and Linde
will explore inflationary theory and the theory of dark energy inspired by
supergravity and string theory. Shenker will investigate the fine structure of
quantum black holes. He will use two-dimensional models that have proven useful
in studying non-perturbative effects in quantum gravity. He will also study BPS
black hole states in supersymmetric theories. Silverstein will extend her 3d de
Sitter microstate count in pure gravity to incorporate local bulk matter and
derive physical implications of M theory de Sitter models from hyperbolic
compactifications. She will systematize the theory of non-perturbative non-
Gaussianity and its relation to large scale structure analysis and develop novel
algorithms for AI. Susskind’s research involves holography, and several
candidates for holographic systems which may describe de Sitter spaces have
already been identified. These include matrix theories similar to BFSS matrix
theory, and a promising candidate based on the double-scaled limit of Sachdev-
Yeh-Kitaev theory at infinite temperature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.