* 2310113
* Collaborative Research: IIS: III: MEDIUM: Learning Protein-ish: Foundational Insight on Protein Language Models for Better Understanding, Democratized Access, and Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Amarda Shehu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,948.00

Large language models are massive neural networks that learn rich contextual
representations of words and use such representations to address a variety of
tasks in natural language processing (NLP). These models are a prominent example
of generative artificial intelligence and are emerging as promising approaches
for distilling and organizing the content of massive biological databases and
for predicting a wide range of molecular bio-properties. Yet, we know
surprisingly little about what these models capture in their learned
representations, why they perform well on some tasks and not on others, and how
they can produce deep insight into the relationships describing the biological
space. If progress in NLP is any indication, the current trend of improving the
performance of language models by drastically increasing the number of their
trainable parameters is unsustainable both for our carbon footprint and for
ensuring equity/accessibility of research and scholarship in the academic
setting.

This project advances algorithmic research at the intersection of information
integration and informatics using principled protein language models (PLMs) as
computational vehicles for deeper insight into the structural, functional, and
evolutionary organization across protein space at varying levels of detail and
scale. It also aims to do so in a way that is resource-aware, sustainable, and
accessible to all researchers. The research activities are organized in three
thrusts: (1) encoding prior biological knowledge in PLMs for joint and resource-
aware learning in composite spaces, (2) revealing fundamental properties and
organizing the learned representation space to inform and connect what is
captured with properties of interest, and (3) enabling PLMs to capture diverse
contexts for deeper exploration of the structural, functional, and evolutionary
organization across protein space. This interdisciplinary approach contributes
to the fields of machine learning, bioinformatics, and molecular biology and
provides opportunities at the interface of these disciplines for training under-
represented students of all levels. The investigators are determined to bridge
communities and disciplines, and they have planned activities to build and
galvanize a trans-disciplinary community to further advance their research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.