* 2310510
* Elements: Sustained Innovation and Service by a GPU-accelerated Computation Tool for Applications of Topological Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Cathy Xia, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Topological data analysis (TDA) and persistent homology (PH) are powerful
algebraic topology-based methods for extracting significant topological features
in large datasets, with diverse applications ranging from astronomy to biology,
social sciences, and artificial intelligence (AI). However, with the rapid
advancement of data instrumentation and generative data production, TDA tasks
have become increasingly complex and computationally intensive. Thus, to keep up
with the ever-evolving technological trends of hardware-accelerated software and
increasing demand for fast topological data analytics, a highly efficient
parallel TDA software is crucial. To address this need, the PIs of this project
develop an open-source GPU-accelerated software tool for various TDA
applications, in collaboration with domain experts, software developers, and
high-performance computing researchers.

The objective of this project is to enhance the computing efficiency and ensure
sustained innovation and service of the GPU-accelerated computation tool. The
specific goals of the project are fourfold: (1) to design and implement enhanced
algorithms that efficiently parallelize computations and minimize data movement;
(2) to enable our TDA software on a heterogeneous computing platform; (3) to
design a graphical user interface that attracts non-GPU programming users and
allows integration with other user-level TDA software tools; and (4) to test and
evaluate our open-source software through state-of-the-art applications in AI
and machine learning. These developments will provide timely hardware-
acceleration solutions for TDA applications, make TDA more accessible to
scientists and data analysts across disciplines, and advance scientific
discoveries in the TDA community and industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.