* 2310572
* Constraining Physics Beyond the Standard Model with Cosmological Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Hertzberg, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 85,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Mark Hertzberg at Tufts
University.

Cosmology is an essential tool to learn about physics beyond the standard model.
With no direct evidence of new physics at colliders, we can use astronomical
data to gain clues about new physics. Perhaps the most significant questions
are: What new physics was at play in the early universe? What types of particles
and interactions are in the dark matter and gravitational sectors? This project
will investigate specific sub-topics within these important questions by first
developing theoretical models and then comparing to astrophysical and
cosmological data. This research therefore advances the national interest by
pursuing basic scientific questions of high significance. The project will also
have broader impacts. It will involve graduate and undergraduate students who
will play an important role in analyzing models and performing computational
work; this will help them develop essential research skills. Professor Hertzberg
will also actively advance these topics within the larger physics community.

More technically, Professor Hertzberg will seek to place constraints on the
couplings of the cosmic inflaton to the Standard Model Higgs and other new
particles --- constraints which must be satisfied in order to avoid instability.
As part of this research, Professor Hertzberg will also explore the implications
of (multi-field) ultralight dark matter and explore new physics in the strong
gravity regime. He will also study the behavior of such light axion dark matter
models, including their behavior within the galaxy, and constrain new effective
operators between astrophysical bodies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.