* 2310360
* Memory in a Droplet: Collections of Brain-Inspired Biomolecular Elements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Freeman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 372,722.00

The development of alternative computing approaches is urgently needed as
artificial intelligence methods become prevalent, requiring greater resources
for their execution. One approach to alternative computing draws inspiration
directly from the brain itself, reconstructing aspects of conventional circuitry
through combinations of the ionic transport and selective membranous barriers
present in living tissues. These approaches require low power consumption
through collocating memory and processing units, building memory into the
structure of the material itself. This project builds networks of lipid-coated
droplets as model neurons capable of adapting their properties in response to
the signals they transmit. This ability to tune the exchange across the model
synapses is a crucial component of neuromorphic architectures, and this project
explores controlling the exchanges using emergent mechanics in networks of
interconnected synthetic cells through a combination of mathematical predictions
and experimental observations. Completion of the project will provide a
foundation for dynamic synthetic tissues capable of chemical computation and
able to interface both with conventional electronics and biochemical signals. In
addition, the project provides interdisciplinary training for future scientists
and enhances the development of the STEM workforce by recruiting and training
undergraduate and high school students.

This research provides a new approach to droplet-based neuromorphic materials,
expanding them to larger multidimensional networks of reconfigurable elements.
Investigating these networks of neuromorphic compartments has demonstrated how
the internal droplet states (such as accumulation of charge) may be exploited as
a form of memory. The selected approach recognizes that droplet interface
bilayers may be viewed through the lens of viscoelasticity/viscoplasticity in
soft materials, enabling metastable behaviors. A novel multiphysics model will
be created for simulating adhesive droplet mechanics by combining the electrical
and chemical activities. This model will then be used to explore complex
electrowetting events in collections of biological membranes, guiding the design
of biomolecular neuromorphic materials. Model predictions will be validated
experimentally, and the model will be gradually expanded to study emergent
mechanics present in larger collections of biomolecular elements operating in
unison. This new approach to the brain-inspired material provides long term
synaptic plasticity and the ability to permanently retain changes in the
membranous structure through voltage signals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.