* 2310226
* SBIR Phase II: High-Performance and Green Materials Based on Engineered Cellulose-Producing Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lina Gonzalez, SPADXTECH LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by replacing
plastics with cellulose secreted by genetically modified bacteria in the form of
synthetic leather. This substitution effort will assist the USA in reaching net-
zero GHG emissions by saving over 660 million metric tons of carbon dioxide
(CO2) or CO2-equivalent gases by 2050. Replacing synthetic leathers made from
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) polyurethane (PU) or hide-based leather with bacterial
cellulose will have significant environmental benefits. Being petroleum-based,
PVC and PU production has significant GHG emissions. Genuine leather requires
transport of hides to tanneries, most of which are no longer located in the USA.
Additionally, the water-intensive tanning and dyeing processes produce toxic
wastes. In contrast, growth and processing of bacterial cellulose produces
little to no toxic waste and few GHG emissions. Further, the material is
biodegradable (unlike PVC or PU), which is appealing to consumers in the rapidly
growing market for vegan leather. Scale-up of the production to replace plastics
worldwide with this sustainable material will reduce trash generation and
alleviate the problem of plastic waste in the environment.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enhance the
properties of the existing synthetic leather materials and will develop the
technology to produce large quantities of the material at low cost. Composed of
bacterial cellulose, this high-performance, environmentally friendly material
will impact the textile, construction, and packaging industries. The material
looks, feels, and performs like real leather having desirable properties such as
suppleness, sew-ability, and high tensile strength. The initial focus will be on
creating a vegan leather alternative consisting of multiple cellulose sheets
combined using a proprietary formulation. This project will enable the
refinement of the material to meet industry standards for durability (e.g.,
water resistance, flex resistance, abrasion resistance, colorfastness) and
aesthetics (color and patterns) and will develop the processes for producing the
material at a commercial scale to meet market demand for quantity and price.
Further, the fast-growing bacterial strains provide a competitive advantage for
scale-up. The research will provide a solid scientific foundation to produce
much larger quantities of this cellulose-based material at competitive prices
for other applications such as insulation for the construction industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.