* 2310627
* RUI: Discovering New Sources of CP Violation in Flavor Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Bhubanjyoti Bhattacharya, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Bhubanjyoti
Bhattacharya at Lawrence Technological University.

Although highly successful, the Standard Model (SM) of Particle Physics has
several limitations. One such limitation is its inability to resolve our
universe's matter-antimatter asymmetry puzzle. The amount of matter in the
universe --- surprisingly and unexpectedly â€“-- far exceeds the amount of
antimatter. A fundamental symmetry called Charge-Parity (CP) relates matter with
antimatter. As a result, any new physics beyond the SM (so-called "BSM" physics)
must therefore have a large amount of CP violation in order to help solve this
puzzle. Professor Bhattacharya's scientific research will provide further
insight into our understanding of CP violation in BSM theories involving new
hypothetical particles. Research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in understanding the fundamental properties of
nature through the creation of new theoretical frameworks. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Undergraduate students at
Lawrence Tech, working under the supervision of Professor Bhattacharya, will
employ model-independent techniques to compare data with theory, identify
deviations in experimental measurements from the SM, and create novel solutions
in the form of new-physics models that alleviate tensions within the data.
Professor Bhattacharya's students will thus become familiar with cutting-edge
computational techniques and contribute to the future American workforce.

More technically, Professor Bhattacharya will investigate the decay
distributions of heavy mesons (such as B and D mesons) as functions of multiple
kinematic variables, using several theoretical tools. He will employ flavor-
SU(3) symmetry to investigate hadronic decays and effective-field theory
approaches to explore semi-leptonic decays. His research will examine these
decays in light of new-physics models with hypothetical particles such as
vectorlike fermions, leptoquarks, axionlike particles, and higgslike particles.
These projects will create opportunities for delivering a scientific research-
based education to undergraduate students while generating increased interest in
and greater understanding of particle physics research among the general public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.