* 2310739
* Engineering Biomaterial Properties to Modulate Adipocyte Phenotype
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Julie Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2026
* USD 540,000.00

The number of people in the US that are classified as obese is almost 50% of the
population, and that number is expected to rise. Obesity contributes to a state
of continuous inflammation in fat tissue, and this inflammation increases the
risk factor for conditions such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and stroke.
Although there is a growing epidemic of obesity, there is limited understanding
of how the support material outside of the cell affects the disease state of fat
cells. This project investigates the effect of the tissue components and
stiffness on the contributing response of fat cells toward inflammation. This
knowledge will allow the team of investigators to make tissue mimics that can be
used to develop therapies to treat obesity and the inflammation that occurs.
This research will be used to recruit students from underrepresented groups and
will provide multidisciplinary training in biology, biochemistry, and materials
engineering. Outreach activities include developing new laboratory modules for
female high school students who attend programs hosted by the Women in
Engineering Program at Purdue University.

During obesity, hypertrophic adipocytes secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines that
can cause changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and contribute to a host of
disease conditions. Recent studies show that the composition of the ECM can be
used to cause normal adipocytes to transition into a diseased phenotype.
Conversely, the ECM can be used to rescue adipocyte dysfunction and revert them
to a healthy phenotype. Experiments described herein will examine the
interactions between the biochemical composition and the biophysical properties
of the ECM and their effect on adipocyte dysfunction. The research begins by
defining the effect that hyaluronic acid avidity has on obesity-related
adipocyte dysfunction (Objective #1). Next, the effect that stress relaxation
and stiffness have on adipocyte dysfunction will be determined (Objective #2).
Finally, the interplay between ligand-induced avidity, stress relaxation, and
stiffness have on adipocyte dysfunction will be evaluated in order to understand
the weighted contribution that each factor plays (Objective #3). Taken together,
this work will show how changes in the microenvironment provide cues that guide
adipocyte function and will establish a defined model to better understand
drivers of obesity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.