* 2310815
* IUCRC Phase III University of Florida: Center for Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Bryony Bonning, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2028
* USD 249,994.00

A considerable proportion of agricultural food production is lost to insect and
nematode pests. In addition, some insects transmit disease to plants or to
humans. The development of new pest management approaches is critical for the
sustainable production of sufficient food for the increasing human population,
and for prevention of arthropod-transmitted disease to plants and humans. The
expansion of pest distribution resulting from changes in climatic conditions and
the development of resistance to current control agents, both present
significant ongoing challenges. The Center for Arthropod Management Technologies
(CAMTech) addresses issues to facilitate effective management of the major
insect and nematode pests that impact agriculture and human health. The center
addresses the need for specific knowledge through state-of-the-art research and
provides research tools to expedite delivery of pest management solutions.
Industry partners can utilize these research data and tools to develop new pest
control strategies for the marketplace and to extend the utility of current
management approaches.

As a Phase III Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC), CAMTech
will continue to serve as a platform for innovative, interdisciplinary research
activities at the interface of academia, government, and industry. The center
conducts pre-competitive research of crucial importance to the industrial sector
using advanced methods ranging from lab-based 3D cell culture, genome editing
and single-cell RNA sequencing, to field-based aerial imagery of pest damage.
Research focus areas are: â€˜omics, physiology, resistance, integrated pest
management (IPM) and tools. The center promotes diversity and trains personnel
for potential future employment within the industrial sector. Research expertise
at the University of Florida includes insect physiology and toxicology,
microbiology, integrated pest management and agricultural nematology. University
of Florida participants work with a diverse agriculture and a wide range of
pests of urban and public health importance, resulting from the large number of
invasive species combined with a sub-tropical climate favored by pest
populations. The research needs of industries in the agricultural biotechnology
and human health domains are aligned with the expertise of university
participants providing for the expedited development of pest management
solutions to the benefit of agricultural sustainability and to public wellbeing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.