* 2310614
* Digital Quantum Simulations of Ground States and Dynamics: Analysis and Realizations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tzu-Chieh Wei, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 382,119.00

Quantum simulation employs a well-controlled quantum system to emulate either
the low-energy behavior or the dynamics of another quantum system. It has been
recognized that using classical computers to simulate many-body interacting
quantum systems will incur an exponential barrier that limits the scope of
classical simulation to small system sizes and short duration. Using quantum
simulators, in principle, avoids such obstacles, but there are still challenges.
There have been realizations of various digital quantum computers and they are
more flexible and programmable than analog quantum simulators. This research
focuses on the approach of digital quantum simulations. However, the current
status is that noise and errors occur in these digital quantum devices, limiting
the overall performance. This research will exploit physics knowledge, such as
results from small system sizes or approximations, and employ techniques to
mitigate the effect of noise and errors so as to enhance the capability of
current noisy quantum devices for simulating theoretically modeled quantum
systems. Some of these systems demonstrate symmetry and topological properties
that are not conventional and understanding them extends the progress of
physical science. These quantum simulation techniques can potentially lead to
realizations of simulations of physical models in a regime that is difficult for
current classical computers. This project thus also contributes to advancing
quantum information science and technology, a strategic direction in the
National Quantum Initiative and subsequent roadmaps. It also trains graduate and
undergraduate students and equips them with skills that will be essential for
career advancement in quantum science and technology, as well as contributes to
materials and activities for quantum education at the level appropriate for
high-school students.

This project will investigate various physical models from the perspective of
quantum simulations that will exploit some physics knowledge to design digital
quantum simulation schemes for creating ground states and studying the dynamics
of an initial state undergoing time evolution. Physics models that will be
considered include the spin-1/2 XXZ spin model, the XXZ-Heisenberg models for
the Haldane phase, the Affleck-Kennedy-Lieb-Tasaki models, the Ising gauge
model, and a supersymmetric one. Ground states will be approximated using
variational ansatzes, which are based on physics-motivated adiabatic connection
from an appropriate simple Hamiltonian to the final Hamiltonian. Dynamics will
be studied with discretized Trotter evolution and local observables and
entanglement properties will be probed. Certain realizations on cloud-based
quantum computers will be performed with noise and error mitigation as proof-of-
principle demonstration. The results will be compared with theoretical and
numerical analysis to benchmark the performance and further used as feedback for
improving implementations. Some models possess topological order (either
intrinsic or symmetry-protected), and realizations of these ground states, even
approximate, provide a potential playground to probe nontrivial phases of
matter. The outcomes of this project will also pave the road for making larger-
scale quantum simulations more feasible on current and future quantum
processors. This project offers research training to graduate and undergraduate
students in cutting-edge techniques in quantum simulations. It incorporates
research findings in course materials for the newly developed masterâ€™s program
in Quantum Information Science and Technology at Stony Brook University and
further strengthens efforts in quantum education for high-school students and
teachers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.