* 2310657
* Analog Quantum Simulation of the Dynamics of Open Quantum Systems with Quantum Dots and Microelectronic Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ignacio Franco, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 350,069.00

A central goal in the physical sciences is to develop the capabilities to model
the dynamics of matter according to the rules of quantum mechanics. However, the
computational cost of doing so increases exponentially with system size,
limiting our predictive capabilities to systems with a few degrees of freedom.
In this context, quantum computers offer the potential to revolutionize our
ability to model and understand matter because they can perform some
calculations much faster than classical computers. However, despite ongoing
research, creating a universal and fault-tolerant quantum computer remains
beyond the reach of present-day technology and is thus not near-term. One near-
term application of quantum information processors is analog quantum simulation,
where the physical problem of interest is mapped onto a highly controllable
quantum setup specifically designed for this purpose, and nature is allowed to
do the calculations. The concept of analog simulation is not new. For instance,
wind tunnels are routinely used to simulate hydrodynamic problems that are
simply too challenging for conventional computation. Just as in regular
simulations, these analog simulators allow continuously tuning simulation
parameters, thus enabling interrogating the behavior of matter in ways that are
beyond the reach of direct experimentation. The objective of this project is to
develop a general blueprint for an analog quantum simulator that can be used to
understand the excited state dynamics of molecules immersed in thermal
environments. This is needed, for example, to develop better organic solar cells
or understand vital processes such as photosynthesis and vision. The project
represents a novel strategy in the ecosystem of molecular simulation methods and
has the potential to be of general utility in applications in chemistry, physics
and quantum information science. Specifically, the goal of this project is to
develop the theory of a new analog quantum simulator for the dynamics of open
quantum systems, harnessing semiconductor quantum dots and quantum electronic
circuits. To model the system the PI will use gate-defined semiconductor quantum
dots as they enable the design of highly configurable and coherent quantum
systems. To model the environment the PI will introduce the concept of a quantum
bath synthesizer that is composed of arrays of quantum electronic circuits. The
approach is based on cooling RLC circuits until they behave like dissipative
quantum mechanical oscillators. By judiciously controlling the resistance R,
inductance L, and capacitance C of the circuits, the frequency, quantum
fluctuations and relaxation of each oscillator can be tailored. By considering
an array of them with different frequencies, the physical system acts as a
quantum thermal environment that can be tuned to mimic the dynamics and response
of even complex chemical environments. In this project, the PI will establish
useful mappings between the physical problem and the quantum hardware that
maximize simulation fidelity and minimize experimental requirements. The
operation and utility of the simulator will be tested through computer
emulations of the simulator. The insights from theory and simulation will be
used to establish a useful mapping for the simulation of the dissipative
dynamics of excitons in molecular arrays such as photosynthetic complexes or
Hubbard chains, based on arrays of quantum dots coupled to the quantum bath
synthesizer. The simulator could eventually be used to understand the operation
of realistic quantum devices, to engineer quantum environments that enhance
molecular function, to isolate molecular qubits with enhanced coherence
properties as needed for quantum technologies, to understand elementary steps in
photosynthesis, and to test quantum control strategies in the presence of
quantum environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.