* 2310770
* RUI: Theories of Dark Matter and Baryogenesis Confront Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Tucker-Smith, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor David Tucker-Smith at
Williams College.

Despite its spectacular successes, the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics
fails to address certain questions of fundamental importance. The SM has nothing
to say about the nature of dark matter, a mysterious component of our universe
that has played a crucial role in its evolution. Nor does the SM shed light on
matter-antimatter asymmetry: if the SM were the whole story, virtually identical
quantities of particles and antiparticles produced by the big bang would have
annihilated each other nearly completely, leaving too little behind to form the
structures around today (galaxies, people, and so on). In his work, Professor
Tucker-Smith will explore theories of dark matter and matter-antimatter
asymmetry, with a focus on understanding how these theories can be tested at
existing and planned experiments. Research on these topics advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in an essential direction:
learning about the makeup of our universe and the physical laws that govern it.
Significant broader impacts of this project will come from undergraduate
involvement. By engaging in this research, Williams College students will learn
important ideas, results, and methods relating to particle physics and
cosmology. They will also develop broadly applicable skills through activities
that will include computer programming, statistical analysis, manuscript
preparation, and oral presentation of research findings.

In more technical terms, Professor Tucker-Smith will conduct research in physics
beyond the Standard Model along the following four directions. First, he will
develop and study freeze-in baryogenesis models in which dark matter interacts
with the Standard-Model Higgs particle. Second, he will perform detailed Monte
Carlo studies of the collider phenomenology of electroweak-charged "portal"
particles that appear in freeze-in baryogenesis models and many others. Third,
he will assess how Lyman-alpha forest surveys and other cosmological
observations constrain scenarios with multiple non-cold dark-matter particles.
Finally, he will carry out a comprehensive study of a model of electroweak
baryogenesis in which dark matter plays a central role in asymmetry generation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.