* 2310091
* The Outer Veto for the DarkSide-20k Dark Matter Search
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Shawn Westerdale, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2026
* USD 160,000.00

An astronomical body of evidence indicates that 27% of the energy density of the
universe is composed of dark matter — a form of matter that cannot be described
by the Standard Model of particle physics and only weakly couples to the known
particles. Dark Matter has clear gravitational effects evident in astrophysical
and cosmological observations. A promising dark matter candidate is the Weakly
Interacting Massive Particle (WIMP), a relic of the early universe with weak
couplings to nucleons within atoms. A WIMP halo is expected to surround the
entire galaxy including our solar system. The Earth’s motion relative to it
creates a flux of WIMPs that may scatter on a target nucleus in the detector,
creating a nuclear recoil. The DarkSide-20k experiment seeks to detect such
WIMPs using a 50 tonne active volume of liquid argon (LAr) as part of a "dual-
phase time projection chamber (TPC) detector", capable of completely suppressing
electromagnetic backgrounds. As a result of these measurements, liquid argon
detectors are capable of reaching large, nearly-background-free exposures.
However, neutrons stand out as a remaining prominent background: they are
produced in rare nuclear reactions in detector materials by cosmic-ray muons
interacting with the detector and its environment. These cosmogenic neutrons are
produced with high energies and can penetrate the detector shielding,
potentially producing WIMP-like nuclear recoils in the detector. The work funded
by this grant will finalize the design and carry out the implementation of the
DarkSide-20k Outer Veto, and ensure the detector can operate free of cosmogenic
neutron backgrounds. At the same time, this work will provide valuable hands-on
training to students in detector design and instrumentation through prototyping
and installation work, as well as in skills related to photoelectronics, data
acquisition systems, and simulation and analysis tools needed to inform the
detector design. The work will also develop 3D detector visualization tools for
use in both outreach and in algorithm development.

This project supports the work to be carried out by the University of
California, Riverside group of the DarkSide-20k experiment, responsible for the
design and implementation of the Outer Veto. This work will involve optical and
mechanical simulations of the Outer Veto instrumentation to ensure its stability
and that it meets the requirements needed to eliminate cosmogenic neutron
backgrounds. Based on the simulation-informed design, a small-scale prototype
detector will be built to test the optical and mechanical systems on campus
before deploying them in the full detector. Additionally, cost-effective
reflectors capable of covering large-area detectors with low photosensor
coverage will be tested to ensure that they maintain their reflectance when
submerged in liquid argon. In addition to the instrumentation, the work
supported by this grant will carry out the design and implementation of the data
acquisition and low-level data processing systems for the Outer Veto. The funded
work will also complete the acquisition of the getter for the LAr TPC
purification system. The outreach project funded by this experiment will involve
programming a 3D headset to display an image of the DarkSide-20k detector and
visualize various classes of signals occurring in it. This tool will be brought
to outreach events around the Riverside area, shown to members of the community
and at local schools, and it will provide a useful tool for algorithmic
development while developing analysis tools for use in the DarkSide-20k dark
matter search.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.