* 2310179
* Authentic Learning Modules for DevOps Security Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Akond Ashfaque Rahman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 154,006.00

Information technology (IT) organizations use development and operations
(DevOps) to deliver software-based services rapidly to end-users. During
software development, various documents are often created. These materials,
referred to as software artifacts, may include design documents, source code,
risk assessments, and other project plans or documentation. Software artifacts
used in DevOps yield tremendous benefits for IT organizations. However, without
the secure development of these artifacts, deployed software can contain
security vulnerabilities which malicious users can exploit to cause serious
consequences for organizations. Therefore, students who are poised to become
next-generation professionals need to be educated on (i) the consequences of
security weaknesses that are commonplace in DevOps artifacts and (ii) how
security weaknesses can be mitigated through secure development. This project
aims to create an engaging and motivating learning environment that encourages
all computer science students to learn cybersecurity integration into artifacts
used for DevOps. The project has the potential to transform computer science
education in the cross-cutting areas of software engineering and cybersecurity
and grow a cybersecurity workforce that is well-versed in secure software
development practices and techniques.

Principal investigators from Tennessee Tech University, Kennesaw State
University, and Tuskegee University will collaborate on developing and deploying
authentic learning-based modules for DevOps security education (ALAMOSE). The
ALAMOSE project will leverage authentic learning, which provides students with
practical knowledge to solve real-world problems. Pre-lab content dissemination,
hands-on exercise, and post-lab activities will be included. The modules will be
deployed in existing cybersecurity, software engineering, and IT system security
courses across the three institutions, potentially impacting students from
diverse backgrounds. Faculty workshops and outreach webinars will be employed to
promote the adoption of the modules and to gather and present lessons learned
and experiential feedback. In addition, the modules will be available to
educators nationwide through code and container sharing platforms, such as
GitHub and DockerHub.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.