* 2310746
* Building Predictive Coarse-Graining Schemes for Complex Microbial Ecosystems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Otto Cordero Sanchez, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2026
* USD 193,486.00

Microbial communities play a defining role in global climate, agriculture, food
safety, and environmental health. These systems are highly complex, often
composed of hundreds of interacting species, which makes it very difficult to
predict their behavior in detail. However, it is known that important ecosystem
properties (e.g., the overall production of a nutrient) can sometimes be
predicted without tracking every species, instead using simpler, coarse
representations. Leveraging such "coarse-grainability" could transform our
ability to predict and control these systems, but the phenomenon remains poorly
understood: which properties are expected to be coarse-grainable, and under what
conditions, is not known. This project will draw on methods of theoretical
physics, statistics and learning theory to develop a systematic theory of
ecosystem coarse-grainability, validate it experimentally, and translate it into
practical software tools disseminated to the broader research community. This
work will significantly advance our ability to model and predict the behavior of
microbial ecosystems of complexity as found in nature, such as those responsible
for global nutrient cycling, nitrogen fixation or other key environmental
functions. On a more technical level, the objectives of the project include: (1)
Establishing the theoretical and computational methodology for quantifying
ecosystem coarse-grainability and identifying the Pareto front of the tradeoff
between description complexity and its prediction error for a given community-
level observable; (2) Validating this approach in the laboratory, applying it to
communities of marine bacteria assembled in hundreds of environments spanning
the axes of variation relevant for ocean ecosystems; and finally, (3)
Translating the methodology into shareable software for identifying observable-
specific predictive coarsening of compositional microbial data. Additionally,
this award will support outreach activities targeting students of grades 6-12 in
the St Louis area, emphasizing how the pursuit of predictable models of complex
systems unites diverse areas of science (math, physics, biology and medicine,
including this research), and increase the participation of underrepresented
groups in research through the MIT Summer Research Program initiative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.