* 2310901
* Understanding the merging dynamics of surface nanobubbles and the resulting capillary force between particles from molecular simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Zhi Liang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 62,334.00

Nanobubbles are gas-filled cavities in liquids with diameters ranging from tens
to hundreds of nanometers. The key difference between nanobubbles and ordinary,
larger bubbles is that larger bubbles rise rapidly to the surface of a liquid
and burst, while nanobubbles can remain suspended in liquids for hours or even
days. Due to their unique properties, nanobubbles are extremely useful in a
broad range of technological applications such as froth flotation, wastewater
treatment, detergent-free cleaning, and de-inking. The key process in these
applications is the coalescence of nanobubbles on the surfaces of particles,
which results in the formation of particle aggregates in a liquid. The main
objective of this project is to use numerical simulations and theoretical models
to understand the merging dynamics of nanobubbles and the resulting capillary
force between adjoining particles. The education activities related to this
project will attract high school students, especially those in underrepresented
groups, in the central valley (California) to the engineering program, train
students to conduct research in bubble dynamics, and guide students toward
doctoral research programs in STEM.

This project will use molecular dynamics simulations coupled with continuum-
based theoretical analysis to study the effects of bubble size, surface tension,
contact angle, and surface topology on merging dynamics of nanobubbles and the
resulting capillary force between particles coated with nanobubbles. The
molecular level modeling will enable the study of microscopic details that are
inaccessible to experiments and will provide a fundamental understanding and
quantitative predictions of many key aspects of nanobubble dynamics and the
nanobubble capillary force between particles. Moreover, such microscopic
predictions are not hindered by many assumptions and approximations used in
continuum and theoretical modeling. The modeling results will enable
practitioners to develop strategies for enhancing the flotation rate of
fine/ultrafine mineral particles and to improve removal rates of contaminants in
processes such as wastewater treatment, surface cleaning, and recycling of
paper.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.