* 2310647
* Structural Mechanisms of Bacterial Extracellular DNA-recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kurt Piepenbrink, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 06/30/2026
* USD 630,746.00

Bacteria interact with DNA from their environment to acquire novel genetic
material and to stabilize multi-cellular structures called biofilms. Biofilms
allow bacteria to persist in a variety of conditions where single bacterial
cells could not. The proteins that bind to DNA outside of bacterial cells are
often incorporated into fibers which extend out from the cell. Although the
basic structure of these fibers is known, identification of the proteins that
bind DNA and how the proteins and DNA are incorporated into the fibers are
points of investigation for this study. The overall goal is to identify which
proteins in the fibers bind DNA and how, to determine the specific molecular
interactions critical to the process of assembling bacterial biofilms. As a
result, this project will advance the field of bacteriology as well as train the
next generation of graduate students in the use of quantitative and structural
methods for microbiology. Educational materials centered on microbial fitness
and communities will be developed and shared with local HS teachers and students
through existing university partnerships, a workshop and a summer camp.

This proposal will identify novel mechanisms through which extracellular DNA
(eDNA) interacts with bacterial surface structures and provide a detailed
molecular description of these interactions to understand how the eDNA is
incorporated and how protein-DNA interactions stabilize the biofilms. The
identification and characterization of diverse extracellular DNA receptors will
highlight unique mechanisms of biofilm stabilization, potentially allowing for
the development of interventions for specific bacteria. The project will
identify and characterize novel DNA receptor subunits incorporated into
bacterial surface appendages known to adhere to eDNA, including those from Gram-
positive (Clostridioides) and Gram-negative (Acinetobacter) bacterial species.
Goals of the work include purifying soluble protein constructs, measuring their
DNA binding affinity and determining the structural mechanisms of recognition
through X-ray crystallography. The goal for this aspect of the project is to
create an atomistic description of DNA recognition by these novel receptors.
Additionally, the project will investigate how these DNA receptors are
incorporated into the protein fibers through isolation of natively-expressed
fibers and reconstitution with soluble protein complexes.

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.