* 2310111
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Corbin Covault, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Measurements of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) have provided an
unprecedented view of the universe and access to astro-physics at energies
beyond those accessible at terrestrial accelerators. Observations performed with
the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO), the largest cosmic ray detector array in the
southern hemisphere, have advanced our understanding of UHECR sources, including
how the particles are accelerated in the extreme environments. This award
supports researchers at the Colorado School of Mines (Mines) and Case Western
Reserve University (CWRU) to continue studies of the highest energy particles
via major contributions to PAO instruments. The awarded activities will leverage
innovative techniques to study the PAO detector and atmospheric systematic
uncertainties, making it possible to couple the subtle manifestations of UHECR
sources in the sky with the observed primary particle mass and charge. The team
will also continue the investigations of cosmic ray energy-scale and flux
discrepancies observed between PAO and the Telescope Array Observatory in the
northern hemisphere via the micro-array detecter Auger@TA. The program includes
research training in experimental methods for graduate and undergraduate
students, including potential broader applications for atmospheric science and
commercial GPS timing.

The current PAO measurements of energy spectra, anisotropy, primary composition,
neutrino and photon limits, and proton-air cross-section provide unique access
to the high-energy universe. The influence of the atmosphere on the PAO
fluorescence detector absolute and relative energy-scales remains a crucial
element of science of the observatory, and the test-beam laser facilities
managed by the team are central to the existing array and the on-going upgrade,
AugerPrime. In parallel, the Auger@TA micro-array is currently under
commissioning, with a planned two-year science run that will provide
simultaneous and independent extensive air shower event data to cross-calibrate
PAO and TA detectors. Doing so will permit a first direct comparison of the
cosmic-ray energy-scales of the experiments to determine the origin of the
observed energy-scale and flux discrepancies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.