* 2310622
* RUI: Implications of Non-Minimal Dark Sectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Brooks Thomas, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

One principal aim of these research activities is to better understand the
origin and properties of the "dark matter" in our universe --- an as-yet
mysterious form of matter that neither emits nor absorbs light, but nevertheless
makes its presence felt via its gravitational pull on normal, visible matter.
Over the next decade, a host of state-of-the-art laboratory experiments and
telescopes will provide us with a wealth of new data. Professor Thomas will
investigate novel ways in which we might be able to glean information about the
dark matter --- and about other as-yet-undiscovered particles with which the
dark matter might interact --- from this forthcoming data. The other principle
aim of these research activities is to address fundamental questions concerning
the history of our universe. To what extent could that history have differed
from the canonical picture without the universe looking markedly different to
us? If the history of the universe does in fact depart from the canonical
picture, how could we tell? Answers to such questions would provide us with
clues about the fundamental nature and properties of matter. Professor Thomas
will investigate the scope of possible such departures and how they would impact
the sizes and shapes of galaxies, the properties of ripples in the spacetime
continuum known as gravitational waves (ripples which were discovered less than
a decade ago and are now being used by astronomers as a tool to learn about
black holes and other astrophysical phenomena), and other aspects of the
observable universe which depend on its history. A significant portion of this
award will be used to support undergraduate involvement in these research
topics, thereby cultivating interest among the next generation of scientists and
honing their computational skills.

Stated in more technical terms, the research activities supported by this award
have two principal goals. The first is to advance our collective understanding
about the properties of the dark sector of our universe. This goal involves
developing new methods of probing and constraining the structure of the dark
sector, taking into account the full range of viable possibilities inherent
within that sector. The results of these investigations will inform both
theoretical efforts in dark-matter and dark-sector model-building and strategies
for experimental dark-matter detection. The second goal of the project is to
advance our understanding of how our universe evolved over time from the end of
the reheating period following cosmic inflation to the present epoch. This goal
involves developing methods for distinguishing between possible expansion
histories for the universe on the basis of observational data --- data
concerning, for example, the matter power spectrum or the properties of the
cosmic microwave background. The results of these investigations will inform
both theoretical and observational research efforts in early-universe cosmology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.