* 2310558
* Collaborative Research: Military Service as a Gendered Pathway into STEM
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Hsu-chih Cheng, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 10/31/2025
* USD 210,506.00

The project investigates how gender and military service shape decisions to
pursue science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) degrees and
occupations. Research shows that military service is a pathway into STEM fields.
The project examines how the timing of educational and occupational experiences
shape STEM-related outcomes. It also focuses on how the influence of military
service on STEM trajectories varies by gender ad across demographic groups.
Thus, the project addresses the national need to increase the number of STEM
professionals, diversify the STEM workforce, and optimize the recruitment of
military personnel. Findings from this project assist decision-makers in how to
finetune military recruitment and assignment strategies to optimize strategic
growth and inclusion goals in the Armed Forces. Findings are also important to
federal agencies committed to broadening participation in STEM, and to employers
interested in recruiting and retaining a diverse STEM workforce. Identifying how
military service influences subsequent STEM trajectories presents a timely and
unique opportunity to strengthen both private- and public-sector institutions.

The project pursues a two-pronged approach. First, large-sample analyses involve
integrating multiple restricted-use data sources available via the U.S. Census
Bureau’s Federal Statistical Research Data Centers/FSRDC to construct a
longitudinal database spanning more than two decades: Decennial Census, American
Community Survey, Department of Veterans’ Affairs U.S. Veterans File, National
Survey of College Graduates; plus publicly-available data from the Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System. These analyses involve sophisticated
statistical models on large samples based on millions of respondents in the
FSRDC databases. Methodological contributions involve creating new population
estimates sought by the U.S. Census Bureau and other federal agencies, plus
conducting essential robustness checks that test several distinct STEM
definitions used by federal agencies. Second, to examine the mechanisms that
shape such trajectories of civilian and veteran students, the project relies on
original survey data for a representative sample of current students at a major
US university. This original survey compensates for limitations in the FSRDC
data by homing in on the impact of specific skills and experiences, including
those of student veterans. The survey data are made publicly available via a
data repository, to enhance social science data infrastructure, dissemination,
and transparency. This project is jointly funded by the Sociology Program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Science
of Broadening Participation Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.