* 2310706
* Universal Aspects of Quantum Entanglement in Higher Dimensional Disordered Quantum Magnets
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Istvan Kovacs, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 331,038.00

Entanglement is a distinguishing property of quantum mechanics, offering
fundamentally stronger correlations than classical physics. However, our
knowledge remains limited on how strong quantum correlations emerge in
interacting quantum systems, especially in higher dimensions. Disordered quantum
magnets are not only experimentally relevant, but offer an ideal basis for
efficient computational methodologies to measure quantum correlations. The
existing, sporadic (and mostly low-dimensional) results indicate surprising,
universal laws in how the entanglement of a single subsystem depends on its
shape. Moreover, entanglement measures between multiple subsystems were recently
found to provide additional universal laws in random quantum systems. Such
universal aspects of quantum entanglement are expected to be transformative in
pinpointing quantum phase transitions, as well as in understanding the governing
universality class. The proposed project aims to achieve an extensive,
systematic characterization of the universal aspects of quantum entanglement in
a broad class of interacting higher-dimensional quantum systems. The results
will provide key insights and methodologies to promote our understanding of
entanglement in disordered quantum systems. This project trains graduate and
undergraduate students at the interface of physics, information theory, and
computer science, preparing a diverse group of independent thinkers for a
continuously evolving workforce. Quantum phase transitions are among the
fundamental problems of modern physics, the properties of which are studied in
solid state physics, quantum field-theory, quantum information and statistical
mechanics. Experimental examples in which quantum phase transitions play an
important role are, among others, rare-earth magnetic insulators, heavy-fermion
compounds, high-temperature superconductors, and two-dimensional electron gases.
The proposed research will form the first systematic study of shape-dependent
universal aspects of entanglement at the bipartite and multipartite level in
interacting higher-dimensional quantum systems. The project will characterize
the entanglement entropy of a single extended or skeletal subsystem, as well as
the entanglement negativity between two subsystems and the mutual information
between two or more subsystems. The focus is on the critical and multicritical
points of the paradigmatic random transverse-field Ising model using an
efficient implementation of the asymptotically exact strong disorder
renormalization group method as well as Monte Carlo simulations. The proposed
study will greatly expand the existing literature and provide new insights on
universal aspects of quantum entanglement. The obtained results and the
developed methodologies are potentially transformative in a broad range of
disordered systems, as they provide efficient ways to locate phase transitions
and identify universality classes, even without having access to an order
parameter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.