* 2310035
* Partnership in EPP and STEM Ed Research: Particle Tracking at the HL-LHC and in STEM Education
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Wittich, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This research project aims to better understand the universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass and to simultaneously study how to bring these research concepts and
practices to undergraduate physics students in classrooms and research groups.
It supports the collaboration of an experimental particle physics (EPP) group
and a physics education research (PER) group to achieve this goal. The science
of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the physics of the early universe, of the
elementary particles and their interactions. The discovery of the Higgs Boson
was a major milestone toward understanding the early history of the universe,
and physicists are now preparing for the next big leap in discovery potential:
the High-Luminosity LHC upgrades (HL-LHC). A relatively small number of
physicists are involved in this research, and the diversity of this research
community does not reflect the diversity of the U.S. population. To broaden the
impact of the research, the investigators will develop and evaluate ways to
simultaneously increase the diversity of EPP and broaden participation of
students in this cutting-edge research area using PER tools and approaches. As
part of this effort, the team will design and evaluate instructional materials
to be used both in laboratory courses and with undergraduate researchers. This
project involves the collaboration of an experimental particle physics (EPP)
group and a physics education research (PER) group to conduct cutting-edge
particle physics research and to bring the same cutting-edge research concepts
and practices to the population of undergraduate physics students. For the HL-
LHC, researchers will attack the CMS upgrade challenge on many fronts --
simulation, engineering and design, testing of hardware, and final construction
of devices. A major emphasis will be the development of the track finding
firmware. These efforts will make it possible for CMS to extract the maximum
physics from the HL-LHC upgrade. Adding tracking to the CMS hardware trigger
will improve the sensitivity of the CMS experiment to such diverse topics as
searching for physics beyond the Standard Model and measuring precise properties
of known particles. In this realm, the researchers will confront fundamental
symmetries, the nature of mass, the dimensionality of space, and the
cosmological origins of the universe. Simultaneously, the investigators will
conduct a controlled and an observational study of educational interventions to
bring the EPP research concepts and practices to undergraduate physics students
in classrooms and research groups. Building on models of Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs), which have been especially used in
biology and some other STEM fields to redesign courses and curricula, the
research team will evaluate the efficacy of the CURE framework as applied to
physics as a way to bring EPP research concepts and skills to the undergraduate
curriculum and to broaden participation in EPP research. This effort will
require innovative collaboration between PER and EPP experts to design and
evaluate discipline-specific, authentic, educationally sound instructional
materials that will directly benefit both the classroom and the LHC. This
project is in response to NSF 22-097, "Dear Colleague Letter: Partnership in
Experimental Elementary Particle Physics and STEM Education Research to Promote
Broadening Research Participation." This award is jointly funded by the Physics
Division (PHY) and the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) in the
Directorate for STEM Education (EDU).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.