* 2310061
* MRI: Acquisition of Hydrogen/Deuterium eXchange Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Matthew Gentry, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 54,118.00

An award is made to the University of Kentucky to acquire a Hydrogen/Deuterium
eXchange (HDX) Mass Spectrometry System. HDX is a cutting-edge technique that
will allow researchers to move from static understanding of biomolecule
structure to a dynamic view of macromolecules and macromolecular interactions.
The system will provide the critical capabilities of a unique and powerful
research technology to researchers at the University of Kentucky, to the
Appalachian region, and other partner investigators and institutions.
Acquisition of the system will be coupled with initiatives to improve education
and training in the Commonwealth and beyond. The training activities include
classes for both students and faculty. Additionally, outreach through inclusion
of PUIs, synergy with Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) programs, and
involvement of High School STEM outreach and education will maximize the impact
of the acquisition. Overall, this will also result in development of a diverse
and globally competitive STEM workforce and increasing public scientific
literacy and engagement with science technology.

Recent advances have positioned HDX as a powerful general technology based on
measuring differential solvent accessibility to address key structural,
biological, biophysical, and materials questions. The new HDX system will serve
a broad range of users and enable a convergence of research that probes
fundamental biological and material systems. Research topics supported by the
new system include glucan dikinase function in starch metabolism, flavin-based
metabolism studies, viral membrane fusion, DNA repair mechanisms, microtubule
assembly, and a range of other interesting subjects. Data generated will advance
key fields including biochemistry, structural biology, biological sciences,
biophysics, and materials. To ensure maximum benefit from the HDX equipment, the
researchers will ensure dissemination of knowledge through peer-reviewed
publications, presentations at scientific meetings, and presentations to the
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.