* 2310259
* EAGER: Evaluation and implementation of a newly developed olfactometer for the study of sensory ecology in small marine organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Paul Sikkel, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,953.00

Chemical cues play critical roles in the life of marine organisms and influence
essential behaviors such as finding habitat, food, and mates, and avoiding
predators. Research on the role of chemicals in the behavior of animals in the
ocean has focused mostly on a small number of organisms, primarily larger,
“charismatic” organisms, leaving most species completely ignored. Small
organisms are by far the most abundant and diverse and have major ecological
importance. The so-called “smaller majority” even includes larval or juvenile
forms of some larger species. Yet, their small size has left them particularly
neglected. Despite decades of research on the importance of chemicals in the
behavior of marine organisms, the sophistication of testing apparatus for small
marine organisms in particular has changed little and lags far behind systems
used for similar studies on insects. The traditional “set up” for marine studies
involves using a two-choice channel flume, which provides a variety of
limitations and areas of potential bias. In insect studies, the use of airflow
“olfactometers” has eliminated many of these limitations. However, adapting
these devices for use on marine organisms is complicated because of the unique
properties of water compared to air. We have assembled a team of experts in the
fields of hydraulic engineering, sensory biology, and marine biology to develop
a device like those used for insect studies that can be used on marine
organisms. The goal of this project is to test this new device, which stands to
fundamentally change the way we study the behavioral response of marine
organisms to chemicals.

This project aims to validate a newly adapted olfactometer for use in research
on behavioral responses to chemicals in small, aquatic organisms. Testing of the
olfactometer will be conducted at the University of Texas’s Marine Science
Institute, and the Keys Marine Laboratory, both of which provide modern marine
research facilities and easy access to test organisms. Three organisms will be
used to validate the olfactometer. These include Daphina spp., fish-parasitic
gnathiid isopods, and juvenile stages of scleractinlan (stony) corals. All of
these can be easily obtained and data on important chemical cues is already
available for them. All organisms will be exposed to a test chemical within the
olfactometer, and their behavior observed. The movement of the organism within
the olfactometer will be recorded and analyzed using Ethovision XT software,
allowing for a high volume of data to be collected, including data indicating
attraction or avoidance of chemical stimuli. This research will help place
marine researchers on a level playing field with terrestrial researchers by
upgrading the toolkit for studies on the response to chemicals by small
organisms in an ever-changing ocean

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.