* 2310158
* WoU-MMA: Very-High-Energy Gamma-Rays as a Unique Probe of Multimessenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Juan Santander, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,946.00

The observation of astrophysical “messengers” across the electromagnetic
spectrum, gravitational waves, and neutrinos, provides a unique opportunity to
study some of the Universe’s most extreme phenomena. Very high-energy (VHE)
gamma-rays play a unique role in these measurements as they probe astrophysical
environments where particles are accelerated to some of the highest energies
observed. This award supports researchers at the University of Alabama to study
multi-messenger astrophysics with the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope
System (VERITAS) and the future Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) observatory. The
research program carries out two dedicated searches. The first search is for
sources of astrophysical neutrinos by combining VERITAS VHE gamma-ray
observations with high-energy neutrinos detected by the IceCube Neutrino
Observatory. The second is searches for VHE gamma-ray counterparts to
gravitational wave events. In addition, the group will provide a dedicated
training program that includes undergraduate students, will develop a
Masterclass in high-energy gamma rays for local high schools, and generate
Spanish-language materials that introduce the broad public to multi-messenger
astrophysics.

The combined study of the neutrino and gamma-ray sky in the TeV – PeV energy
range can provide important insight into some of the most pressing questions in
high-energy astrophysics, including the acceleration and propagation of cosmic
rays, the characterization and localization of compact object mergers, the study
of supermassive black hole systems, and the properties of energetic transients
like gamma-ray bursts. As many of the underlying processes are expected to be
responsible for simultaneous gamma-ray and neutrino emission, joint studies
benefit from the interconnection between multi-messenger channels. This includes
VERITAS observations coincident with real-time high-energy astrophysical
neutrino events, long-term observations of candidate active galactic nuclei, and
comprehensive studies of bright blazars and other types of extragalactic sources
to probe the mechanisms of potential neutrino emitters. This project advances
the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.