* 2310080
* Experimental Physics Research Program at Columbia University/Nevis Laboratories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Shaevitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,280,000.00

This award covers the Columbia University activities in several major ongoing
programs: ATLAS and the ATLAS HL-LHC upgrade at the CERN Laboratory, and the
Short Baseline Neutrino (SBN) and the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment
(DUNE) programs at Fermilab. Particle physics considers a vast range of
questions, from subatomic to cosmic scales. The current Standard Model (SM) of
particle physics is believed to be only an approximate theory, and new physics
beyond the SM holds the key to making progress in understanding the underlying
theory. To discover if there are new symmetries or physical laws yet to be
uncovered, one must search for new particles or interactions, or look for
deviations from the SM through precision measurements. The Columbia program is
preparing to do this by helping to develop and run new detectors that have
better measurement and data collection capability. The group is also at the
forefront in developing improved data analysis using artificial intelligence and
machine learning computing techniques and instrumentation. The Columbia group
has very strong education and outreach programs that cover students from high
school (and even younger) through graduate/post-graduate school, including a
summer REU program for undergraduates that has been operating since 2001. The
group also maintains a very popular monthly public lecture series, called
Science-on-Hudson, that presents the science that physicists do and how it is
done to a general and diverse audience.

This award will concentrate work in two areas: collider physics at the energy
frontier, with the ATLAS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC), and
neutrino physics both probing neutrino properties and using neutrinos as probes
through synergistic short- and long-baseline neutrino experiments. For all of
these programs, the highly skilled group of faculty, postdocs, and students
allows the Columbia group to take on major roles in physics analysis, as well as
in instrumentation. The group’s ability to take on major experimental projects
is made possible by the facilities at Columbia University’s Nevis Laboratories,
including a world-renowned electronics shop, large high-bay areas, and
significant computing resources. As examples, the group led the development of
the ATLAS liquid argon (LAr) calorimeter readout, now leads its upgrade, and
continues to make leading contributions to LAr operations. For the neutrino
program, the group has led the development and production of the readout
electronics and trigger for the MicroBooNE and SBND experiments, including
methods and instrumentation which are also being applied to the future DUNE
experiment. Some of the main physics goals of the proposed research program
include: supersymmetry searches, dark energy and extra spacetime dimension
explorations, probing the fundamental properties of the Higgs boson, addressing
unanswered questions related to the number of neutrino species and fundamental
symmetries between neutrinos and antineutrinos, answering if neutrinos have
unexpected properties that give them a special place among other particles, and
hunting for possible “dark sector” physics through direct dark matter searches
or using neutrinos as a gateway to this new sector.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.