* 2310217
* Fusion Pursuit for Pattern-Mixture Models with Application to Longitudinal Studies with Nonignorable Missing Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lu Tang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 64,908.00

Missing data is ubiquitous in scientific research, challenging the accuracy of
statistical analyses, the results of which will ultimately generate knowledge
and guide policy or decision making. This project aims to develop a suite of new
statistical tools to address the challenges in analyzing longitudinal studies
with nonignorable missingness, such as informative dropout. The principal
investigator will incorporate a machine learning approach termed fusion pursuit
into the pattern-mixture modeling framework to achieve more efficient estimation
and inference in longitudinal association analyses. The methods will find broad
use in survey, medical, and policy research, and in other areas that involve
longitudinal studies with a heavy presence of missing data. The project will
also integrate research with the training of graduate students, developing
trainees in the topics proposed through research involvement and teaching.

The project will extend the estimation and inference capabilities of pattern-
mixture models in analyzing longitudinal data that are subject to missing not at
random. Formulated in the framework of generalized estimating equations, this
research develops a post-stratification fusion pursuit strategy to overcome
over-stratification by missing-data patterns, which is the bottleneck of
pattern-mixture models in analyzing large-scale data sets. The project will
first develop a regularization approach to simultaneously collapse redundant
missing-data pattern strata and estimate parameters of interest. To ensure valid
statistical inference, the project will then develop a post-fusion inference
approach to derive valid and generalizable confidence regions. Finally, the
project will demonstrate the developed approaches in three situations of real-
world longitudinal studies, including missing visits, missing covariates, and
distributed data. The research project is expected to broaden the use cases of
pattern-mixture models in analyzing longitudinal studies with missing data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.