* 2310974
* Collaborative Research: Learning and forecasting high-dimensional extremes: sparsity, causality, privacy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Gennady Samorodnitsky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The principal goal of this research project is to learn how to forecast future
extreme observations and to assess their impact. On an almost daily occurrence,
the public is inundated with news accounts related to extreme observations
arising from extraordinary climatic events from extended and severe droughts to
extraordinary precipitation records, to record heat waves that have reached
virtually every region of the US in one form or another. These extreme events
appear unexpectedly, can be dangerous and occur in combinations that may or may
not be coincidental. Do tropical storms become more deadly as global
temperatures rise? Does extreme violence become more widespread as the economic
conditions worsen? Questions of this type are studied by climate scientists and
social scientists respectively, but statistical and probabilistic analysis of
extreme values is an indispensable ingredient in any analysis. Modern
statistical analysis of extremes is both blessed by the deluge of the amount of
available data and cursed by this deluge. The available data are often high
dimensional and contaminated. The necessity of quick forecast of future extremes
and corresponding policy updates require online analysis of extremes. This
research aims to evaluate causal impacts of various factors from a potentially
large array of variables including changing environmental conditions,
demographic movements within the US, changing landscapes, and changing economic
conditions, on the frequency and magnitude of extreme events. From many
variables, the hope is to produce methodology to extract the important features
in the data that have a direct impact on describing and predicting extremes.
This research also revolves around the notion of differential privacy and aims
to develop tools for releasing global characteristics of a data set without
revealing individual level information. The focus of this research will be
related to developing differential privacy procedures that are tailored to
extreme value characteristics of large data sets, which is challenging because
extreme observations are precisely the ones that reveal the most individual
information.

An overarching objective of this research project is to adapt modern statistical
learning tools to the problem of forecasting extremes. Learning the structure of
extremes presents difficult challenges due to both a limited number of extreme
data and to the scarcity of extremal labels. One approach is to develop methods
for detecting nonlinear sets of much smaller dimension that can provide an
adequate description of extremes in high dimensions. A main thrust of this
research is to develop powerful modern learning techniques (such as graph-based
learning methods and kernel principal component analysis) that allow one to
determine the extremal support from the data. A second main thrust of this
research centers on the issue of causality in both small and large dimensional
problems. In the most basic form, a set of variables X is said to be tail causal
to a dependent vector Y if certain changes in X (sometimes themselves extreme
but not always so) impact the tail behavior of Y. The potential outcomes
framework for causality of extreme events will be a major focus in this
proposalâ€™s research agenda. A third main thrust of this research is about
differential privacy in the context of extremes, which provides tools for
releasing global characteristics of a data set without revealing individual
level information. This is achieved by modifying the data before releasing it
and, in particular, randomizing it, in such a way that the output of the
procedure does not depend too much on any specific observation while still
allowing for statistical inference for certain characteristics of the original
data set.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.