* 2310189
* Conference: NSF INCLUDES: Gathering to Create Culturally Relevant Biomimicry Pathways to STEM for Indigenous Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Sara El-Sayed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Holgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,988.00

Indigenous students and Native ways of learning and knowing are vastly
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields. To
address this challenge, we propose an in-person gathering to gain an
understanding across disciplines and worldviews. The purpose of this proposed
gathering is to further the INCLUDES Initiative goal of catalyzing the STEM
enterprise to be more inclusive by exploring culturally relevant biomimicry
pathways to encourage more Indigenous students into STEM fields. We see this
gathering as phase one of a multi-year collaboration that builds synergies
between biomimicry, Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), and Indigenous
communities.

Low enrollment by Indigenous students in STEM is attributed to STEM’s exclusive
roots in Western science with little acknowledgment of Indigenous ways of
knowing, along with limited curricular linkages to their lived experiences. To
address this low representation, we postulate that biomimicry, an emerging STEM
discipline of emulating nature to create sustainable designs, could attract
Indigenous students. Biomimicry recognizes multiple scientific roots, many
shared with Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) of Indigenous peoples, of
having a deep respect and relationship with nature. We propose a gathering where
biomimicry acts as a bridge between Western and Indigenous knowledges, providing
a pathway to broaden academic understanding of what constitutes valid science,
thus engaging more Indigenous students in a wider array of STEM fields and
becoming more inclusive and holistic. The gathering is based on an ethical
framework of knowledge co-production built on reciprocity and relationality with
an Indigenous-led planning committee and a focus on place-based knowledge of a
desert ecosystem. Our aim is to expand solutions to environmental problems and
healing ecosystems through two-eyed seeing –an approach of viewing the world
through an Indigenous lens with one eye while the other eye sees through a
Western lens, creating a more holistic and inclusive vision.

This project is funded by NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson Inclusion across the
Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering
and Science (INCLUDES) Initiative, which seeks to motivate and accelerate
collaborative infrastructure building to advance and sustain systemic change to
broaden participation in STEM at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.