* 2310589
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Star-Planet Interactions Around Low-mass Stars
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Jacqueline Villadsen, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 109,853.00

A collaborative team from the University of Colorado and Vassar College will
study magnetic fields of planets found beyond the Solar System. Magnetic fields
shape how planets evolve over time. However, magnetic field properties are
currently unknown for almost all planets outside our solar system. When the
magnetic fields of planets and stars interact, they produce radio waves. By
detecting these radio waves, the project can measure the magnetic fields of
planets. The investigators will search for these radio waves and measure their
properties. The team will also make computer models to explain the brightness of
the radio waves using the magnetic properties of star and planet. This research
will train future astronomers and engage undergraduate students in scientific
careers. The team will share this research with a broad audience with a
planetarium program, available in both English and Spanish. They will also
create high-school-level educational materials based on the research results.

This project will examine magnetic star-planet interactions from low-mass stars
through interconnected observational and theoretical investigations. The
investigators will follow-up newly discovered planetary systems from NASA's
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) mission. TESS has multiplied the
population of known planetary systems predicted to have a detectable signature
of radio star-planet interaction. These planets have orbital periods of less
than 1 one day, making it feasible to observe complete orbital cycles using
ground-based telescopes. Telescopes will be employed to search for periodic
radio emission induced by magnetic interactions between low-mass stars and their
innermost planets. The team will close knowledge gaps by characterizing the
target starsâ€™ magnetic fields via Zeeman broadening and improving planetary
radii via transit photometry. To interpret the radio observations and better
understand the ability of close-in exoplanets to power radio interactions, the
investigators will carry out 3D modeling of the circumplanetary magnetic/plasma
environment for magnetically active and inactive stellar hosts. These
simulations will characterize planetary atmospheric mass-loss, its dependence on
stellar and planetary magnetic properties, and what effect these have on the
generation of radio emission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.