* 2310412
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Graph Analysis: Integrating Metric and Topological Perspectives
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Facundo Memoli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,985.00

Graphs are one of the most common types of data across various application
fields in science and engineering. Graph analysis has been central for multiple
communities, including the classical graph theory community, network analysis,
graph optimization, as well as the modern day graph learning communities.
Traditionally, graphs are regarded as purely combinatorial objects. However, as
applications of graphs proliferate, they tend to be regarded as much richer
structures. For example, a graph might be viewed as a noisy skeleton of a hidden
geometric domain, and there could be rich, complex data associated with its
nodes or edges. While this viewpoint is not new, existing algorithmic treatments
of graphs have not yet fully leveraged this perspective. In this project, the
investigators aim to further integrate various (geo)metric and topological
perspectives into graph analysis in order to enrich graph analysis algorithms
and broaden the range of methodologies one can use to tackle diverse graph
related tasks. This project will integrate ideas and notions from metric
geometry, applied topology, spectral geometry and also algorithms to develop new
perspectives and effective methods to analyze complex graphs. It will inject new
ideas to graph analysis and learning, while at the same time also advancing the
field of geometric and topological data analysis. Given the ubiquity of graphs
data, methods resulting from this project can potentially impact various
application fields, from scientific domains such as molecular biology, materials
science, neuroscience, to engineering domains such as chip design. Results from
this project will be integrated into the data science curriculum, strengthening
the workforce by training undergraduates and graduates in data science.

More specifically, the investigators will consider a range of important problems
related to the study of individual as well as of collections of graphs. A
central theme of this project is to view graphs as objects enriched beyond their
combinatorial structures. Two specific research thrusts that the investigators
will focus on are: (1) various graph distances, trade-offs between their
discriminating power and computational complexity, and potential applications in
graph sparsification and in the study of graph neural networks; and (2)
modeling, recovering and using (potentially higher order) structures in graphs.
To tackle the challenges emerging from these two research thrusts, the
investigators will use various metric and topological methods. Examples include
viewing graphs as metric spaces and bringing in topological tools (e.g., the
interleaving distance from applied topology) to compare them; viewing graphs as
metric measure spaces so as to use optimal transport ideas; and bringing
together topological persistence through the high dimensional Laplace operator
to study spectral structures induced by graphs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.