* 2310275
* New Physics in Artificial Spin Ice via Materials Innovation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Peter Schiffer, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2027
* USD 389,786.00

Non-Technical Abstract

Magnetic materials are extremely important technologically, and magnets that
have size scale in the range of nanometers are especially important in a range
of applications, such as hard disk drives. The fundamental physics of such tiny
“nanomagnets” is also exciting, because collections of them show behavior that
cannot be observed in any other physical system and can be controlled very
precisely. Collections of these nanomagnets in certain carefully designed arrays
are called “artificial spin ice” because they share some underlying physics with
water molecules in ice. This research program studies such artificial spin ice
composed of carefully chosen materials that result in a wide range of unusual
behavior that would otherwise be inaccessible and could have significant
technological implications once explored and understood. While the vast majority
of prior research in this area uses only simple magnetic materials, this work
will introduce more exotic materials to access specific, unusual, and
potentially useful physics. Aside from connections to possible technologies, the
research will also contribute substantially to the education of both
undergraduate and graduate students, and the research efforts will inform the
investigators’ work on behalf of the larger research ecosystem in the nation.

Technical Abstract

The research program will significantly expand the physics that can be probed in
artificial spin ice by fabricating arrays from strategically chosen, innovative
ferromagnetic materials through a collaboration between two investigators with
highly complementary expertise, in materials fabrication and characterization,
and magnetic measurements. The research will focus on three thrusts: 1. New
artificial spin ice physics enabled by magnetic moments that point out of the
plane of the structures, exploring cooperative phenomena that are inaccessible
with in-plane moments. 2. Artificial spin ice behavior and superparamagnetism in
the regime of strongly-temperature-dependent magnetization. 3. Emergent
materials-induced electronic transport phenomena through networks of connected
artificial spin ice. The research findings may have technological relevance in
new computing paradigms and in magnonics. Undergraduate and graduate student
researchers will be deeply involved in the research efforts and will gain a
range of skills to advance their professional development. Both investigators
will also leverage their involvement in various activities to further support
the national research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.