* 2310833
* RUI: Thermal Transport across Liquid-gas Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Zhi Liang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,014.00

Evaporation and condensation of micro/nanodroplets are of great importance to
various engineering and environmental applications such as spray cooling, spray
combustion, and cloud formation. It is essential to accurately predict the
evaporation/condensation rates for these small droplets for achieving a more
efficient use of micro/nanodroplets in these applications. Although evaporation
and condensation processes have been studied for over a century, the existing
relationships that model evaporation and condensation processes often predict
results that are inconsistent with, or even contradictive to experimental data.
The main objective of this project is to use numerical and theoretical methods
to fundamentally understand heat and mass transfer across liquid-gas interfaces,
and evaluate the thermal resistance at liquid-gas interfaces to help elucidate
these inconsistencies. The education activities will attract underrepresented
high school students in the central valley (California) to the engineering
program, train the students to conduct research in micro/nanoscale heat
transfer, and guide minority students to Ph. D. programs in STEM.

Two heat transfer mechanisms, namely, evaporation and heat conduction, often
occur simultaneously at evaporating liquid surfaces, such as the water
evaporation in air. To elucidate the roles of each of the two mechanisms in heat
transfer across liquid-gas interfaces, this project uses molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations coupled with the kinetic theory of gases to quantitatively analyze
heat and mass transfer at evaporating/condensing liquid surfaces under a variety
of driving force conditions. Furthermore, MD simulations can determine the
temperature, density, and the mass accommodation coefficient of fluid near the
liquid-gas interface with high fidelity, which allows the validation of the
various relationships that model the heat and mass transfer at liquid-gas
interfaces. Based on MD simulation results and kinetic theory analysis, this
project will derive appropriate boundary conditions for continuum-level modeling
of evaporation/condensation processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.