* 2310949
* Center: IUCRC Phase I Carnegie Mellon: Center for Quantum Computing and Information Technologies (Q-CIT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Elias Towe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2028
* USD 150,000.00

The Center for Quantum Computing and Information Technologies (QCiT) will map
complex, but important practical problems in selected sectors of industry onto
emerging and future quantum processors. Complex problems have very large number
of variables that interact in complicated ways; such problems are challenging to
solve on classical computers. Since future quantum processors are expected to be
massively interconnected, QCiT will also investigate schemes for interconnection
networks among processor nodes; this same type of network is also critical for
high resolution and precision quantum sensors. Furthermore, when appropriately
designed, quantum networks can be the basis for ultra-secure information
systems.

The overarching goal of QCiT is to create and nurture an ecosystem where
industry, government laboratories, including Federally Funded Research and
Development Centers, work collaboratively with faculty and students on use-case
problems that accelerate translation of quantum computing and information
technologies to practice. This will be achieved by developing and constructing
two critical test-beds: one for quantum computing, and another for quantum
networks for investigating devices for quantum information encoding,
transmission, and detection. Such a network permits investigation of protocols
and algorithms for manipulating and processing quantum information. The two
test-beds (i) unify the research efforts of the center by providing common
overarching objectives, (ii) serve as developments tools for component and
device technologies, (iii) provide platforms for developing practical protocols
and algorithms, and (iv) provide an essential infrastructure for training a
workforce in quantum computing and information technologies.

Classical computing and information technologies have had transformative impacts
on society. Quantum computing and the associated information technologies will
radically change how information is processed and transformed. The ecosystem of
the proposed center provides the foundation to address an unmet need of
translating practical use-case applications to quantum computing research
problems that can be readily solved and demonstrated in our unique test-beds,
while simultaneously developing and training a multidisciplinary workforce that
is essential for meaningful exploitation of the technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.