* 2310229
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Mitochondrial Populations: from Social to Physical Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Elena Koslover, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2028
* USD 436,130.00

Mitochondria, the energetic powerhouses of eukaryotic cells, play a critical
role in maintaining cell health and function. These organelles exhibit a variety
of dynamic behaviors, including motor-driven transport, fusion, fission, and
autophagic recycling. The balance of mitochondrial fusion and fission varies
between different cell types and environmental conditions, allowing for the
formation of both topologically connected physical networks and social networks
of globular units that engage in transient interactions. As a population,
mitochondria must be able to rapidly deliver signals and metabolic products to
far-flung cellular regions, to maintain their own health and energy-producing
capacity, and to respond in a concerted manner to environment changes.

This award will develop a fundamental understanding of how the dynamics of
mitochondrial populations gives rise to their spatial structure and mediates the
transport of material through the population. The research approach will focus
on the development of mathematical and physical models that link morphology and
mixing dynamics on networks. The award aims for a general framework that will
tie together behavior of social and physical networks. These models will help
establish how a wide variety of mitochondrial features arises from a handful of
basic parameters, including local fusion and fission rates, processive transport
rates, and the geometry of the cellular domain. The theoretical work will be
carried out in close collaboration with experimental measurements of
mitochondrial populations. This work will deepen our understanding of a
functionally critical organelle population whose structure and dynamics play a
fundamentally important role in cellular health and whose perturbations are
associated with a broad variety of human disorders, from neuropathies to cancer
and aging.

An integrated educational program will be developed to promote student interest
and competency in cross-disciplinary scientific inquiry, targeting elementary to
undergraduate students. This program will feature the Young Scientistâ€™s Club
(YSC) run by the PI at a local elementary school, which enrolls 2nd and 3rd
grade students for two sessions a year. During the YSC meetings, students learn
about key concepts that span across physics, chemistry, and biology, and engage
in hands-on activities that illustrate those concepts. These research
opportunities will enable students to acquire skills in data processing and
numerical simulation, as well as gain exposure to interdisciplinary research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.