* 2310066
* RUI: An Inference Methodology to Illuminate Nonlinear Neutrino Flavor Transformation for Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Akif Baha Balantekin, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Probing the physics underlying cosmic explosions is vital for understanding the
makeup of the observable Universe. The explosions of massive stars are candidate
sites for the nucleosynthesis of some heavy elements – the building blocks of
life on Earth. Important aspects of these explosions, however, are difficult to
access via traditional approaches in nuclear astrophysics. This is due both to a
lack of adaptability of existing codes to the required mathematical framework,
and to computational expense. Moreover, important features of the physics remain
artificially hidden from the tools built to describe them. Inference (related to
the common term “machine learning”) is an alternative methodology. In the
geosciences and neurobiology, inference has for decades illuminated problems
akin to those that hinder progress within nuclear astrophysics. For that reason,
recently inference has been brought into astrophysics, where proof-of-concept
simulations have been successful. This project builds beyond those tests,
integrating inference into larger-scale codes and handling real astrophysical
data. Innovations cultivated within one scientific arena can be transformative
when expanded for disjoint fields. Integral to the research is the training of
undergraduates, many with socio-economic backgrounds under-represented in
science. Students also engage in comedic science outreach, to build
communication skills. The physics noted as “artificially hidden” from
traditional techniques is direction-changing backscattering in the neutrino
flavor field in these high-density environments. Neutrinos are elementary
particles whose “flavor” dictates the manner in which they interact with other
particles. Flavor in large part sets the neutron-to-proton ratio as well as
energy and entropy deposition, thereby in-part dictating the mechanism of
explosion and nucleosynthesis. Backscattering in the flavor field can
significantly shape the explosion. But it presents a two-point boundary-value
problem: a framework that traditional numerical integration is ill-equipped to
handle. This project applies statistical data assimilation (SDA) to illuminate
this problem. SDA is a Bayesian inference methodology, invented for numerical
weather prediction, to predict sparsely-sampled nonlinear systems. SDA is well-
suited for solving boundary-value problems, and it is expected to outperform
integration in computational efficiency. This project builds upon previous work
that established that SDA can 1) outperform integration in terms of solving a
direction-changing backscattering problem, 2) search parameter space more
efficiently than integration, and 3) find solutions to simple problems where the
data are real, rather than simulated. These findings call for a deeper
examination of SDA’s ability to solve more complex parameter estimation problems
and augment larger-scale codes.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.