* 2310943
* Graphical Modeling of High-Dimensional Functional Data: Separability Structures and Unified Methodology under General Observational Designs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Petersen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 178,859.00

The statistical methodologies outlined in this project are motivated by the need
to analyze multi-subject neuroimaging data sets as well as longitudinal
observations from biomedical studies, among a variety of other examples. In many
instances, it is of primary importance to discover interactions and dependencies
between components of the data that are collected over time. In the case of
neuroimaging data sets, these dependencies represent areas of the brain that
coordinate during a specific task or share common features of baseline activity
when the brain is at rest. This so-called functional brain connectome is known
to be important biomarker for comparison across individuals or populations,
provided that it can be reliably inferred from the data. The size of such data
sets is typically very large, leading to practical issues in computation as well
as theoretical ones related to quantifying uncertainty in outputs produced by
the statistical analysis. The investigator will develop statistical methods,
along with theoretical justifications and efficient computational packages, for
estimating and interpreting functional connectivity networks and other large
data sets of similar structure. Through both research and instructional
activities, the investigator will educate and train students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels in the development and use of statistical
tools related to the project aims.

The data examples previously mentioned will be modeled as multivariate
functional data (MFD), due to collection of multiple measurements at each time
instant as well as the variability of these measurements across time. Most MFD
methods, and the majority of existing computational tools for their analysis,
simply apply univariate functional data methods to each component function
separately, then combine the outputs for downstream analysis. Though simple,
this approach ignores potentially valuable structures and properties that can be
effectively harnessed in modeling and estimation. This is particularly the case
for the graphical modeling of high-dimensional MFD that is the research focus of
this project. The project aims to make foundational theoretical and algorithmic
contributions to this nascent area of research by developing models and
estimators that are flexible to different functional observation designs and
manage the difficulties associated with the dual dimensionality problem of high-
dimensional functional data, in which the large number of functions observed per
subject is compounded with the intrinsically infinite dimension of each
individual function. Specifically, the investigator will develop novel tools for
a regularized inverse correlation operator estimator, underlying separability
structures of the MFD, and a historical functional graphical model. The products
of the project will be validated mathematically by deriving relevant statistical
properties of the estimators and empirically through the analysis of real data
sets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.