* 2310300
* EAGER: Advancing Adaptive Vibrational Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Dennis Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,998.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will advance
the practical theory of vibrational control, a powerful method for stabilizing
complex systems. Stabilization is the process of suppressing unwanted changes
and forcing the system to settle into specific desired dynamic behavior.
Conventionally, stabilization requires feedback, in which measurements are
converted to input signals that cause the unwanted behaviors to die out.
Considerable effort has been devoted to understanding the ability of vibrational
control to stabilize without the need for any measurements, not only because it
is scientifically interesting, but also because of its advantages in
engineering. In recent years, new applications of vibrational stabilization have
been discovered, including reduction of drag over airfoils and stabilization of
plasma in fusion reactors. The goal of this project is to develop new methods
for adaptive vibrational stabilization, where the stabilizing signal will be
adjusted as needed during operation. This project will enable the use of
vibrational control in previously unmanageable situations, such as when the
input signal cannot be driven at very high speeds, or when the system properties
are changing or uncertain, or when the input signal cannot be controlled with
extreme precision. This project will investigate ways of processing simple,
slow, composite measurements in order to find a stabilizing vibrational control
input. This innovative use of adaptation promises to maintain all the benefits
of vibrational control, with only a small increase in controller complexity. In
parallel with mathematical and computational studies that provide insight into
the underlying dynamics, developed methods will be applied to models of
magnetically confined hydrogen plasmas in nuclear fusion reactors. The results
have the potential to benefit society by improving the performance, efficiency,
and reliability of novel energy generation devices.

Vibrational control is the only known control method that can stabilize
uncontrollable or unobservable dynamics, including in high-dimensional,
spatially distributed systems with limited sensing and actuation. This project
will explore how adaptive control algorithms may use slow, low-dimensional
system outputs to tune the vibrational control input signal. This hybrid scheme
has the potential to stabilize complex and challenging processes, achieving a
robust result without the need for the high frequency inputs traditionally
associated with vibrational control. In collaboration with an expert in fusion
reactors, the result will be applied to suppress rapid bursts of unstable
behavior called edge-localized modes, which can interfere with sustained stable
operation of fusion plasmas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.