* 2310781
* The Evolutionary Origin of Non-Equilibrium Order
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Arvind Murugan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2027
* USD 799,905.00

This project aims to understand the evolutionary origin of kinetic proofreading,
a mechanism that increases biochemical accuracy while consuming energy.
Proofreading mechanisms are thought to be exploited by numerous biological
processes, ranging from the replication of DNA to pass information with fidelity
down over generations to the immune system to distinguish foreign viral proteins
from our own. While the biophysics of kinetic proofreading are understood, the
forces that led to its evolution are still unknown. Intuition and current theory
predicts that molecular machines that are more accurate will be slower because
they spend more time checking errors. However, these theories have not been
tested and this project will test whether higher accuracy implies higher speed
or lower speed. Some data has suggested that counterintuitively, more accurate
molecular machines might in fact be faster. In this award, the research team
will develop a novel experimental platform to study the evolution of this
mechanism in DNA polymerases, the molecular machines that copy information in
our DNA so it can be transmitted over generations. This novel platform will
allow the researchers to study the speed and accuracy of 1000s of mutants of
this machine in a single experiment. The research team will exploit this
platform to evolve DNA polymerases for higher speed alone, without any selection
for higher or lower accuracy and measure the resulting mutation rates. In this
way, the team will the hypothesis that proofreading in polymerases can evolve
due to selection for higher speed, even without selection for accuracy. The team
will then develop a theoretical framework for the origin of non-equilibrium
order, extending current models to include memory effects and entropy of
mutations.

This research will have important consequences for our understanding of how
mutation rates in viruses and pathogens can help them avoid the immune system.
Viruses must mutate to evade the human immune system and propagate but the rate
at which viruses mutate is a double-edged sword. This rate of mutations for a
virus is partly determined by the viral replication machinery and its
proofreading abilities. The work here will inform the development of new
treatments that target proofreading during viral replication and increase
mutation rates to a point where viral fitness is harmed. The results will also
be useful in bioengineering, where balancing speed and accuracy is crucial for
enzymes like Rubisco, which is important for carbon fixation. It is often
believed that if a molecular machine like an enzyme works quickly, it is less
accurate. However, this research will determine when faster enzymes can be more
accurate too. Knowing when this happens is important for creating useful enzymes
for commercial and medical applications. The project will also advance our
understanding of a frontier region of physics, namely non-equilibrium dynamics.
While physicists have a deep understanding and predictive frameworks for passive
equilibrium systems, physicists lack general theoretical frameworks for
understanding how systems can consume energy and create more ordered states than
otherwise possible. This project will reveal relationships between energy cost,
time cost and accuracy in non-equilibrium systems.

The interdisciplinary research will educate a new generation of students skilled
in both non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and molecular biology techniques.
The project will train a physics graduate student and involving undergraduates
from biological and biomedical sciences at the University of Chicago, exposing
them to the benefits of quantitative and physics-oriented thinking in biology.
To reach a wider audience, a series of demos and games called "Thriving through
mistakes" will be developed. These activities, similar to the Wordle game, will
teach about the role of mutations in virus evolution and how quantitative
research can help create treatments that target these processes. These
educational resources will be shared with local K-12 students on the South Side
of Chicago through outreach events on campus.

This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics
programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences/Directorate for
Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.