* 2310505
* MAMMOTH ARCTIC PATHS (MAP):  Interdisciplinary Research into the Movement Ecology and Biogeography of an Iconic Arctic Animal through Environmental Change.
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Wooller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Information about how Arctic ecosystems in the past responded to changes, like
past periods of warming, is exceedingly valuable because it can reveal the
results from a series of natural experiments completed over thousands of years.
When the Arctic warmed after the last ice age, many large animals in the Arctic,
like the woolly mammoths, went extinct. However, little is known about how
mammoths lived and moved in the Arctic. Researchers want to know how mammoths
moved around and if their movement changed depending on the environment. Did
they have certain areas they always went to, or certain paths they followed in
the Arctic? Luckily, much can be learned from the teeth and tusks of mammoths.
These animal parts can hold records of chemicals (called isotopes) that can tell
us about a mammoth’s life. In this project, the investigators will study the
chemistry of the tusks and teeth from mammoths in Alaska. By looking at changes
in the chemical makeup over their lifetime, researchers can determine where
mammoths moved during the peak of the last ice age and right before they went
extinct in mainland Alaska. The investigators are working with collaborators at
the University of Alaska Museum of the North (UAMN). The radiocarbon dating of
the mammoths as part of this project will also be used in an education program
called the “Adopt a Mammoth,” project, which is a partnership with UAMN and is
aimed at students in kindergarten to twelfth grade. The investigators will work
with an artist who specializes in drawing ancient animals to create visual
representations based on the findings. These will be displayed in the UAMN to
share the project’s discoveries with the public.

Substantial climate warming and environmental changes in the Arctic are
resulting in significant alterations in the biogeography and movement patterns
of animals, including polar bears, caribou, and beaver. In some cases, these
changes are proving to be exceedingly stressful, pushing some animals to their
eco-physiological limits and the possibility of extinction. Woolly mammoths
(Mammuthus primigenius), an iconic and extinct Arctic species, reputedly served
as important ecosystem engineers. Sometime after the end of the last ice age,
when climate warmed and environmental conditions changed, they went extinct from
the Arctic landmass known as Beringia, along with several other large animals.
Numerous hypotheses have been proposed for the cause of these relatively recent
extinctions from the Arctic biome, and these have been heavily debated. Despite
this research attention, it is not yet clear to what degree mammoths were able
to mitigate fluctuating environmental conditions through movement to more
preferable habitats and/or persist in certain habitats over the long-term. The
overarching project goal is to determine whether woolly mammoths from Arctic
Alaska consistently moved between a series of frequently used areas and adopted
similar movement patterns and routes during the last glacial maximum (LGM)
compared to after the LGM as the climate warmed. The investigators will analyze
a suite of isotope ratios of elements, including strontium and oxygen, preserved
in radiocarbon dated mammoth teeth and tusks. Variations in the isotope
signatures will be compared with isotopic maps of Alaska to create spatial
models of the lifetime movements of mammoths during and after the LGM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.