* 2310681
* IUCRC Phase III University of North Carolina at Charlotte: Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Thomas Suleski, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2028
* USD 150,000.00

The Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) is a partnership between the University of
Rochester (UR) and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC
Charlotte). As a Phase III Industry University Cooperative Research Center, CeFO
will continue to advance research and education in Freeform Optics science,
engineering, and applications through dedicated, long-term partnerships with
industry and government laboratories. CeFO is motivated by the need for compact,
affordable, high-performance optical systems to support the precision
technologies of the 21st century. Freeform optics enables compact optical
solutions for complex light mapping and optical systems folding in three
dimensions (3-D). Applications with immediate benefit include 3-D imaging and
visualization, augmented and virtual reality, infrared and military optical
systems, efficient automotive and LED lighting, energy research, remote sensing,
semiconductor manufacturing and inspection, and medical and assistive
technologies. CeFO enables freeform optics to permeate the marketplace by
integrating fundamental and applied research, including artificial intelligence
optimization algorithms, and significant advances in design, fabrication,
testing, and assembly. CeFO creates a fertile, dynamic, inclusive,
multidisciplinary environment to advance this technology. The partner
universities are dedicated to recruiting and retaining women and students from
other underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and math
(i.e., ~40% average in CeFO) to create a diverse and skilled workforce for the
21st century. Students work with CeFO industrial members to communicate and
transfer critical enabling technologies.

The Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) vertically integrates mathematics,
materials science, optical science, optical instrument design, optomechanics,
and precision optical manufacturing, measurement, and testing to transform the
optics industry in the 21st century. CeFO constitutes a unique research
environment combining the strengths of two world-class research universities
with specialized experiences, insights, and interdisciplinary talents for
designing, building, and measuring advanced optical systems. UNC Charlotte's
excellence in fabrication, metrology, and precision opto-mechanical design
complements the University of Rochester's expertise in optical theory, design,
and metrology. Research topics of immediate interest to the industry include the
mathematical descriptions of freeform surfaces and design methodologies,
quantifying the impact of mid-spatial frequencies (MSFs) on optical performance,
emerging manufacturing methods including laser-based and additive manufacturing,
and precision metrology for freeform optics spanning form and MSFs. Additional
challenges include using complex optical materials, mitigating MSFs, volume
manufacturing (e.g., replication, molding, 3D printing), and integrating
artificial intelligence optimization algorithms in process chains. Freeform
optical systems will enable innovation in sensing, imaging, visualization, and
diagnostic instrumentation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.