* 2310086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Blacksmithing Traditions and Social Relationships of Early Historic Ironworkers
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 30,696.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates how archaeometallurgy
and computer science can reveal blacksmithing traditions and the relationships
between blacksmiths, their elite patrons, and religious consumers by examining
early historic Iron Age materials. A “blacksmithing tradition,” is a body of
knowledge and skills that craftspeople practice throughout their lives that is
passed down through apprenticeships from one generation to the next and creates
technological patterns in the archaeological record. Uncovering the
blacksmithing traditions that created iron tools can reveal how social
relationships incentivized speed or care in iron production. Blacksmiths’
patrons may have needed iron objects as quickly as possible to rapidly construct
religious buildings, or patrons may have wanted iron objects carefully crafted
to promote their quality and longevity for the sake of religious groups.
Additionally, blacksmiths may have supplied religious groups with iron objects
after the initial construction in an ad hoc manner to repair structures out of a
sense of spiritual duty. Revealing relationships between blacksmiths, their
patrons, and religious officials in the ancient past allows for comparison to
modern blacksmiths who have been marginalized. In the research region female
blacksmiths have been common practitioners, but large gender disparities in the
labor market and STEM fields still exist. By revealing the unique material and
social contributions of relevant earlier ironworkers, this project hopes to
honor and inspire living blacksmiths, both male and female, and educate the
general public about their craft.

Two questions guide this project. First, which was more important to the elites
and the blacksmiths, the prestige of having the religious monument built
quickly, or the piety of having the religious monument built well? Second, how
can present day scientists use ancient iron objects to reveal blacksmithing
traditions and the social relationships influencing those traditions? Iron
objects are studied with optical and scanning electron microscopy, innovative
image analysis, and chemical analysis of both residual metal and slag
inclusions. Through these analyses, the researcher quantifies the patterns in
chemical and microstructural signatures of iron objects caused by blacksmithing
tradition(s). These signatures show if speed or care was incentivized in the
blacksmithing tradition(s). Moreover, blacksmithing tradition(s) are examined in
the context of visually and algorithmically created typologies whose groups and
sub-groups enable researchers to see if blacksmiths worked together in one
localized large group, multiple separated large groups, or if they worked in
smaller groups in an ad hoc manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.