* 2310034
* RUI: Probing the Structure of Excited Baryons that Decay through the Omega-Meson Channel
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Philip Cole, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2026
* USD 301,810.00

The strong force gives rise to the nuclear attractions that bind protons and
neutrons, otherwise known as nucleons, together inside the nucleus.
Understanding exactly how the strong nuclear force is generated inside the
nucleus is one of the greatest intellectual challenges facing nuclear physics
today. We do know that the strong force is mediated by the exchange of particles
known as gluons, and it is this gluon interaction that accounts for most of the
mass of the nucleon. The nucleons themselves are formed of three other particles
called quarks embedded in a frothing sea of gluons. Our knowledge of how protons
and neutrons are constructed from their quark and gluon constituents, however,
is rudimentary at best. An energetic particle, such as an electron or a pi-
meson, incident on a nucleon can interact directly with one of the quarks
inside, exciting the quark to higher energy, making the nucleon more massive.
These excited states exist for the briefest of moments, on the order of a
trillionth of a trillionth of a second, and then decay into other particles. The
types of particles produced and how they are distributed in space provide key
information on the make-up of the nucleon. This award to Lamar University, a
Primarily Undergraduate Institution, supports the mentoring of undergraduate
students as researchers and their preparation for graduate school and/or
industry. Two or three undergraduate students will work onsite at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility for ten weeks each summer to assist in
hardware and software projects at two of the ongoing experiments at the
Laboratory. The training provided for this work includes learning how to set up
computer systems, writing efficient software, running detector simulations, and
scheduling large-scale computations on a computer cluster like the High
Performance Computer Cluster at Lamar University. Through their hands-on
experience, the undergraduate students will learn the nuances and intricacies of
how detectors actually work. Having good hardware skills will give profound
insight into the reliability of the final results from data analysis, skills
that are highly sought after by graduate schools as well as by industries that
deal with big data and data analytics. The students will also learn the soft
skills of time management and the overall importance of working together in a
team.

This award supports the study of the fundamental properties and structure of
nucleons through using a beam of linearly-polarized photons, polarized electrons
and pions (π+/π–) at Jefferson Lab (USA), ELSA (Germany), and J-PARC (Japan).
The strong nuclear interaction is responsible for phenomena over a large
distance scale from the binding of quarks by gluons, the combinations of quarks
into colorless hadrons, the binding of nucleons into nuclei, and the collective
behavior of large nuclei. The PI and his group will seek answers to questions
such as how valence quarks self-assemble when sea quark and gluon contributions
are minimal, the nature of how gluons attach to quarks to increase the mass of
current quarks to that of constituent quarks, and how quarks resonate inside the
nucleon to form excited assemblies of quarks. The group aims to understand the
emergent behavior and structure from assemblies of quarks and gluons. In the
case at JLab and ELSA, the probe for these studies will be the omega meson.
There is great discovery potential in probing the structure of N* resonances
through the clean and unambiguous signal of the omega meson. Moreover, there is
a significant dearth of data of baryon resonances decaying through the omega
mode as a function of Q2 for the electromagnetic channels, which is needed to
understand the emergence of hadron mass. The PI will use a coupled-channel
approach to the pion-beam data to ascertain and assist in amplitude analysis for
the two-pion decay channel, which is further necessary for understanding the
emergence of hadron mass.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.