* 2310423
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: Towards A Unified Memory-centric Computing System with Cross-layer Support
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Peng Jiang, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 172,066.00

Data-centric applications, from scientific simulation to emerging machine
learning and data mining algorithms, are becoming prevalent. Memory-centric
computing is a potential solution to overcome the unprecedented memory
performance bottleneck for such applications. We propose an integrated, full-
stack, cross-layer system to enable Unified Memory-centric Computing (UniMCC).
We target systems that have near-memory data processors (NDPs) as well as a
disaggregated shared memory pool. We work on the entire system stack to utilize
these newly proposed hardware solutions from a unified viewpoint of
architecture, SW/HW interface, code generation and runtime support, and
performance modeling and optimization. The goal of the proposed UniMCC system is
to maximize the potential of NDPs and disaggregated memories and lift memory-
centric computing to a new level.

The outcomes of the project will have significant broader impacts on research
communities, society, and education. With the cross-layer collaborative design,
the proposed research can bring state-of-the-art techniques together to make the
memory-centric paradigm more feasible. The success of the project will enable
experiments and deployment of data-centric applications at larger scales,
facilitating research in the AI area and improving the availability of large-
scale data mining and machine learning systems for solving real-world problems.
Besides training Ph.D. students, this project will deliver several course
developments, curricular update activities, and outreach activities to broaden
participation in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.