* 2310593
* Mechanosensitivity of Membrane-Actin Cortex Adhesion
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Brenton Hoffman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,963.00

Physical forces generated by, or applied to, human or animal cells are involved
in almost every fundamental cellular function, including division, shape
control, volume and internal pressure control, differentiation, and migration,
as well as cell death. These forces must pass through the surface of the cell,
which consists of a thin lipid membrane on the outside and a mechanically tough
biopolymer network, the actin cortex, on the inside. Cells meticulously sense
and regulate these forces. In the same way that the straps that tie the fabric
of a tent to its supporting frame would be the best place to monitor what the
wind is doing to the tent, the prime location for force-sensing machinery in the
cell is at the interface between the actin cortex and the lipid membrane. How
single cells react to forces and produce their own is important for large-scale
dynamics in living organisms, such as tissue and organ development, cancer
progression and metastasis, wound healing, and tissue regeneration. However, it
remains largely unknown how cells sense and respond to forces.

In this project, the team will develop and use a suite of innovative biosensors
to study a prominent membrane actin linker protein, ezrin, which is known to
regulate stem cell differentiation and cell migration and is implicated in
cancer progression. The investigators will use the sensors to probe where the
protein accumulates, what conformations it can be in, and what forces it
experiences as cells are physically manipulated. The investigators will combine
the results from these molecular probes with what we know about the larger-scale
mechanics of the cell surface and use manipulation with laser beams, magnetic
particles, and elastic micro-cantilevers for micromechanical probing.
Computational modeling will be used to simulate ezrin kinetics and interpret the
results of these experiments. This work develops an innovative concept,
considering the proteins at the interface between the cell membrane and the
underlying mechanical skeleton as a sensory machinery supplying crucial signals
to control cell behavior. The research aims to discover the important molecular
players and determine how they tie into the larger-scale mechanics of the whole
cell. The project also drives technical innovation in that it will provide a new
suite of biosensors that probe the localization, conformation, and molecular
force experienced by a protein that can be observed and directly compared with
standard fluorescence microscopy.

Cellular mechanosensing is a central part of the physics of living systems, and
new insights will have a broad impact on fundamental cell and developmental
biology as well as biotechnology and medicine. Mechanosensing and
mechanoregulation are particularly relevant for regenerative medicine and for
various prominent human pathologies, including cancer and fibrosis. By combining
molecular engineering with cell biophysics and theoretical modeling, the project
will provide new ways of training future scientists and engineers working in
this interdisciplinary area at all levels. Through educational and public
outreach, the research will engage new generations of young scientists from
diverse communities and stimulate them to participate in research in the broad
area of the physics of living systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.