* 2310533
* Theory and Phenomenology at the Frontiers of the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Stephen Martin, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen P. Martin at
Northern Illinois University.

This project will advance our knowledge of the particles that are the basic
constituents of matter, and the physical laws governing their interactions at
very short distance scales. An important way of gaining new understanding of
these topics is to study collisions of particles at very high energies. The
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN Laboratory in Geneva, Switzerand, is
currently the most energetic collider facility in the world, and was responsible
for discovering the Higgs boson particle in 2012. It is now taking more data at
a higher energy and faster rates, providing new chances for discovery. As part
of his research, Professor Martin will pursue an enhanced understanding of the
Higgs boson and other known particles, as well as develop strategies for
detecting new unknown particles at the LHC and at planned future colliders. He
will also perform calculations of unprecedented accuracy that predict and
explain the implications of the known forces and proposed new forces. These
activities will advance the national interest by improving our understanding of
how nature works at the most fundamental level. This project will also have
broader impacts. Martin will train and mentor university students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels on methods of scientific research. He will
also interact directly with younger local students and other interested members
of the public through science outreach exhibitions and judging at local and
regional science fairs.

More technically, Martin will continue his research on supersymmetric theories.
These models predict that for each of the known types of fundamental particles,
there must be another type with similar properties, but which are much heavier
than those presently known. He will study the possible role in supersymmetric
theories of axions, which can explain the absence of large CP-violating
interactions in the strong nuclear force. Martin will develop search strategies
for supersymmetric particles at the LHC, and at future experiments of various
types, including proton-proton, electron-positron, and muon-antimuon colliders,
with particular attention to compressed mass spectra which are known to be
harder to probe. He will do the same for other new physics models, including
those that predict new fermions with vector-like gauge interactions. He will
work on multi-loop integrals in quantum field theories by developing new methods
for their computation, with applications to precise evaluation of the basic
parameters of particle physics, including the masses and interaction couplings
of gauge bosons and the Higgs boson with each other and with quarks and leptons.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.