* 2310260
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: Towards Effective Detection and Mitigation for Shortcut Learning: A Data Modeling Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Xia Hu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Deep Neural Network (DNN) generalization is a challenging problem. Many DNNs do
not remain predictive when the distribution of data changes or there are small
disturbances to their input. A common reason for this behavior is “shortcut
learning”, in which the DNN learns to make decisions based on relationships
observed in the data, but that are not causal. These decisions fail when the
model is transferred to real-world scenarios because the network has latched
onto spurious correlations. This project investigates how to identify and
mitigate shortcut learning in DNNs. A successful outcome of this research will
lead to advances in theoretical understanding, as well as robust and
generalizable DNN algorithms that avoid shortcuts. The education program
integrates machine learning, industrial engineering, and health informatics to
train students with essential data analytics tools in information systems, as
well as to attract, mentor and retain members from underrepresented groups.

The primary goal of this project is to systematically investigate the
identification and mitigation of shortcut features from a data-centric
perspective to facilitate generalization in deep learning. The developed data-
centric mechanisms could be directly adopted in real-world data analytics
systems to mitigate the drawbacks of shortcut learning. The project studies
shortcut identification and detection at different levels, including instance,
feature, and task levels, and then performs shortcut mitigation through data
augmentation and training regularization. The project also demonstrates how the
proposed research innovations could be embedded into two real DNN-based medical
informatics systems. The proposed framework uncovers intrinsic properties of
shortcut learning by calibrating shortcut features across different types of
distribution shifts, and should support both researchers and practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.