* 2310161
* WoU-MMA: Teraelectronvolt Astrophysics of Relativistic Jets
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Manel Errando, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 374,999.00

Relativistic jets in active galactic nuclei (AGN) are some of the most powerful
particle accelerators in the Universe. Powered by accretion of matter onto a
supermassive black hole, the AGN jets have been observed from radio wavelengths
to teraelectronvolt (TeV) gamma-ray energies. Recent tentative spatial and
temporal correlations between observations of high-energy astrophysical
neutrinos and AGN have provided new indications of the particles and
acceleration mechanisms involved in the extreme jet environment. This award
supports researchers at Washington University to conduct studies of of AGN with
simultaneous TeV gamma-ray observations with VERITAS (the Very Energetic
Radiation Imaging Telescope System at the Whipple Observatory in Arizona) and
X-ray observations with IXPE satellite. The team will complete and deliver a
public legacy dataset of AGN observations, including a first unbiased survey of
a flux-limited sample at TeV energies. The team will also create summer research
internships for local high school students from the St. Louis public schools and
establish a network of regional science teachers and counselors to support
student engagement in the STEM fields.

Understanding the astrophysical and cosmological roles of supermassive black
holes (active galactic nuclei â€“ AGN) in the evolution of galaxies serves as a
pathfinder to advance our knowledge of extragalactic science. Identifying the
dominant particle acceleration mechanisms associated with AGN would establish a
benchmark against which the models that produce high-energy gamma-rays, cosmic
rays, and neutrinos in these extreme environments may be tested. Utilizing TeV
gamma-ray observations of X-ray observed blazars (AGN with the jet aligned with
the direction of the Earth) holds the potential to discriminate between
competing postulated particle acceleration mechanisms that power the emission of
the AGN jets. In addition, a legacy survey of TeV gamma-ray emission from AGN,
resulting from this award, will establish a unique dataset with which to perform
the model tests and ultimately probe the possible links between the neutrino and
gamma-ray luminosity in AGN jets. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.