* 2310361
* Electronic Metal-Support Interactions in Fischer-Tropsch Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Liney Arnadottir, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 539,479.00

Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a widely employed chemical manufacturing
process, primarily used to convert steam-reformed natural gas to long-chain
hydrocarbons or organic molecules suitable for fuels, lubricants, and other
chemical products. The FTS reaction is typically run at high pressures where the
catalyzed reaction between carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H2) is favored.
Such high pressures demand extremely large reactors and associated chemical
plants to achieve the economies of scale needed for cost-effective
manufacturing. The project investigates an alternative approach to FTS in which
the catalyst properties are tuned to promote reaction at lower pressures. The
lower pressures, in turn, potentially open the door to cost-effective FTS in
smaller scale plants that can be located close to remote or stranded sources of
natural gas or distributed sources of renewable biomass. A key benefit of low-
pressure, distributed FTS resides in its capability to ensure security in
chemical manufacturing as our nation transitions to net-zero carbon emission
technologies for manufacturing fuels and chemicals. The project explores
Electronic Metal-Support Interactions (EMSI) through the central hypothesis that
a basic support will inject electron density into the metal clusters supported
on them, and this electron donation will, in turn, result in stronger binding of
CO onto the surface of the metal. Specifically, the investigators will
synthesize and evaluate ruthenium (Ru) and cobalt (Co) catalysts supported on
mixed metal oxides of the general formula MgxAlyO. The Mg:Al ratio will control
the basicity of the supports and, in turn, the extent of electron donation into
the supported Co and Ru. Changes in the electronic structure of the metals will
be monitored by L-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The experimental
data (including direct assessment of CO binding strength via Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) and CO temperature-programmed desorption (TPD))
will be validated with density functional theory (DFT) calculations and Bader
analysis to confirm metal/support and adsorbate effects on the electron
structure and charge transfer. The characterization and computational analyses
will be followed by kinetic studies of the FT reaction under realistic operating
conditions in a laboratory reactor. More broadly, the project will potentially
lead to economic benefits for the U.S. by reducing capital and operating
expenses for stranded natural gas upgrading to liquid fuels. The project will
also train graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students in aspects of
catalysis as related to chemical process engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.