* 2310578
* Semiparametric Efficient and Robust Inference on High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Alexander Giessing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 05/31/2026
* USD 175,000.00

Most data collected for scientific or industrial purposes suffer from
missingness, lacking information about certain features that were lost at the
sampling stage due to factors such as experimental design, non-compliance, or
technical problems. This issue is particularly prevalent in high-dimensional
data sets, where each observation comprises many features. Failing to
effectively address the issue of missing and incomplete data results in
inefficient and biased inference. Moreover, when traditional statistical
methods, originally designed for low-dimensional incomplete data, are applied to
high-dimensional data, they can yield misleading scientific discoveries.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for innovative statistical methodologies
specifically tailored to inference on incomplete data in high dimensions. For
instance, in cancer research, next-generation sequencing technology allows for
comprehensive genomic profiling. However, due to technical limitations and tumor
heterogeneity, this profiling is typically incomplete. The ability to conduct
valid inference after imputing incomplete profiles holds significant
implications for advancing cancer treatment. This research project involves (1)
developing methodology for inference on high-dimensional incomplete and missing
data; (2) disseminating the resulting techniques to the statistics community via
publications, seminars, and public release of software; (3) training PhD
students in high-dimensional statistics and probability theory; and (4)
increasing the exposure of high school students, undergraduates, and members of
underrepresented groups to statistics and probability theory via introductory
reading groups, conference presentations, and other outreach activities. The
project will provide a broad range of mentoring, educational and professional
development opportunities to train the next generation of statisticians and data
scientists at various career levels.

The proposed research has two main objectives, namely (1) to develop a
semiparametric efficient approach to inference after adjusting for incomplete
data in high dimensions, and (2) to develop one- and two-sample bootstrap tests
for high-dimensional hypotheses that retain correct size and power under
incomplete data. Inference with incomplete data requires careful adjustments
through inverse probability weighting or single/ multiple imputation. Any
estimation error in these adjustments propagates into subsequent analyses. To
address this challenge and achieve the first objective, the project will develop
combined inference and adjustment procedures which treat imputation/ re-
weighting not as a separate nuisance step, but as an integral part of the
inference process. Specific solutions to several canonical incomplete data
problems will be provided. For the second objective, the main challenge lies in
designing a bootstrap procedure that accurately accounts for the variability of
imputation/ re-weighting. To meet this objective, the project will develop a new
parametric high-dimensional bootstrap procedure that can leverage such
information. Different bootstrap tests for discrete/ categorical and continuous
data will be provided.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.