* 2310632
* Statistical Inference for Optimal Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Larry Wasserman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This research project concerns optimal transport, which is a mathematical method
for transforming one probability distribution into another probability
distribution. Optimal transport has been used to transfer data from one
scientific domain to another, thus enabling scientists to combine data from
different sources. It has also been used to ensure that algorithms do not create
unintended biases against demographic groups. The focus of this project is to
develop rigorous statistical methods for optimal transport that permit precise
assessment of uncertainty due to the fact that we only have access to finite
datasets. The methods will be used with collaborators in particle physics to
address data analysis problems that arise in data obtained for particle
accelerators. Graduate students will be trained by including them in the
research. Division of Physics provides cofunding for this award.

This project has three thrusts. The first is to develop statistical inference
for transport maps. The aim is to prove central limit theorems for these
estimated maps and then use these theorems to construct confidence intervals.
The investigators will also extend inferential ideas to robust versions of
transport and to the Gromov-Wasserstein distance, which extends the idea of
transport to measures on different spaces. THey will then consider
semiparametric theory (double robustness), higher-order inference, and optimal
hypothesis testing. The second thrust is the development of new transport maps.
By departing from the original definition, they can derive slightly less
efficient maps that are easier to estimate and that still have good properties.
The third thrust is to apply the methods to the physical sciences. This includes
using optimal transport for estimating background distributions in particle
physics, for simulator-based inference, to quantify the systematic uncertainty
in particle unfolding, and to decorrelate signal classifiers from protected
variables. They will also develop missing data transport for use when data from
a signal region is not available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.