* 2310691
* Physics of Living Tangled Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2027
* USD 350,000.00

Knotted and tangled filamentous structures are hallmarks of living systems and
human technologies, from DNA to weaving. By contrast, design principles for
tangled active matter that can autonomously self-assemble, disassemble, and
break symmetry are currently unknown. The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes
to explore this new frontier of materials science and applied mathematics by
studying the physics of living knots and tangles. This research is made possible
by the PI's discovery of blackworms (Lumbriculus variegatus) that intertwine
with each other in complex, topological patterns to form soft blobs. These blobs
can aggregate, shape-shift, engulf, transport cargo, and dissolve rapidly. The
blobs represent a unique example of a knotted living material that uses
topological mechanics to produce emergent, intelligent behavior, not seen in
other known materials.

Motivated by the fascinating behavior of these worms, in this award the PI will
use mathematical theory to construct minimal tangling and untangling states that
enable control over the topological structure. The PI will develop experimental
techniques and low-dimensional representation to characterize the worm blob as a
topologically tunable material. The PI will also develop multi-physics models of
tangling worms as active filaments, linking physical properties of tangled
fibers, such as energy and elastic torque, to topological parameters such as
link, writhe, and crossing number. Finally, the PI will develop control schemes
and unifying phase diagrams for predictive shape-morphing and symmetry-breaking
in tangled ensembles.

With this award, the PI's interdisciplinary research on the physics of living
tangles and knots has the potential to impact a wide range of fields, including
mathematics, materials science, biology, and physics. Beyond advancing our
understanding of living systems, this work could also lead to breakthroughs in
the development of stimuli-responsive materials, living fabrics, and shape-
morphing robots that could navigate challenging environments like the deep ocean
or Mars. To increase the participation of historically marginalized communities
in this research, the PI plans to involve, mentor, and educate young scientists
at all levels, from K-12 to postdocs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.