* 2310656
* Characterizing Finite-Temperature Topology Via Quantum Computation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* CHIH CHUN CHIEN, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 307,887.00

The rapid development of quantum computers has brought us a powerful tool for
exploring challenging problems in physics, chemistry, biology, finance, and
others that are practically impossible using available classical computers.
Meanwhile, the discovery of novel quantum matter with exotic properties that can
be understood via the concept of topology has revolutionized our classification
of materials for electric or thermal applications. While temperature tends to
destroy both quantum computation and topological matter, there exist protections
which await systematic characterization. This research will advance both science
and technology by applying quantum computation to accelerate the investigation
of the open question on topological quantum matter at finite temperature and
discoveries of robust quantum properties for novel schemes of quantum
computation against destructions from temperature. The characterization of
quantum behavior protected by topological properties from the research will lead
to new functional quantum materials for information storage and processing and
more accessible quantum computers. The research will be disseminated and
broadcast to local communities in the California Central Valley with a high
population of under-represented minorities. While a periodic table of
topological quantum matter at zero temperature has been constructed, a
systematic characterization of topological matter at finite temperature remains
a challenge due to the inclusion of both quantum and thermal distributions.
Through the process of purification and geometric construction, finite-
temperature systems can acquire a formalism that allows them to be solved on
quantum computers using its power from the quantum nature. This research will
first demonstrate finite-temperature topological properties of simple systems on
quantum computers and then systematically generalize more complicated
topological matter to finite temperature. Utilizing those robust topological
properties, the research will in turn design novel quantum computational schemes
robust against temperature and use quantum computation to bridge finite-
temperature quantum theories developed by high-energy physics and quantum-
information communities. Moreover, the research will introduce practical quantum
computation to undergraduate and graduate curricula to train the next generation
of workforce in quantum education and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.