* 2310078
* Windows on the Universe: Open Quantum Systems in Atomic Nuclei at FRIB
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Thomas Baumann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,400,000.00

This proposal seeks to understand how protons and neutrons interact when they
are placed in an environment where there are far more neutrons than protons,
also known as rare isotopes. These neutron-rich rare isotopes straddle the limit
of existence, which defines the neutron drip line, where protons and neutrons no
longer form a nucleus because they do not “stick” together (e.g., become
unbound). They offer an opportunity to explore the unique science of systems
that interact with themselves, also referred to as open quantum systems. This
research will be conducted at worldwide scientific user facilities, and
primarily at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams in Michigan that is estimated
to produce nearly 1,000 new isotopes in this region of interest. The structure
and properties of these isotopes are highly relevant for understanding
astrophysical processes. In addition, this topic has special significance due to
its relevance to quantum computing, quantum optics, and quantum sensing. A part
of the research that will be performed involves the MoNA Collaboration, which
consists of a group of undergraduate institutions that has had a major impact on
recruitment of students to enter nuclear science. The research will further
develop the LISE++ code that is used by thousands of scientists around the world
for the modeling of rare isotope production. The work will have a significant
impact on diversity by involvement of Minority Serving Institutions in the
proposed research as well as the involvement of pre-college students to train
the next generation of the science, technology, engineering, art and mathematics
(STEAM) workforce.

This proposal is to perform experimental studies of weakly bound atomic nuclei
in order to test nuclear models that are relevant to understanding open quantum
systems and astrophysical processes in the universe. Proper modeling and
understanding of continuum effects are important in the era of multi-messenger
astronomy where nuclear properties, such as binding energies and nuclear radii
are relevant for interpreting optical, neutrino, and gravitational-wave
observations. It will address fundamental questions, such as what combination of
neutrons and protons can form an atomic nucleus and perhaps double our knowledge
of the neutron drip line. Properties of unbound states will be measured using
the powerful tools of the MoNA Collaboration and the wide range of new nuclei
accessible at FRIB. New techniques will be developed to exploit quasi-elastic
proton removal reactions to probe states near the particle emission threshold
and the structure of weakly-bound nuclei, including the characterization of near
threshold resonances in loosely bound systems. Finally, due to the open-quantum
nature of the states of interest, the reaction mechanism to produce these states
becomes an important part of the measurement. The role of the reaction mechanism
in the context of open quantum systems will be explored with the development of
dedicated equipment (e.g., Cherenkov and Rutherford scattering based detectors).

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.