* 2310678
* Collaborative Research: Social Perception of Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Alt, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 72,507.00

In daily life, people regularly encounter unknown others, and they tend to
categorize them in terms of their social category memberships, such as sex
(i.e., male, female), race (e.g. , Black, White, Asian, etc. ), and emotion
(e.g., happy, angry). These perceptions occur rapidly from merely a glimpse of a
face or body and often produce judgments that are more evaluative in nature.
Prior research examining how observers perceive others focused largely on
understanding the perception of individuals. In daily life, however, we often
encounter others in groups rather than in isolation. Little is known about how
people quickly and accurately form impressions of groups. The proposed research
builds on recent theoretical advances to test how individuals perceive groups of
people. This research will provide important insights about how observers form
meaningful impressions that impact their judgments, decisions, and behaviors
about others. This research has important implications for social perception,
stereotyping, and vision perception research.

The research tests hypotheses about the mechanisms that underlie the social
perception of groups. One set of experiments tests the means by which observers
accurately perceive a group’s composition (e.g., the ratio of men to women) by
examining how variations in group composition, the physical appearance of group
members, and the visual behavior of observers impact the accuracy of group
percepts. Another set of experiments tests how members of a group are perceived
as sub-groups and individually (i.e. visual assimilation or contrast). Other
experiments explore the consequences of these patterns by seeking to understand
how groups are evaluated by observers, leading to inferences that a group might
be either hostile or hospitable to the perceiver. A final set of experiments
seeks to test the mechanisms of group perception for groups that occur naturally
in society (e.g., members of corporate boards, faculty rosters from university
departments, and panelists at scientific conferences). This research will
contribute to our understanding of the social perception of groups. The research
illuminates how groups and contexts can contribute to or explain group
stereotypes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.