* 2310637
* Experimental Design-based Weighted Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Roshan Joseph, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Random sampling is commonly used for inferring quantities of interest of a
population. This project aims to develop a deterministic sampling technique that
improves upon the existing sampling techniques by introducing weights for each
sample. Building on the recent developments of data compression and subsampling
algorithms, the new sampling technique has the potential to overcome the
computational challenges faced by the existing techniques. The developed
techniques are broad and can have applications in many fields of science and
engineering, such as uncertainty quantification, Bayesian statistics,
simulation, stochastic optimization, machine learning, and numerical analysis,
to name a few. The PI will develop software packages to be distributed to the
public for free to enable the widespread use of the proposed techniques. The
sampling techniques will also be implemented in industries and tested in several
engineering applications, which will provide a broad and immediate impact on
society. The project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.

The experimental design-based weighted sampling technique is developed by
working on three broad classes of problems in statistics: (1) uncertainty
quantification, where the probability density is known and fully specified, (2)
Bayesian computation, where the probability density is known only up to a
proportionality constant, and (3) data compression, where the probability
distribution is unknown. The key idea of the proposed technique is to relax the
restriction that the samples should follow the underlying distribution of the
population. Instead, the samples are optimally generated to improve the
estimation of the quantity of interest, and then weights are used for correcting
the distributional mismatch. The resulting weighted sample can provide a more
robust performance compared to the existing unweighted samples. The project
develops new techniques such as optimally weighted quantizers, weighted minimum
energy designs, adaptive integration methods using sequential designs, weighted
twinning, and supervised data compression techniques using weights. Overall,
this project will develop a suite of theoretically sound and computationally
efficient techniques for weighted sampling that represents a significant
advancement from the existing techniques that focus on generating unweighted
samples from the target distribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.