* 2310059
* WoU-MMA: Nuclear Physics at the Notre Dame Nuclear Science Laboratory Providing a Window on the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

This award continues the research program of eight faculty members and their
students in Nuclear Structure Physics and Nuclear Astrophysics at the University
of Notre Dame. The program focuses on direct measurements of nuclear reaction
and decay processes that determine the life of stars, the origin of the
elements, and production of multi messengers that provide a Window on the
Universe. This program addresses key nuclear processes that define the
timescales of stellar evolution and explosion processes. Another component is
the study of low energy fusion reactions during the last days of a stellar life
prior to supernova explosion. The program also explores the nuclear structure
effects that are guiding large scale nucleosynthesis processes. The research is
performed primarily by using the accelerators of the Nuclear Science Laboratory
(NSL) at the University of Notre Dame, which are uniquely designed to probe
stellar reactions through a number of experimental techniques. The experimental
results expand our knowledge of the fundamental structure of the nucleus as a
multi-body quantum system; they also provide new insight for the astrophysics
community on the origin of the elements and the chemical evolution of the cosmos
from the Big Bang to the present. The NSL is uniquely equipped for performing
this kind of research in a university environment. The award will support the
training of a large number of graduate (approximately 25) and undergraduate
students (approximately 20) in experimental and theoretical techniques to be
ready to join the nuclear workforce of the nation.

The experimental program is based on the use of two accelerators at the NSL.
Intense stable ion beams from the single ended 5U Pelletron are used for the
direct study of low-energy capture and fusion reactions. Heavy ion beams are
used to investigate such reactions in inverse kinematic technique using the St.
GEORGE recoil separator. This separator is unique and serves as a blueprint for
the design of the SECAR separator at FRIB. The FN tandem accelerator is used as
a multi-purpose instrument. It is operated as a driver for the production of
radioactive beams at the newly-expanded TriSol facility, the nation's first
dedicated instrument for producing low energy radioactive beams. These beams
allow direct reaction measurements with and the trapping of light radioactive
particles at levels not possible at large national facilities. The FN also
serves the accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) program at the NSL, testing
geological and cosmological samples for long-lived radioactivities. A large
number of nuclear structure experiments are based on the operation of this
machine using a variety of particle and gamma spectroscopy techniques. A smaller
fraction of the program relies on the use of other national and international
facilities to take advantage of higher energy and more exotic beams not
available at the NSL.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.