* 2310771
* Elements: Curating and Disseminating Solid Mechanics Based Benchmark Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2026
* USD 451,470.00

From automobile safety to surgical planning, predicting the mechanical behavior
of materials under loading is an essential step in engineering design. However,
current approaches to predicting mechanical behavior are often very slow, where
single simulations can take hours or even months to run. Motivated by this
limitation, recent research has leveraged machine learning techniques to rapidly
predict the behavior of engineered systems and create predictive models directly
from data. Though these emerging techniques have enormous potential to benefit
society, current strategies for creating machine learning models from mechanical
data remain ad hoc. The goal of this research project is to change this through
disseminating large mechanics-based datasets and associated scientific resources
to the broader community. In addition, this project provides resources for a
cultural shift within the broader mechanics community towards data and code
dissemination practices that will allow the mechanics research community to make
collective research progress more efficiently.

The objective of this work is to create and disseminate open source benchmark
datasets that focus on two broad classes of mechanical challenge: nonlinear
material behavior (e.g., fracture of engineered composites), and nonlinear
structural behavior (e.g., large deformation behavior and buckling of engineered
metamaterials). In conjunction with dataset dissemination, this work defines and
disseminates core challenge problems around emerging and unresolved areas where
methodological innovation would significantly move the solid mechanics field
forward such as: (1) full-field prediction for nonlinear mechanics, (2)
representation of complex geometries for mechanical prediction, (3) mechanics-
specific out of distribution generalization, and (4) uncertainty quantification
in mechanical problems. Finally, this project includes an “Open Access Mechanics
Dataset Website and Educational Resource” component to collate open access
mechanics datasets from the broader research community.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.