* 2310818
* AF: SMALL: Extending the Reach of Distribution Testing via Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ronitt Rubinfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

We are inundated with a multitude of available data, much of which is naturally
viewed as samples from a probability distribution over a large discrete domain.
As there is typically no explicit description of the distribution, in order to
make effective use of the data, one must develop efficient methods of
determining which salient properties are held by the underlying distribution.
Such distribution testing tasks are fundamental to scientific analysis, and
recent years have seen a leap in our understanding of how to design such
algorithms. However, the amount of sample data needed to successfully achieve
many of these tasks can be prohibitively large. This project aims to develop
algorithms which capitalize on known structures in the data in order to give
significantly more efficient solutions. In addition, this project will develop
sample-efficient methods of ascertaining whether the data indeed has the claimed
structure. This project will include the organization of an annual Workshop on
Local Algorithms (WOLA) and will produce publicly available educational material
based on current research. The project will also include co-chairing a
postdoctoral program specifically aimed at broadening participation and other
mentoring activities. The project will engage with high school students in local
public schools by giving presentations and serving on advisory committees.

This project studies the role of structure in distribution testing. This
research will lead to tools for understanding the tradeoffs between the sample
complexity required to test properties of distributions and the strength of the
assumptions made a priori on the distributions being tested. In a first thrust,
algorithms will be developed which capitalize on known (or assumed) existing
structural properties in the sample data to give significantly more efficient
solutions for estimating information-theoretic quantities and determining
whether the data additionally satisfies other structural properties. In a second
thrust, new techniques will be developed for designing algorithms to determine
whether the data in fact has the assumed structural properties. Unfortunately,
for many natural structural properties, the task of testing whether data
satisfies these structural properties can be expensive. Fortunately, in many
important settings, it can be the case that testing whether the precise
structural properties hold is unnecessary. Thus, in a third thrust, this project
will consider techniques that bypass the difficulty of testing for structure by
testing only that the data has enough structure to make it amenable for use in
the settings for which the data is intended. Specifically, such methods allow
one to safely use (possibly modified versions of) agnostic learning algorithms
that depend on a weaker distributional assumption on the data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.