* 2310394
* Submerged-Shell Atoms Trapped in Noble Gas Solids for Quantum Information and Measurement
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Colin Parker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 392,935.00

This project will perform optical and infrared spectroscopy of neutral thulium
atoms trapped in solidified noble gases, which are chemically inert solids
sometimes called cryocrystals. The trapped thulium atoms may be excited with a
laser, which allows transition frequencies between the atomic energy levels to
be measured. Thulium is chosen because of its unusual electron configuration,
which contains valence electrons in the f-shell near the nucleus. Unlike other
species whose energy levels are substantially broadened when trapped in a
cryocrystal, thulium energy levels are split into resolvable components. This
project will employ a new set of spectroscopy techniques to uncover the complete
energy level diagram for thulium atoms trapped in solid argon and neon, which
paves the way for using their unique properties as probes of the local
environment at nanometer scale, or as entangled elements in a quantum device.
The project has great potential for broader impacts to quantum information
science and measurement, and will contribute to education of students in surface
science, cryogenics, optics, and atomic physics.

This project is motivated in particular from recent observations that the
magnetic dipole transition between f shells at 1140 nm can be as narrow as 1.5
GHz, even when averaged over a population. Furthermore, there is no indication
of population inhomogeneity at the GHz scale, suggesting that with further
cooling, MHz linewidths might be obtained. This is significantly narrower than,
for example, the inhomogeneity in diamond NV centers, which supports the notion,
seen in gas phase spectroscopy, that submerged f shells interact much less with
the surrounding environment than s or p levels. This suggests a novel platform
for quantum information and measurement, where frequency resolution permits
detailed optical pumping schemes, even as atoms are held in place at the sub-
nanometer scale, co-located with measurement targets, and/or directly integrated
into quantum hardware via a universally compatible process requiring a single
step: condensing noble gas solids with co-deposition of thulium. In particular,
the high density combined with homogeneity are promising for quantum information
applications and for observing coherent effects such as superradiance. To
investigate these possibilities, a series of experiments will be performed to
determine the low-temperature linewidth of thulium in solid argon and neon
hosts, to resolve ground state substructure coming from crystal field splitting,
to increase the maximum photon cycling rate, and to attempt to sense the
environment near a glass substrate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.