* 2310769
* Robustness and Optimality of Estimation and Testing
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Chao Gao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 09/30/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This project is dedicated to tackling the challenge of data contamination in
modern scientific studies through the advancement of robust estimation
techniques. The primary objective is to develop innovative methods for robust
high-dimensional estimation and robust nonparametric interpolation, enabling the
identification of optimal procedures for different data sets with varying types
of contamination. This research will yield invaluable insights into statistical
inference within the realm of data science. Furthermore, its impact will extend
beyond the field of statistics, reaching diverse disciplines such as genomics,
biology, and social network analysis, where accurate analysis of complex data is
of paramount importance. Moreover, this project places a strong emphasis on
education and community outreach, fostering collaboration and inclusivity to
unleash the full potential of big data for scientific discovery and
understanding. The project also provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.

This project addresses the challenge of achieving optimal robust statistical
inference in both high-dimensional and nonparametric settings. It introduces
novel statistical methods that satisfy the requirements of information-theoretic
optimality, computational efficiency, and robustness to contamination. The
research project covers various data contamination settings, including the
classical Huber model and the modern Efron's model. In the high-dimensional
setting, the project encompasses multiple comparisons, robust ranking, and
robust group synchronization. In the nonparametric setting, the focus is on
robust function interpolation. This project recognizes the existence of
different types of contamination and aims to develop optimal robust procedures
that can adapt to these diverse scenarios. Moreover, the project highlights the
necessity for innovative methods to effectively handle contamination in large
datasets and extract meaningful insights.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.