* 2310263
* New Chemical Tools for Advancing Lipid Metabolic Labeling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Todd Reynolds, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2026
* USD 421,521.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Michael Best and Todd Reynolds from the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville and their research groups are studying the
development of chemical probes that enable detection, tracking, and imaging of
the production of specific lipid molecules in cells. Lipids control many
critical biological processes and therefore dysregulation of lipid biosynthesis
results in severe diseases including cancer. Despite this significance, tracking
the production and localization of lipids in cells remains challenging due to
the complexity of membranes and the diversity of lipid structures that are
constantly undergoing interconversion. Through this project, new strategies will
be designed to overcome these longstanding obstacles by developing probes that
infiltrate lipid biosynthesis to produce tagged versions of lipid products that
facilitate their detection. This work will enable intensive training of
researchers in an interdisciplinary environment that incorporates elements
ranging from chemistry to biology. Additionally, participation in research will
be broadened through outreach efforts aimed at enhancing understanding and
enthusiasm for research among pre-collegiate students.

In this project, probe analogues of lipid biosynthetic precursors bearing
diminutive clickable tags are being developed to infiltrate normal cellular
machinery and produce labeled lipid products. Post-derivatization of these
molecules through bioorthogonal reactions is expected to enable the attachment
of a variety of reporter tags that will facilitate tracking of lipid
biosynthesis in cells. Distinct approaches are being undertaken to advance the
approach of lipid metabolite labeling. On one hand, probes are being developed
to enable labeling of specific and important lipid targets. In a complementary
approach, probe strategies are being devised for labeling larger families of
lipids to analyze lipid metabolism more broadly. In each of these cases, the
goal is to synthesize new probe analogues of metabolic precursors and subject
them to comprehensive evaluation of their labeling properties, including
analysis of cellular labeling through fluorescence microscopy, validation of the
identities of labeled lipids using multiple techniques, and determination of
probe cytotoxicity. Furthermore, lipid metabolic labeling could be advanced by
directing probes to specific cellular organelles using targeting moieties. This
approach could provide new chemical tools for addressing important biological
questions regarding the manner in which lipids are synthesized, trafficked, and
dysregulated during crucial biological processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.