* 2310318
* Disorder, Topology and Frustration in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Natalia Perkins, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2026
* USD 249,680.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research with an aim to understand the effects
of disorder in a novel phase of matter called the quantum spin liquid. In this
unique phase, electron spins in a material do not establish ordered patterns,
even at zero temperature, as they normally do in conventional magnets, but
remain liquid-like due to the peculiarities of quantum mechanics. This phase has
been a central theme in condensed matter physics for decades, both from a
fundamental perspective and in terms of its potential applications in novel
technologies, such as their promise for building robust quantum computers. It is
known that the properties of the spin liquid phase in real materials can be
modified or destroyed in the presence of disorder, such as atomic imperfections
due to missing atoms or impurities. In this project, the PI and her team will
investigate how different types of disorder in real materials can suppress or
enhance the discernibility of quantum spin liquid phase and the unique quantum
mechanical properties associated with this phase. This theoretical research will
be conducted in close collaboration with experimental studies.

This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities that are
linked to the research projects. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in condensed matter physics with a particular eye toward broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in the research projects. The PI will
also organize summer schools on modern condensed matter physics and collaborate
with the Weisman Art Museum at the University of Minnesota to develop a new
program for undergraduate students that combines artistic and scientific
disciplines.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research with an aim to understand frustration
and disorder effects in quantum magnets with strong spin-orbit coupling, non-
trivial topology and correlations. This broad field has recently experienced
significant advances in both theory and experiment. In particular, the quantum
spin liquid phase has been one of the central themes in condensed matter
physics, owing to their remarkable emergent properties, including long-range
entanglement, topological degeneracy and fractionalized excitations. A growing
number of candidate magnetic materials are believed to be adequately described
by quantum spin liquid models. Some level of disorder is inevitable in real
quantum spin liquid candidate materials, which makes it necessary to understand
the competition between quantum fluctuations and randomness in order to unveil
the true nature of their low-energy phase. One of the main goals of this project
is to expand the current understanding of the effects of disorder in quantum
magnets. The PI will study how quantum spin liquids respond to various forms of
disorder, such as dislocations, vacancies, impurities, and bond randomness. A
second goal of this project is to understand novel quantum phases arising from a
collective behavior of correlated electrons in the presence of strong spin-orbit
coupling and non-trivial topology. The PI will study both candidate materials
and theoretical models proximate to the Kitaev honeycomb model and, more
generally, on systems with strongly anisotropic bond-dependent interactions.

This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities that are
linked to the research projects. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in condensed matter physics with a particular eye toward broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in the research projects. The PI will
also organize summer schools on modern condensed matter physics and collaborate
with the Weisman Art Museum at the University of Minnesota to develop a new
program for undergraduate students that combines artistic and scientific
disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.