* 2310030
* Particle Physics Research with the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Graham Wilson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2026
* USD 431,891.00

This program of research aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125 GeV represents
both the crowning achievement of the standard model of particle physics and a
hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge,
destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? Further, dark
matter is known to exist from astronomical observations; however, the particle
properties of dark matter remain shrouded in mystery. The combined activities of
the University of Kansas (KU) group address such basic questions puzzling
physics - the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter - and have
the potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we understand
our physical world. This award will provide support for the KU group's work on
the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle
physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. Analytically, the group has a broad
range of physics interests, including searches for vector-like quarks and the
initiation into new searches for evidence of supersymmetry, with emphasis on
signatures that emphasize compressed spectra: electroweakino, stop, and slepton
decays. A discovery of any of these new particles would transform modern high
energy physics.

Technically, KU will continue to work with the CMS tracker system, both to
support the current operations and to develop new components for the future high
luminosity HL-LHC era. Photon conversion reconstruction will be used to
precisely measure the active and passive material of the tracker leading to
improvements in systematic uncertainties associated with the modeling of
interactions in the tracker material. KU will design, test and build cables that
will bring the high-speed electronic signals from the HL-LHC inner pixel tracker
modules to optical links on the detector and assess how the full chain of
electronic readout performs. This pixel tracker system is critical to the
reconstruction of many event types of special interest to the CMS program of
discovery science. The group has two major continuing outreach efforts: a long-
standing QuarkNet center, through which it engages with area high school physics
teachers and their students, and the multimedia Quarked! project that presents
modern physics concepts to youth through games, videos, and other web content.
This project is jointly funded by PHY/EPP and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.