* 2310942
* Semiparametric Techniques for Data Exploitation across Heterogeneous Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jiwei Zhao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 224,999.00

In various fields, from clinical medicine to policy research, researchers often
have access to data and information from multiple populations that are relevant
but different. For example, in biomedical studies that use electronic health
records, relying solely on labeled data for analysis may be inefficient due to
small sample sizes resulting from various resource constraints. In a clinical
trial setting, physicians may need to interpret evidence from a randomized
controlled trial consisting of patients whose demographics and other historical
characteristics are quite different from their own patients. Similarly,
researchers studying a pneumonia outbreak during the flu season may find a
predictive model developed during the non-flu season to be relevant and useful.
In all of these scenarios, it is crucial to develop methods that can
appropriately incorporate information from one population into statistical
analyses for another. This project will develop a suite of statistically sound
methods that can effectively integrate external data into primary studies. The
research product has the potential to be applied to various fields, such as
Alzheimer's disease, mental health disorders, cancer, and pain research. The
project also contains active mentoring plans at both disciplinary and
interdisciplinary levels, benefiting local high school students, undergraduates,
master's and PhD students, as well as biomedical investigators.

In this project, the unique combination of semiparametric statistics, robust
statistical methods, statistical learning techniques, missing data analysis, and
high-dimensional data analysis will be leveraged to develop a suite of
statistically sound methods for incorporating external data into primary
studies. The new methods have minimal model assumptions: they are either
developed under an assumption lean framework or allow for misspecification of
more than one nuisance model in the procedure. Compared to naive methods that do
not incorporate external data, the new methods are guaranteed to increase
estimation efficiency, improve statistical power, and enhance scientific
discovery. Moreover, they achieve maximum efficiency gains when the nuisance
models are correctly specified.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.