* 2310816
* Conference: Dynamical Systems in the Life Sciences. Satellite Workshop of the 2023 Annual SMB Meeting
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Grzegorz Rempala, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 01/31/2024
* USD 39,246.00

This award will support a workshop entitled “Dynamical Systems in the Life
Sciences” (https://sites.google.com/d.umn.edu/dsls2023/home), to be held in
Columbus, Ohio from July 13-15, 2023, in the week preceding the planned 2023
Society of Mathematical Biology (SMB) annual meeting at the same location. The
workshop will bring together a diverse mix of researchers representing a broad
spectrum of backgrounds and diverse expertise and experience within the modern
mathematical biology community. This will provide an excellent opportunity for
fostering collaborative interactions among researchers with common interests in
dynamical systems and in life sciences. The discussions during talks, poster
sessions and social events will give ample opportunity to share different
perspectives and suggest new scientific projects. Besides invited talks, there
will be two nearly two-hour poster sessions during day 1 and day 2 of the
workshop, along with contributed talk sessions. These opportunities are
designated to provide junior researchers, especially those from under-
represented groups, with a platform to to present their research and actively
engage in the problems of theory of applied dynamical systems and its
applications in modern life sciences.

The workshop will emphasize new advancements in mathematics, especially the
dynamical systems theory, that were inspired by biological applications.
Accordingly, a majority of talks during the workshop will be 30-35 minutes and
technically detailed, creating better opportunities for interdisciplinary
interactions. The workshop format also promises to attract a broad
representation of the mathematical biology community, including researchers from
underrepresented groups, early career researchers, and researchers from R2
universities. The specific topics covered by the workshop presentations will
include: biomechanical models, cancer modeling, free boundary problems in
cardiovascular and autoimmune disease, pattern formation, models of homeostasis
and diseases spread. The workshop will also help foster mentoring across career
stages and expose early-career researchers (particularly those from the
underrepresented groups) to new research and collaboration opportunities in one
of the most important areas of modern interdisciplinary STEM research. The
workshop presentations and materials will be disseminated broadly across the
mathematical biology community through the conference website and a special
issue in the pre-eminent mathematical biology journal, Mathematical Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.