* 2310303
* Single-cell dynamic analysis to improve the biomanufacturing process for engineering of cell therapy products
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tania Konry, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 398,495.00

Immune cells could form the basis of effective therapies for a variety of
diseases. Producing these cells with uniform activity is difficult. This project
will focus on developing a microfluidic device capable of sorting effective
cells from ineffective ones. The effective population will be characterized. It
is expected that the insight obtained will be useful in designing more effective
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. Interactive lectures and hands-on
activities directed to high school students will be key components of the
outreach activities supported by this project. Working through the Diversity and
Women in Engineering Program to spark high school girls' interest in the future
study of biotechnology and bioengineering should increase engagement of women in
STEM careers.

Antigens are molecules that induce an immune response in an organism. Several
unique antigens are present on certain human cancer cells. Identifying T cell
receptors (TCRs) that bind these antigens with high affinity is a key bottleneck
in the development of T-cell therapy to treat cancer. The objective of this
project is to develop microfluidic technology that simplifies TCR screening.
This technology will be used to sort CD8+ T cells that display a physiological
response to antigen binding. Transcriptomic sequencing will be used to identify
the optimal structure of a TCR for antigen recognition. The data from these
sequences will be used to engineer T cells with maximized specificity and
selectivity for cancer cell antigen recognition. In addition, the sorted T
cells, with a higher affinity for antigen, will be expanded to produce a cell
population with optimal anti-tumor potential. The proposed technology will be
used to determine the degree and rapidity of primed and expanded chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) T cell responses which will then enable researchers to
“tune” cell behavior in a desired direction with specific drugs. The ultimate
goal is to advance the understanding of immune responses and improve the
biomanufacturing and effectiveness of immunotherapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.