* 2310050
* Collaborative Research: Beyond Standard Model Searches Using the IceCube Neutrino Telescope
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Carlos Arguelles Delgado, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

This project uses the unique data set acquired by the gigaton-scale IceCube
Neutrino Observatory, located at the South Pole, to explore for signatures of
new physics. The IceCube data set comprises the highest energy neutrino
interactions observed on Earth. The neutrino interactions to be used in the
analyses supported by this grant are in a range that is x20 to x200 higher than
the highest energy accelerator-produced neutrino interactions produced today.
Because signatures for Beyond Standard Model Physics are expected to become more
apparent with energy, IceCube data opens a new window on a rich array of
predicted Beyond Standard Model effects, as well as an opportunity to follow up
on anomalous behavior that may point to new physics. The group will continue and
expand upon the very successful CosmicWatch program that provides instructions
for building simple muon detectors that can be used for teaching and other
outreach activities.

The project will allow for the first high-energy, full three-flavor search for
Beyond Standard Model signatures in neutrino physics utilizing flavor-tagged
events in the 1 to 100 TeV-scale. IceCube has the unique capability of observing
resonance signatures of matter effects induced if neutrinos with exotic
properties pass through the dense Earth. The analysis will expand a data set
developed by the PIs since 2014 that unites the Neutrino, Energy, Cosmic, and
Rare Process Frontiers. The data set will reach 100~TeV and comprise more than
one million upward-going neutrino events flavor identified on an event-by-event
basis. The flux sources in the sample are atmospheric neutrinos and a highly-
enriched astrophysical sample isolated through directional information - the
first high-purity astrophysical sample below 60 TeV.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.