* 2310020
* Quantum Many-Body Theories for the Nuclear Equation of State
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Scott Bogner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

An overarching challenge in nuclear theory is to develop a predictive framework
for atomic nuclei and the extended nuclear matter found in the interiors of
stars and other dense astrophysical environments, starting from the fundamental
interactions between the constituent nucleons and solving the quantum mechanical
equations of motion that describe their dynamics. This project focuses on
developing new theoretical techniques to predict the behavior of extended
nuclear matter under a wide range of conditions such as those found in the
interiors of stars. Mapping out the behavior of nuclear matter as a function of
asymmetry (i.e., different ratios of protons and neutrons), density, and
temperature is referred to as constructing the nuclear equation of state. The
project will generalize techniques which have previously been used to describe
the properties of atomic nuclei at zero temperature to the problem of extended
nuclear matter (i.e., homogenous systems comprised of an infinite number of
nucleons) at finite temperatures, in order to construct the nuclear equation of
state.

The project develops and applies microscopic many-body methods targeted for
dense nuclear matter, with extensions to access finite temperature and dynamic
response properties. The research is built around modern many-body methods such
as coupled cluster theory and the in-medium similarity renormalization group. In
addition to extending nuclear matter calculations to finite temperature and
dynamic response properties, powerful techniques from machine learning and
dynamical systems are used to develop fast and accurate emulators of our many-
body calculations, which is necessary for computationally-intensive uncertainty
quantification studies. Additionally, renormalization group scale and scheme
dependence of operators that couple to external probes are studied to better
understand how reaction theory and structure theory calculations can be carried
out in a consistent framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.