* 2310807
* IUCRC Phase II University of Miami: Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Mitsunori Ogihara, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2028
* USD 99,999.00

Accelerated and real-time analytics is a leading edge of the smart data
revolution, pushed by advances in internet-connected sensor hardware on one side
and accelerated AI/ML analytics on the other. These technologies include machine
learning, cognitive, quantum, neuromorphic, and edge computing combined with new
classes of sensory and programmable hardware components, active storage, flash
storage, in-memory cloud systems, and embedded sensors. They address many
pursuits of national defense and cybersecurity, weather prediction, health- and
disease-monitoring, Industrial IoT, etc. In IUCRC/CARTA Phase II, we’ll develop
new accelerated and real-time approaches to these technologies and their
integration relevant to our partners.

We’ll leverage our cutting-edge research in AI/ML and programmable cyber-systems
to conduct collaborative CARTA research. Our research areas include accelerated
medical image analytics, explainable and interpretable AI/ML for medical and
vision/language models, digital twins for dynamical systems with acceleration,
and physics-based modeling with AI/ML for improved understanding. Our research
will be primarily “application neutral;” i.e., the techniques can be applied
with modifications across multiple industry sectors, including cyber security,
healthcare and medical, dynamic systems, environment, and business intelligence.
Our exploration will include deep learning, semi-supervised learning, federated
learning, architectures, image understanding, real-time simulations, and
blockchains. Our project will benefit businesses by providing a larger pool of
highly skilled workforce. We’ll disseminate the results of this collaborative
research with industry widely by publishing them in appropriate journals and
conferences and share the results of our research with other non-CARTA
institutions that want to duplicate this approach. We’ll leverage our many
programs for our underrepresented students both in the undergraduate and the
graduate populations to recruit students for summer internships at our industry
partners and to do research in CARTA projects. We’ll also leverage our MS in
Data Science Program to find opportunities for the students to do projects as
industry interns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.