* 2310327
* Long Term Effects of Colonization on Culture Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2027
* USD 295,743.00

This project investigates and compares nonelite Maya peoples’ contributions to
social change associated with the profound impacts of the first century of
Colonial encounters. This research, focuses on variable responses at the
household and community scales, informs on the how these entities confronted and
endured a period of dire social upheaval. There was little uniformity in the
experiences, strategies enacted, and outcomes among indigenous settlements and
the comparative, regional approach of this project at multiple settlements
documents the strategies employed by ordinary people. The household was the
fundamental unit of social and economic production for premodern states and in
early Colonial settings. Focusing on household archaeology, this project
compares rural perspectives on social change to understand local adaptations
beyond the scope of written history. Cross-culturally and historically,
countryside localities often served, in times of societal disjunction and
collapse, as wellsprings of cultural preservation and innovation. Northern Maya
peoples persisted through a century and a half of drastic depopulation due to
famine, drought, pestilence, illness, persecution, and exploitation, followed by
a demographic recovery. Historical sources inadequately credit the resiliency
and innovations of indigenous householders of the early Colonial years, and
their long-term historical successes, as indicated by the persistence of five
million speakers of Yucatec Maya languages today and their ongoing contributions
to society, globally. The project represents an international and
interdisciplinary collaboration that provides research training and publication
opportunities for university students and professional staff, including those of
Yucatec Maya descent. It also contributes to the education and training of local
Maya assistants and host villages in terms of understanding and preserving
cultural heritage.

How did towns, households, and individuals negotiate outcomes, passively or
actively, in the emergent politico-economic contexts of this disjuncture? Did
they engage in resistance (outright or hidden), negotiation (interpersonal or
through legal mechanisms), incorporation (such as aspects of Christian doctrine
or European cuisine), cooperation (fleeting or long-term), flight (temporary or
permanent), or dynamically shifting combinations of these approaches? These
responses are reconstructed from data bearing on the spatial organization of
communities and house groups, family size, agrarian strategies, labor dedicated
to crafting exchange or tribute goods, comparative family wealth or
impoverishment, sanctioned and black market exchanges of goods, exploitation of
wild, domesticated, and natural resources augmenting productive capacities, and
the stability, duration, and growth of domestic units. The researchers bring
expertise in the analysis of remote sensing data (Lidar), pedestrian settlement
survey and mapping, excavation, and laboratory analysis of household material
assemblages (artifacts), radiocarbon dating, faunal resources and botanicals
(dietary reconstruction), and historical archives. Assessing changes during the
first 100 years of colonialism will be facilitated by comparisons to the
investigators’ extensive dataset (from prior research) on late Pre-Columbian
household archaeology in the region and in the time period immediately preceding
the Colonial era.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.