* 2310869
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership - Visible Light-wave Generation and Manipulation through Non-Linear Waveguide Technology (VIBRANT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Shamsul Arafin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 425,000.00

Visible Light-wave, particularly green, generation and manipulation in a
functional and miniaturized photonic integrated circuit is currently of
significant interest for biophotonic applications as means to interrogate and
characterize human tissue in order to rapidly diagnose or treat various
illnesses with the promise of much improved healthcare. Current state-of-the-art
optics for these applications are cumbersome, inflexible and costly. Leveraging
the technological advancement made for implementing photonic integrated circuits
in data- and telecommunication, this international collaborative research will
provide a low-cost solution by realizing full optical systems on a centimeter-
scale chip. The research project will be carried out between the US-The Ohio
State University, and Ireland- Queens University Belfast, University College
Cork and Munster Technological University. The success of this project will make
significant advancements in a variety of photonic technologies, including
robust, scalable, chemical and biological sensing via sensing systems on a chip
that in turn, will have impact on the fields of sensing. The proposed integrated
green photonic circuits involve a new architecture incorporating many integrated
devices, leading to dense photonic integration on chip. This project will also
place a strong emphasis on international collaboration, undergraduate research,
and outreach to high school students who are interested in careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. Graduate students and postdocs working
on this project will perform joint experiments with visiting team members from
these four institutions. The researchers also plan to include a short exchange
visit for the students to facilitate the exchange of research experiences as
well as the development of collaborations.

The goal of this US-Ireland collaborative research project is to study visible
light-wave generation and manipulation through non-linear waveguide technology
to realize functional photonic integrated circuits (PICs). The primary research
objective is to develop a PIC technology platform in the green spectral band. To
enable this technological breakthrough, the project will co-integrate the
materials for second harmonic generation with silicon nitride waveguides and
infrared III-V pump lasers to allow the generation of green-light on-chip. The
project will use an on-chip continuous-wave GaAs-laser emitting at 1062 nm to
excite a high-Q lithium niobate (LN) ring resonator and subsequently generate
the second harmonic (531 nm). Other new pulsed laser deposited- non-linear
materials will be studied, developed, and characterized for efficient up-
conversion. The integration technology will utilize transfer printing to
evanescently and end-fire couple the non-linear materials and pump lasers with
the low-loss waveguides. Novel LN PIC designs, fabrication and hybrid
integration processes will be developed. We will explore modal phase matching
and periodic poling-based quasi phase matching techniques on these non-linear
materials to compare effectiveness of each of these methods. The limits of the
poll-free modal phase matching technique in terms of achieving high second
harmonic generation/visible conversion efficiency will be investigated. If
successful, this PIC technology will offer compelling size, weight, power and
cost reduction advantages and enable a wide range of emerging application in
areas including sensing, security, medical, research and communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.