* 2310630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The impact of permafrost thaw on the fate and magnitude of carbon aquatic transport from Arctic tundra soil
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Edward Schuur, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 02/28/2025
* USD 57,113.00

Permafrost thaw in Arctic watersheds triggers the release of previously
sequestered, ancient carbon to the atmosphere and to stream systems - a feedback
that accelerates climate warming. Atmospheric release of carbon has been well-
documented for decades; however, water is more difficult to monitor and its role
in the Arctic carbon cycle has often been overlooked. This research will explore
the environmental drivers that Arctic groundwater and headwater streams play in
long-term permafrost carbon release. Better understanding the emerging role that
water plays in the carbon cycle in a warming Arctic will help improve regional
carbon budgets, quantifying the amount of carbon lost from the land that is
exported via rivers in a watershed underlain by permafrost. The research will
also aid in monitoring the impacts that climate change and resulting permafrost
thaw have on ancient permafrost carbon release by carbon dating the dissolved
carbon carried away in rivers to identify ancient permafrost signatures.

At a long-term experimental study site in interior Alaska, 50% of the soil
carbon lost from soils annually was unaccounted for in atmospheric carbon flux
measurements. The missing 50% of carbon lost is hypothesized to be exported in
dissolved organic carbon fluxes and that an increasing amount of ancient,
permafrost carbon is released each year with increasing permafrost thaw. This
research will (1) help to resolve the Arctic net ecosystem carbon budget and
help to parameterize future Earth System Models; (2) identify the proportion of
dissolved organic carbon that is ancient permafrost carbon, using radiocarbon
dating; and (3) identify how environmental drivers, such as thaw, impact
dissolved organic carbon concentration and age in order to help constrain future
predictions of dissolved organic carbon export. Further, the project team will
facilitate various outreach activities in Arizona and within the local community
surrounding the field site in interior Alaska, to include the broader public as
well as a future cohort of young scientists in this work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.