* 2310201
* I-Corps: Photochemical Treatment Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Haizhou Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that will provide access to clean water. This project
will generate knowledge to develop efficient, cost-effective and sustainable
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance treatment technologies, help the water
industry and industry dischargers, prepare our society for water sustainability,
and ultimately protect public health. The customers for the technologies include
the industrial wastewater dischargers, hazardous waste site managers, municipal
water districts, private water companies, chemical manufacturing industries, and
government agencies. This project will enhance US technological competitiveness
in the water sector by accelerating new knowledge transfer.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a vacuum ultraviolet light-
driven photochemical technology for treatment of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances. This technology is a clean and energy-efficient medium that directly
photolyzes water to a pool of energetic radicals. The traditional application of
this system for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance treatment is limited by an
unreactive environment (i.e., simultaneous generation of oxidative and reductive
radicals) and low quantum yield of radicals. This project will develop an
innovative system that overcomes the deficiencies, and elucidate the unique
mechanism for generation, propagation, and manipulation of reactive radicals for
a complete destruction of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.