* 2310532
* Conference: Catalyzing University Climate Action Workshop
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Maria Tolstoy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,139.00

Climate change is one of the main and urgent challenges of our time.
Universities, colleges, and other institutions of higher learning are embedded
in the national fabric and widely distributed across the country. This two-day
conference will bring senior officials from a diverse set of climate-engaged
colleges and universities from across the country together with selected
representatives of federal agencies and stakeholder organizations to explore
mechanisms for leveraging the collective contributions of higher education for
addressing the climate crisis. Goals of the meeting will be to share best
practices; improve climate-related communication among institutions and the
government; and facilitate intentional, coordinated, and collective actions of
institutions of higher education as well as those between higher education and
the government. Questions addressed will include: How would a formal network
that connects campus climate action leaders to each other and to federal efforts
strengthen the work being undertaken on individual campuses? How could a network
of institutions of higher education stimulate additional responses to the
climate challenge both inside academia and in the geographic regions in which
these institutions reside? What are the best ways to create, structure, support,
and maintain such a network of institutions? And finally, how will the network
interact with existing networks? Broader impacts of the work are strengthening
the ties, information exchange, and potential sharing of resources between
institutions of higher learning, from community colleges to research intensive
institutions on the topic of climate change and addressing the challenges it
poses to the Nation. The interaction will help make climate-focused efforts at
institutions of higher education more coordinated, effective, equitable, and
more relevant to campuses, communities, and to decision makers across the US. An
additional impact is lowering barriers to climate action and identifying where
university actors can bridge gaps in federal and state programs that address
climate change and its challenges.

The conference: The Catalyzing University Climate Action Workshop will be a two-
day meeting held in Washington DC. It involves discussion and planning among
approximately 100 attendees, most of whom will be representatives from
institutions of higher education. Attendees will also include representatives
from federal agencies who interact with academic institutions on climate-related
issues. The meeting will concentrate on four themes to organize discussions of
the diverse activities that take place on campuses across the country. They are:
(1) Campus sustainability efforts towards reduced emissions and other activities
aimed at increasing sustainability; (2) Climate education—both formal and
informal education—as well as workforce development; (3) Public climate services
that help states, municipalities, local industry, and other partners assess
climate risks and evaluate adaptation and mitigation strategies as well as
identify implementable actions for meeting their climate goals; and (4)
Developing, demonstrating, and testing new technologies, behaviors, and
strategies for climate mitigation and adaptation on campuses as well as working
with researchers and innovation partners to translate new ideas and developments
into commercially available solutions. The first day of the conference and its
presentations will be live streamed to maximize the accessibility of all
interested parties and allow communication with the conveners. The second day
will have breakout groups involving those present in person. These will focus on
forging a plan for developing a network of climate-active academic institutions
and how it could be structured, implemented, and sustained.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.