* 2310002
* WoU-MMA: Astrophysics with Very High-Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 715,000.00

High-energy gamma-rays are used to study the most extreme objects in the
Universe, such as black holes at the center of active galaxies and gamma-ray
bursts (GRBs). Cosmic gamma-rays can also reveal new physics beyond the standard
models of particle physics and cosmology. The most powerful very high-energy
sources are extragalactic and have narrow jets of high-energy particles beamed
in the direction of Earth. This award supports researchers at the University of
California-Santa Cruz to conduct studies of how the astrophysical jets propagate
and what processes occur within them. The team will apply high-energy gamma-ray
observations with the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope System
(VERITAS) to study key features of active galactic nuclei (AGN) and GRBs, and
use these sources as beacons to study the properties of the extragalactic medium
through which the gamma-rays propagate. The team will create unique research
opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students, and develop
a “citizen scientist” program that will classify event images recorded with a
next generation imaging air Cherenkov telescope.

Very high-energy gamma-ray measurements provide the means to probe the
properties of extreme astrophysical objects, including the emission-region size
and location and the magnetic field strength, crucial information about the
particles being accelerated and the underlying acceleration mechanisms. Applying
expanded datasets obtained with VERITAS and new data analysis techniques that
harness machine-learning will increase the sensitivity to study the
astrophysical sources and constrain the models and properties of the
environments that are anticipated to accelerate the highest energy cosmic rays.
A closely related search for counterparts to real-time transient gravitational
wave and neutrino multi-messenger events will enhance the understanding of the
extreme Universe. The data will also be used to study gamma-ray absorption by
collisions with the extragalactic background light, comparing to new direct
measurements, that will test predictions of cosmological models of star
formation and galaxy evolution, as well as Lorentz invariance at the highest
energies. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.