* 2310829
* Collaborative Research: Effects of ferric iron on heat transport in Earth's mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Susannah Dorfman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 07/31/2025
* USD 225,000.00

Heat transport in Earth’s mantle affects plate tectonics, volcanism, and the
magnetic field. How materials carry heat varies with depth, temperature, and
composition. This project tests how oxidized iron changes heat transport in the
mantle. Oxidized iron-rich rock in tectonic plates subducts to the mantle and
may be enriched at the base of the mantle. In this project, researchers will
conduct experiments to grow mantle-relevant crystals with compositions including
oxidized iron. They will measure heat flow in these crystals at high pressures
and temperatures. The results will allow them to examine how reactions between
Earth's atmosphere and mantle rock affect the Earth’s dynamics as a consequence
of their ability to transport heat. This project will enable a new technique at
Michigan State and establish collaboration between researchers in Michigan and
Taiwan through experiments and shared graduate student and postdoctoral scholar
training. Michigan undergraduate students will be introduced to geology of
Taiwan and thermal properties of Earth materials.

Thermal conductivity of mantle silicates modulates the Earth’s dynamics. Recent
studies have investigated the effects of iron and pressure-induced spin
transitions on thermal conductivity in mantle minerals. However, these studies
have been limited to reduced compositions such as ferropericlase and ferrous-
iron-rich bridgmanite. The researchers will use ultrafast time-domain thermo-
reflectance (TDTR) spectroscopy in diamond anvil cells to determine the lattice
thermal conductivity of oxidized ferric-iron-rich bridgmanite and post-
perovskite. They will isolate the effects of the pressure-driven spin pairing
transition in ferric-iron-bearing bridgmanite and effects of aluminum versus
ferric iron on heat transport. This collaboration between Michigan State
University, the University of Michigan, and the Academia Sinica in Taiwan will
combine complementary expertise in crystal growth, extreme high pressure and
temperature experiments, and heat flow measurement to measure how differences in
oxidation in the mantle impact mantle convection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.