* 2310203
* CIF: Small: Shared Information: Theory and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This research develops the concept of shared information as a fundamental,
quantifiable, and compact measure for capturing interdependence among multiple
correlated signals. It will seek to emulate and enhance the spirit of Claude
Shannon’s celebrated and enormously consequential notion of mutual information
which constitutes a measure of correlation between two random signals. The role
of shared information will be investigated for operational meanings in network
information theory with implications for related communication applications and
as a self-contained, compact, and calculable figure-of-merit that can be
optimized in learning applications where statistical correlation is of central
interest. The goal is to establish central theoretical and practical roles for
shared information in network data compression, distributed function
computation, reliable and secure information transmission in networks, signal
cluster detection, and a new category of statistical estimation and learning
algorithms. Engineering applications include communication and signal processing
in a smart home, satellite image reconstruction, and messaging protocols in
automated guided vehicles and drone swarms.

The technical approach involves (i) establishing basic properties of shared
information; (ii) examining its role in common randomness generation including
algorithms for combinatorial tree packing and network function computation,
especially signal acquisition or omniscience; (iii) querying common randomness;
(iv) hypothesis testing for cluster and community detection; (v) multiuser data
compression and channel transmission; and (vi) estimation of shared information
when the underlying probability distribution of the signals is unknown. Rooted
in information theory, the research has rich connections to algorithms in
combinatorial graph theory (in Theoretical Computer Science) and correlated
multiarmed bandits (in Learning). It aims to create advances in network
information theory through new models and methods that highlight interactive
communication among the terminals, with the concept of shared information
serving as a linchpin. Links to important problems in combinatorial algorithms,
by way of shared information, highlight interpretations that promise new
understanding and solutions. Furthermore, the estimation of shared information
using correlated multiarmed bandits will introduce models, concepts, and
algorithms in an essential but fledgling realm of machine learning. The research
will be accomplished using methods from information theory, Markov random
fields, combinatorial graph theory, and statistical inference. Expected research
outcomes include interactive techniques for multiuser data compression and
channel transmission, algorithms for combinatorial tree packing, methods for
detecting clusters of correlated signals, and bandit algorithms for parameter
estimation in correlated signals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.