* 2310067
* Studies of the Proton Structure with Electron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Fatiha Benmokhtar, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2026
* USD 230,000.00

Half a century of experimental investigations into the proton's internal
structure have provided remarkable insight into the dynamics of the quarks and
gluons making up the particle. However, many outstanding questions remain. Even
the most fundamental aspect, the origin of the mass of nuclei, is uncertain. To
date, the most visible mass of the universe, as well as a complete description
of how quarks are confined into composite particles remain outside our current
understanding. The PI and her Duquesne undergraduate students will investigate
the origin of the spin of the proton through its fundamental constituents, using
electron beams at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility.

This award supports the PI and Duquesne undergraduate students in research
aiming to study the structure of the proton through its partonic distributions
using polarized electron scattering in the deep inelastic scattering regime in
Hall B at Jefferson lab. These measurements will help understand the origin of
single hadron formation inside the proton. Combined with additional measurements
on deuterium targets, the PI will be able to probe the strangeness contribution
to the structure of the nucleon through its partonic distribution using charged
kaon and pion detection. The Duquesne group will participate in monitoring and
maintaining the software for two hybrid Ring Imaging Cherenkov Detectors that
are important for particle identification. Software development and Physics data
analysis will be performed at Duquesne, while electronics testing and other
hardware projects will be performed at Jefferson lab. This project will provide
undergraduate students with opportunities to further their training and
education outside of the classroom. This includes gaining experience in the
design, assembly, and testing of modern particle Physics detectors, high tech
fast electronics, and scientific data analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.