* 2310955
* Knockoff Feature Selection Techniques for Robust Inference in Supervised and Unsupervised Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yushu Shi, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to develop a new methodology for selecting key features among
a large pool of potential variables that are predictive of the final outcomes.
When applied to the biomedical field, these methods will enable the discovery of
determinants of patient health, thus improving the prevention, treatment, and
management of diseases. When used in fields such as engineering, psychology,
sociology, economics, and environmental sciences, these methods can improve
manufacturing processes, social programs that focus on diversity and equity, the
care and management of mental health, and the preservation of the environment
and natural resources. Additionally, the new methods will also help to generate
high-quality synthetic data while maintaining the confidentiality of the
original information, thereby spurring new scientific discoveries and providing
a valuable educational tool. The project will offer a number of unique
interdisciplinary training initiatives for the future cohorts of data scientists
at the interface of statistics, machine learning, and biomedical sciences.

The research agenda is based on the 'knockoff method' for identifying key
features predictive of the outcomes while maintaining false discovery control.
The methods incorporate the microbiome phylogenetic structure in feature
selection, accommodate missing values, incorporate multiple knockoffs to
increase robustness, employ nonparametric Bayesian models for complex data
structures, and introduce a new knockoff statistic based on conditional
prediction function. The proposed statistics can be paired with state-of-the-art
machine learning models to detect nonlinear relationships while accounting for
feature correlation. Furthermore, by applying knockoff filtering with
unsupervised learning models, this research can identify determinants of the
feature space and provide insights into unsupervised clustering and learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.