* 2310112
* Liquid-noble Bubble Chambers for Dark Matter and CEvNS Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Carl Dahl, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,859.00

The identity of dark matter, which makes up nearly 85% of the matter in the
Universe, and the origin of the matter/anti-matter asymmetry are two of the
current fundamental unknowns in modern physics. Novel instrumentation is under
development aimed at resolving both challenges via searches for GeV-scale dark
matter and precision measurements of neutrino properties via coherent elastic
scattering (CEvNS) of reactor neutrinos. Scalable background-discriminating
techniques, like Scintillating Bubble Chambers (SBC), hold the potential to
revolutionize the sensitivity in these searches. This award supports personnel
at Northwestern University and Northeastern Illinois University in operating,
and analyzing the data from, a 10kg liquid-argon SBC located at the Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory located near Batavia IL USA. The team will
characterize response of the SBC to determine the low-threshold reach of this
technology to distinguish electron and nuclear recoils below approximately 1
keV. The award provides unique opportunities for hands-on instrumentation
experiences for undergraduate researchers, with a directed effort to broaden
access to, and participation within, the physics community for local low-income
and first-generation students.

Nuclear recoils in liquid-noble gas bubble chambers simultaneously create a
flash of scintillation light and nucleate a single bubble in a superheated
liquid target. By combining the electron-recoil insensitivity of the instrument
and the position reconstruction of a bubble chamber with the event-by-event
energy resolution of a scintillator, the SBC technique holds the potential to
eliminate all known backgrounds to dark matter and CEvNS signals. In addition,
superheated noble liquids maintain electron-recoil insensitivity at far higher
degrees of superheat than can be achieved in existing molecular-fluid bubble
chamber, potentially extending the quasi-background-free operation of the SBC to
thresholds as low as 100 eV. The SBC ability to discriminate the electron- and
nuclear-recoils at low-energy may suppress background event levels to that
needed to reach the solar neutrino coherent scattering flow in a dark matter
search, and to achieve signal-to-noise of better than 1 in reactor CEvNS
studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.