* 2310031
* RUI: The 3D Momentum and Spin Structure of the Nucleon in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alexey Prokudin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2026
* USD 239,996.00

The visible universe is made up of nucleons (protons and neutrons) and
electrons. Nucleons themselves are interacting dynamical systems of partons,
quarks, and gluons—the degrees of freedom of the theory of strong interactions,
Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD). Unfolding the QCD quark and gluon structure of
nucleons is a crucial area of study in modern nuclear physics. The main
objective of this project is to advance theoretical and phenomenological studies
of the three-dimensional (3D) momentum and spin structure of the nucleon in QCD.
By doing this, the project aims to discover the internal landscape of the
nucleon. This project expands the impact of the future program at the Electron-
Ion Collider (EIC), a powerful new facility to be built in the United States, as
well as of the existing programs at Jefferson Lab and Brookhaven National
Laboratory, by performing phenomenological and theoretical studies, providing
analysis, explanation of present data, and predictions for future measurements.
The project contributes to the education of a diverse, globally engaged
workforce with world-class skills by providing and developing courses on modern
statistics and nuclear physics, organizing and teaching summer schools for
graduate students, and running annual workshops on the 3D structure of the
nucleon. The main objective of this project is to advance the theoretical and
phenomenological studies of the 3D momentum and spin structure of the nucleon,
and to map its internal landscape encoded in the Transverse Momentum Dependent
parton distribution and fragmentation functions (TMDs). TMDs are crucial in
understanding the correlations between the intrinsic motion and spin of partons
and the nucleon, which generate Spin Asymmetries measured in various scattering
processes. The project aims to extract the unpolarized 3D structure of the
nucleon with high perturbative precision by performing a global QCD analysis of
data from experiments from world facilities, including HERMES (DESY), COMPASS
(CERN), Jefferson Lab, BELLE (KEK), BaBar (SLAC), BESIII (Beijing), RHIC (BNL),
and LHC (CERN). The study involves a global QCD analysis of the data, unifying
collinear and TMD physics. The project also focuses on studying the spin
structure of the nucleon using all available world data, and extracting
polarized TMDs such as Sivers functions, transversity, Collins Fragmentation
Functions, and others. In addition, the project will combine TMD-related
measurements and the polarized proton-proton scattering data from the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC, BNL) related to twist-3 factorization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.