* 2310209
* Travel: NSF Student Travel for 2023 USENIX Conferences SOUPS 2023 and Security 2023
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 40,000.00

The USENIX Security Conference is one of the most important research conferences
for professionals to present cutting edge research of fundamental importance to
advancing understanding of computer systems security. Published research has
specific application to security threats and vulnerabilities in computing
systems; the design, implementation and implications of systems software;
virtualization, system and network management and troubleshooting; cloud and
edge computing; security, privacy, and trust; mobile and wireless systems; and
more. This award provides funding for approximately 25 students to attend the
18th USENIX Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS ‘23) and the 32nd
USENIX Security Symposium (Security ‘23).

USENIX conferences gather researchers from across the academic, government, and
industry communities to foster cross-disciplinary approaches and to address
shared research challenges. This cross-disciplinary emphasis makes them well-
suited as a target for student participation, and the important topics addressed
in these conferences encourage student research and collaboration in critical
areas of advanced computing. This award enables the participation of students
who would otherwise be unable to attend the conferences. It also extends the
impact of research presented to a broader audience inclusive of junior
researchers from across the country. For 2023, USENIX events are planned to be
in-person events, with virtual participation if pandemic conditions require.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.