* 2310719
* Dark Matter on the Smallest Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Adrienne Erickcek, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Adrienne Erickcek at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The protons, neutrons, and electrons that compose all the elements on the
periodic table account for less than sixteen percent of the matter in the
Universe. The composition of the remaining eighty-four percent of matter is one
of the major outstanding questions in physics. As part of this award, Professor
Erickcek will investigate how the smallest dark-matter structures can be used to
understand the composition and origins of dark matter. This project serves the
national interest by promoting the progress of science through both the
knowledge it will generate and the training it will provide undergraduate and
graduate students. This project will have broader impacts as well. Professor
Erickcek will continue to expose high-school physics students to the mystery of
dark matter using the "How Do You Weigh a Galaxy?" curriculum that she designed
in partnership with the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center. She will also
share the quest to understand dark matter more widely by giving public lectures.

More technically, the size of the smallest dark-matter structures depends on the
origins of dark matter, and their abundance provides information about the
expansion history of the Universe during its first tenth of a second. If dark
matter was produced through pair production, then dark-matter annihilations
within the dense centers of the smallest dark-matter clumps may finally provide
a non-gravitational signature of the existence of dark matter. Under this award,
Professor Erickcek will extend the scope and improve the accuracy of the method
her team has developed to calculate the dark-matter annihilation rate within the
smallest halos, leading to more robust constraints on thermal dark-matter
production. She will also explore how observations of kiloparsec-scale density
fluctuations constrain the non-thermal creation of dark matter. Finally, this
award will support Professor Erickcek's investigation of the connection between
the matter power spectrum and the velocity dispersion of the dark-matter
particles, which aims to improve our ability to use observations of small-scale
structure to learn about the fundamental properties of the dark-matter particle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.