* 2310269
* The Polymer Physics of Separation Membranes (A DPOLY Short Course at the 2023 American Physical Society March Meeting)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Hee Jeung Oh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 8,000.00

Chemical separations are required in many industrial processes for producing
chemicals, fuels, and pharmaceuticals, purifying water, and more. Driven by
advances in polymer science, membrane-based separations have demonstrated
exemplary performance and energy efficiency in applications such as seawater
desalination and the enrichment of nitrogen from air. Continued innovation in
polymer membrane technology is needed to expand the role of membrane-based
separations as an energy-efficient alternative to conventional approaches. A
short course, “The Polymer Physics of Separation Membranes,” held at the 2023
American Physical Society (APS) March Meeting, will prepare a cohort of early-
stage researchers to design next-generation polymer membranes. The short course
will teach foundational aspects of membrane design for gas and water
separations, including established and emerging uses, polymer physics in
multiscale design and characterization, and formulation and non-equilibrium
processing methods used to manufacture polymer membranes at scale. Convergence
research will be fostered by bringing together researchers from the fundamental
polymer physics and membrane design and processing disciplines. In support of
this educational opportunity, this award will provide 20 graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and early-career professionals with funds to offset
their travel and registration expenses. The course organizers have committed to
focus recruiting efforts on promoting diversity and graduate student
participation.

"The Polymer Physics of Separation Membranes" short course will be held on March
4th and 5th, 2023, at the 2023 APS March Meeting in Las Vegas, NV. The course
will be delivered through the APS Division of Polymer Physics (DPOLY). The goal
is to bring together researchers across various disciplines, including polymer
physics, polymer chemistry, materials science, and membrane technology, to
facilitate discussions that address the design, characterization, and processing
of polymer separation membranes. Over one and a half days, field-leading experts
will guide participants in tutorial sessions and hands-on learning activities
emphasizing the importance of bridging the multiple time and length scales
associated with the polymer physics of separation membranes. The topics covered
in the course include an overview of polymer membranes for water purification
and gas separations, membrane fabrication at the industrial scale and non-
equilibrium formation mechanisms, polymer materials and their structural
characterization, solute partitioning in polymers via interfacial
characterization and computation, solute dynamics in gas and liquid separation
polymers, and field-driven transport through separation membranes. This short
course is the first of its kind offered through DPOLY. It is unique in its focus
on merging concepts from fundamental polymer physics with applied membrane
design and processing approaches. The award of travel and registration fee
subsidies is expected to attract diverse researchers to attend a short course
they may not otherwise be able to attend.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.