* 2310639
* Physical Models for Cancer Cells with Links to Alterations in Genome Organization
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2028
* USD 426,459.00

Cancer is an evolutionary disease caused by steady accumulation of sequential
somatic mutations. By gaining fitness advantage, cancer cells undergo rapid
growth. The overarching goals of this award are to use theory and computations
to provide quantitative predictions for collective motions of mixtures of cancer
and normal cells and link them to changes in genome organization and dynamics.
To accomplish the goals, the Principal Investigator (PI) will create physical
models to elucidate the principles governing collective cell dynamics in
mixtures of two cell types. The PI will also investigate the differences in the
three-dimensional organization and dynamics of chromosomes between normal and
cancer cells. The two major problems that the PI wishes to solve, using physics-
based ideas, emerge from the following observations. First, it is unclear how
the generation of a single cancer cell interacts with normal cells, and
eventually spreads without control. Second, what are the differences between
movements of normal and cancer cells as they move through constrictions that
arise through cell jamming? The proposed problems were generated by surveying
recent experiments have generated questions that can be quantitatively addressed
using theoretical and computational methods.

To address how cancer cells invade the space of normal cells, in this award, the
investigators will develop methods to solve the organization and dynamics when
cancer cells are mixed with normal cells. Indeed, in all aspects of tissue
formation, ranging from development to breakdown of their structures during
cancer and other diseases, the description of how multiple cell types organize
themselves is a difficult but an important issue. In this award, the
Investigators will develop novel models to simulate the structures and dynamics
of mixtures of cells as a function of cell-cell adhesion, cell-matrix
interactions, and cell division, and apoptosis. The second goal is to study the
effect of cell movement through constrictions on chromosomes in normal and
cancer cells. As cells move, their motions are constricted through cell jamming,
driven by self-crowding of cells and confinement, which profoundly affect
chromatin structures, possibly resulting in altered gene expression. Most recent
experiments have given glimpses of the differences in the chromosome
organization between normal and cancer cells. The ability of a primary tumor to
migrate to distant parts involves a cascade of steps in the invasion of the
cancer cells into heathy tissues. During migration, cancer cells have to, at
least occasionally, squeeze through constrictions in the extra cellular matrix
surrounding the cells. The sizes of the constrictions could be smaller than the
nucleus size, which potentially deforms the genome in the cells. The natural
questions that need to be answered by this award are: Does the deformation of
the nucleus alter the organization of the chromosomes? What insights can one
gain by using theoretical methods to quantitatively understand these
experiments? Answering these questions requires development of models that go
roughly from the molecular scale to tissue level.

The broader impacts of this award will include the development of curated
software, which will be made publicly available. This award will also contribute
to the training of students and postdoctoral fellows in interdisciplinary
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.