* 2310633
* Scattering in Quantum Gravity: Symmetries and Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Monica Pate, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Monica Pate at New York
University.

The formulation of a complete theory unifying quantum mechanics and gravity
remains a fundamental open problem at the forefront of modern physics. The
subject of quantum gravity not only holds great significance for our
understanding of the natural world, but also presents unique challenges that
drive a quest for entirely new principles of physics. Remarkably, a new
principle known as holography has emerged as a potential solution. At present,
the holographic principle is the conjecture that systems of quantum gravity are
equivalent to ordinary physical systems without gravity in fewer dimensions.
This idea is similar to how every detail in a holographic projection is
precisely captured on the corresponding holographic plate. While meaningful
progress in quantum gravity has arisen from concrete realizations of the
holographic principle, many fundamental aspects of the subject remain
unresolved. Notably, we lack definitive predictions for a hypothetical particle
collider that is powerful enough to probe the gravitational force at the quantum
level. Professor Pate's research aims to bridge this gap by specifically
tailoring a novel extension of the holographic principle to this quantum
gravitational scattering problem. Through this research, Professor Pate's
endeavors will contribute to the national interest in attaining a precise
technical understanding of the natural world. This work will critically evaluate
the viability of holography as the new physical paradigm necessary for
describing quantum gravity, while also providing valuable insight into more
basic questions including those regarding the identity of the fundamental
building blocks of the universe. While the content of Professor Pate's research
is selected based on intellectual merit, the strategic choice of problem-driven
as opposed to methods-based projects is well-suited for easing the entry of new
talent into a technically formidable field. The mentorship provided during the
course of these projects will contribute to the development of new scientific
leaders as well as to a sustained growth towards the full participation of women
and members of other underrepresented groups in the field of high energy theory.
As such, these efforts form part of the broader endeavor to create an equitable
and diverse scientific community.

At a more technical level, Professor Pate's research aims to constrain and
determine scattering amplitudes in quantum gravity. Analyses will entail an
extension of the holographic principle from the well-studied context of
asymptotically Anti-de Sitter spacetimes to asymptotically flat spacetimes,
which are the most natural setting for the gravitational scattering problem.
More specifically, aspects of the celestial holographic proposal, which posits
an equivalence between gravitational scattering and a theory with conformal
symmetry on the celestial sphere, will be investigated. A primary objective is
to develop and assess the viability of celestial holography in the context of
quantum gravitational systems that resemble the real world. A specific goal is
to extend many of the novel symmetries and similar organizing principles
underlying recent progress in celestial holography to massive scattering
particles. Another focus will be to develop a coherent picture of boundary and
bulk renormalization in celestial holography. Methods will include a synthesis
of top-down and bottom-up approaches. An auxiliary objective is to uncover new
phenomena within the known laws of physics. The discovery and exploitation of
recently-discovered symmetries of asymptotically flat spacetimes is the main
approach that will be employed to make progress along this front.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.