* 2310174
* From local to global: deciphering oceanic oxygenation responses through the Penultimate Glacial Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Sune Nielsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 685,378.00

Recent records suggest that oxygen levels in the ocean are decreasing. As a
result, oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) have intensified and expanded. Yet,
measurements of ocean dissolved oxygen have been limited in time (since ~1950s)
preventing observations of longer term ocean oxygen trends. Better knowledge of
ocean oxygen in the past will be valuable to understand future impacts due to
climate change. This project will extend ocean oxygen records beyond the 20th
century into the geologic past. The project will target the transition between
warm and cool climate periods to test ocean oxygen response to climate change.
Past oxygen levels will be reconstructed using two different proxies. The
porosity of foraminifera shells is a proxy for oxygen locally in an OMZ, and
thallium isotopes reflect global oxygen content. Therefore, this study will
compare global versus local ocean oxygen changes within two different OMZs that
will be studied. The project will support two female early-career scientists and
undergraduate students. Additional outreach programs will use the Woods Hole
Science and Technology Education Partnership to work with teachers to develop
science curriculum for K-12 schools.

This project will investigate both local and global oxygen responses to
millennial climate change through the Penultimate Glacial cycle, using benthic
foraminiferal surface porosity and thallium isotopes. Surface porosity of
benthic foraminifera has recently been developed as a quantitative proxy of
bottom water dissolved oxygen concentrations in the oxygen minimum zones,
whereas seawater thallium isotopic compositions have proved to track global
ocean oxygen content through Mn oxide burial flux variations. Combination of the
two analyses would thus allow a simultaneous understanding of oxygen minimum
zone and global ocean oxygen responses to the changes of climate states (glacial
and interglacial periods) and to high-resolution transient climate oscillations
during the (de)glaciation. The goal will be achieved with sediment cores from
the Arabian Sea and the Southern California margin oxygen minimum zones. The
study will test the hypotheses of (1) weaker Arabian Sea and California oxygen
minimum zones in the glacial periods compared to the Last Interglacial; (2)
lower global ocean oxygen inventory in the glacial periods; and (3) a close
correlation between the global oxygen content and atmospheric CO2. This study
thus allows evaluation of global versus local ocean oxygenation perturbations in
the two oxygen minimum zones and potential implications on marine respired
carbon storage. This project will support two female early-career scientists and
undergraduate students. Outreach programs in collaboration with Woods Hole
Science and Technology Education Partnership will include class visits and
annual tours and research talks at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to help
local school teachers develop science curriculum and improve climate literacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.