* 2310353
* NSF-BSF: Physical-Chemical Stabilization of Electrodeposition through Fundamental Interfacial Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Ryan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 306,199.00

Electrochemical storage systems (batteries) are ubiquitous, found in everything
from commercial electronics to electric vehicles. In batteries, physical-
chemical processes drive complex, coupled phenomena at the interfaces, such as
electrodeposition. Electrodeposition is the deposition of metallic ions
(dissolved in an electrolyte) onto an electrically conductive surface (the
electrode) in the presence of an electric field. Unstable (i.e. non-uniform)
electrodeposition on the electrodes of batteries leads to performance
degradation and failure. This is one of the main challenges limiting next
generation batteries, which hold potential for longer range electric vehicle and
grid scale energy storage for renewable energy. In this project, the
investigators will use an integrated computational-experimental approach to
study the complex coupling of physical-chemical processes in the interface
region during electrodeposition that lead to unstable deposition. The team will
then use that knowledge to define regions of physical-chemical stabilization (or
destabilization) of electrodeposition. This research will lay the foundation for
engineering more stable batteries with longer lifetimes and higher capacities.
This project is a collaboration between researchers in the United States and
Israel and will provide opportunities for students to not only learn about
state-of-the-art research but also to interact with and learn about different
cultures. The project will train graduate students in both the United States at
Boston University and in Israel at The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and will
engage k-12 students through outreach activities in both countries.

Unstable electrodeposition is caused by heterogeneities, including non-uniform
transport, reactivity, stresses, etc., and leads to performance loss and
failure. While ideally development of homogeneous materials/interfaces/systems
would solve these issues, it is impossible to fabricate perfect systems. In this
project, the investigators will use an integrated computational-experimental
approach to study the complex coupling of physical-chemical processes in the
interface region during electrodeposition that lead to unstable deposition. The
team will then use that knowledge to define regions of physical-chemical
stabilization (or destabilization) of electrodeposition. Using computational and
experimental model systems we will investigate the effects of both physical and
chemical properties on electrodeposition for several metal systems (i.e. silver,
copper, zinc, etc.) with the goal of developing a holistic understanding of the
driving forces for stable electrodeposition that will lead to the mapping of
electrodeposition stabilization and destabilization regimes. This project will
test the hypothesis that the location and rate of electrodeposition on the
electrode surface can be controlled by tuning the physical-chemical properties
of the material system. To accomplish the research objectives a meso-scale
computational model of the interfacial region will be coupled with controlled
experimental investigations of electrodeposition. Controlled experimental
studies of the electrode interface will provide data for parameterization, and
validation of the model; while the computational models will guide experimental
studies and provide further insight into the fundamental physical phenomena that
lead to observed experimental behavior. By integrating the experimental and
computational research, the project will develop a fundamental understanding of
the physical-chemical processes that drive unstable or stable electrodeposition
including interfacial transport, surface features, such as engineered surface
roughness, changing surface reactivity through dopants, and structured
interfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.