* 2310130
* Probing the Majorana Nature of Neutrinos with KamLAND-Zen
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Grant, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2026
* USD 480,000.00

Neutrinos are electrically neutral, weakly interacting, subatomic particles and
are one of the most abundant particles in the universe. Our understanding of the
fundamental nature of neutrinos has rapidly progressed in recent decades, yet we
are still unable to some very basic questions. What is the absolute mass of the
neutrino? Why are neutrino masses so small compared to other elementary
particles? How did the neutrino obtain a mass? The answers to these questions
could be intimately related to the neutrino being its own antiparticle, known as
a Majorana particle, and might also explain the absence of anti-matter in the
universe. The PI will shed light on these questions by searching for a
hypothetical nuclear process called neutrinoless double beta decay. An
observation of this process would provide direct proof that neutrinos are
Majorana particles; however, it will be extremely difficult to observe due to
the vast number of very similar processes constantly taking place inside
experiments. A competitive search requires a large quantity of double beta decay
isotope and exquisite suppression of backgrounds. Therefore, the PI will upgrade
the world-leading neutrinoless double beta decay experiment, KamLAND-Zen, with
state-of-the-art data acquisition electronics and novel machine learning
algorithms. This exciting area of experimental research will provide an
excellent platform for training students and postdocs in advanced technical
skills that are highly sought-after in in academia, industry, and national
laboratories.

In the last year, KamLAND-Zen (a liquid scintillator detector in Japan loaded
with Xe-136) began searching for neutrinoless double beta decay in new regions
of phase space for the first time. The PI is implementing major enhancements to
KamLAND-Zen while continuing to collect and analyze new data. The first
enhancement involves a state-of-the-art deep learning algorithm recently
developed by the PI, called KamNET, which will be used to search for the elusive
two-neutrino double beta decays of Xe-136 excited states. The PI will also use
KamNET to perform a combined analysis over all present and past KamLAND-Zen data
to maximize its sensitivity to neutrinoless double beta decay. The second
enhancement involves the installation and commissioning of zero dead-time
waveform digitizer electronics with online event tagging logic, known as
MoGURA2. MoGURA2 will be used to reduce the leading backgrounds in the search
for neutrinoless double beta decay on KamLAND-Zen.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.