* 2310247
* Collaborative Research: Establishing the role of photodegradation in the fate of organic contaminants in aquatic systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Kristine Wammer, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 117,303.00

Synthetic organic compounds such as pesticides and pharmaceuticals can enter
surface water systems (e.g., lakes and rivers) through point sources (e.g.,
effluents from wastewater treatment plants) and non-point sources (e.g., runoff
from urban and agricultural watersheds). These organic pollutants can adversely
affect both human and ecosystem health. Understanding how quickly sunlight
reacts to degrade synthetic organic pollutants in aquatic systems is important
for predicting and managing their health risks. However, laboratory experiments
using simulated sunlight cannot be directly translated to environmental
conditions and greatly overestimate how quickly sunlight reacts with synthetic
organic chemicals in surface water systems including lakes and rivers. As a
result, these chemicals may have longer lifetimes in surface waters than
currently predicted. The overarching goal of this project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of sunlight-induced photochemical degradations of
synthetic organic pollutants in surface water systems. To advance this goal, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) will study approximately 50 pesticides,
pharmaceuticals, and industrial chemicals in the laboratory and outdoors and
will use this information to make accurate predictions about sunlight-driven
degradation reactions in rivers and lakes. The successful completion of this
research will benefit society through the generation of new data and fundamental
knowledge about the extents and rates of sunlight-driven photochemical reactions
of synthetic organic pollutants in aquatic systems. This new data and knowledge
will be critical for evaluating the fate and lifetime of potentially toxic
organic chemicals in lakes and rivers. Additional benefits will be achieved
through student education and training including the mentoring of one graduate
student at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and two undergraduate students at
the University of St. Thomas, a predominantly undergraduate institution.

Sunlight-mediated photodegradation is among the most important abiotic
transformation processes in aquatic systems for synthetic organic compounds
(SOCs) such as pesticides and pharmaceuticals. A major goal of this project is
to test the hypothesis that laboratory-scale experiments overpredict the
photolysis rates of SOCs in lakes and rivers by many orders of magnitude due to
discrepancies between laboratory light sources and environmental conditions. To
test this hypothesis, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to evaluate the
direct photolysis of approximately 50 pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and
industrial chemicals in relevant aquatic systems with the goal of developing a
first principles kinetic model to relate laboratory direct photolysis rates to a
variety of environmental conditions. The model will be validated using outdoor
mid-scale experiments that quantify the impacts of diurnal variability, water
depth, cloud cover, and seasonality on the rates of direct photolysis of SOCs in
aquatic systems. Finally, the PIs propose to couple laboratory and outdoor
experiments, and modeling to investigate the indirect photolysis rates of
selected SOCs in the presence of dissolved organic matter (DOM), a natural
photosensitizer in surface water systems that absorbs light to generate
photochemically produced reactive intermediates such as hydroxyl radicals and
singlet oxygen species. The successful completion of this project has the
potential for transformative impact by linking laboratory-measured rates with
expected photodegradation rates in lakes/rivers for a wide range of SOCs. To
implement the educational and training goals of this project, the PIs propose to
leverage existing programs at the University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison and the
University of St. Thomas to recruit and mentor undergraduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, to work on this project. In addition, the
PIs plans to 1) integrate the research findings into existing undergraduate and
graduate courses in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the
UW-Madison and 2) develop a website that will include a database containing all
the validated results of the project. These results will be disseminated to
water resource managers, relevant stakeholders, and the public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.