* 2310526
* High-Entropy Alloy Superconductors under High Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 456,786.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Superconductors play a vital role in various sectors of the US economy ranging
from energy transmission, medical imaging, magnetically confined plasma for
fusion energy generation, high-speed transportation, as well as quantum
computing and information technology. Superconducting materials are special
because they exhibit zero resistance to current flow and spontaneously expel
magnetic fields below a critical transition temperature. High-entropy alloys are
a special class of metal that has near equal amounts of typically five or more
elements as opposed to more conventional alloys that usually add small amounts
of several elements to one base (e.g. Iron, Nickel, Cobalt). High-entropy alloys
represent a new addition to the family of superconductors as they show a
phenomenon of robust superconductivity, where the superconducting transition
temperature is unaffected even when the material is subjected to very high
pressure. This work is uncovering a fundamental understanding of the
superconducting phenomenon in high-entropy alloys for the purposes of tailoring
their microstructure using 3-D printing techniques to further enhance their
ability to generate higher magnetic fields required for practical applications.
This project supports graduate and undergraduate students who are receiving
training at national experimental and computational facilities, leading to a
pipeline of well-rounded materials science graduates for employment in academia,
national laboratories, and industry. The University of Alabama at Birmingham in
partnership with the Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the
southeastern region jointly undertake efforts in broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in the science and engineering fields.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In this project, combined theoretical and experimental expertise is called upon
to investigate the phenomenon of robust superconductivity in high-entropy alloys
at high-pressures and low-temperatures. Four-probe electrical resistance and
magnetic susceptibility measurements on three classes of high-entropy alloy
superconductors crystallizing in body-centered cubic phase (TiZrHfTaNb),
hexagonal close-packed phase (TiZrHfReNb), and Cesium-Chloride type phase
(RhPdScZrNb) are being conducted. The superconducting measurements are being
extended to low temperatures of 1.9 K and pressures as high as 200 GPa using a
custom diamond anvil with embedded probes for electrical transport and magnetic
susceptibility measurements. The crystal structures of high-entropy alloy
superconductors under high-pressures and low temperatures are also being
examined using a synchrotron x-ray source. This study is providing corresponding
first-principles calculations based on density functional theory, electron-
phonon calculations, and stochastic random structures across three classes of
high-entropy alloys as a function of external pressure. The resulting
simulations of structural, electronic, and superconducting properties are being
compared directly with experiments, which are helping benchmark the
computational frameworks. Current studies on 3-D printed high-entropy alloy
superconductors are offering unique microstructural control that increases the
upper critical magnetic field which is of importance for practical applications
of superconductors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.