* 2310951
* Center: IUCRC Phase II Florida International University: Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science (CARFS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Kenneth Furton, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2028
* USD 605,000.00

In recent decades, translation of fundamental discoveries to forensic method
development has improved forensic investigations. Efforts continue to address
scientific limitations and expand fundamental research that can contribute to
existing and developing forensic applications. Investigators at Florida
International University (lead site), Sam Houston State University, and Texas
A&M AgriLife Research, along with collaborators at Boston University, Howard
University, Syracuse University, and University of Michigan, address aspects of
this broad challenge through the continuation of the Center for Advanced
Research in Forensic Science (CARFS). This Phase II Industry University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) will continue to serve as a platform for
innovative and, in many cases, interdisciplinary forensic science research
activities at the interface of academia, government, and industry, bringing
together forensic science leaders in state-of-the-art research laboratories,
specialized facilities, and institutes across the nation. CARFS researchers will
conduct projects in a range of forensic areas including forensic biology,
chemistry, toxicology and medicine, as well as digital evidence, environmental
forensics, and nuclear forensics. The Center communicates new findings and tools
to a range of stakeholders, including forensic science practitioners, research
laboratories, industrial partners, and government and private forensic science
end users, ultimately supporting safety and justice for the nation. The Center's
research sites provide training and internship opportunities to a diverse group
of students, thus supporting the future US STEM and forensic workforce.

The current state of forensic science has required advanced and novel techniques
and approaches that have pushed the boundaries of traditional scientific areas
such as chemistry and biology and require the collaboration of engineers and
computer scientists to develop next generation devices and analysis methods. The
goal of CARFS is to bring together industrial partners, including the end-user
community, with academic forensic science researchers with an aim to develop,
implement and commercialize tools that benefit the national forensic science
enterprise. Across the sites and collaborators of CARFS Phase II, projects are
proposed to the industrial advisory board in the following initial areas, with
potential for expansion based on evolving research needs: Forensic Biology
(e.g., entomology, genomics, microbial), Forensic Chemistry (e.g., trace,
biosensors), Forensic Medicine (e.g., anthropology, taphonomy), Forensic
Toxicology (e.g., metabolomics, biomarkers), Digital Evidence (e.g., mobile
devices, authentication), Environmental Forensics (e.g., trafficking, source
attribution) and Nuclear Forensics (e.g., source signatures). CARFS will
continue to grow its partnerships, research, and footprint while embracing
diversity to mentor and foster the future forensic science workforce. The center
leverages additional NSF opportunities for student training and mentoring,
including through the REU, INTERN, and START supplement programs. This grant is
jointly supported by the National Science Foundation (Division of Chemistry,
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate; Division Of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences, Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorate; and
Division of Social and Economic Sciences, Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Directorate) and the National Institute of Justice (Office of
Investigative and Forensic Sciences).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.