* 2310305
* RUI: Field Theories and Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sophia Domokos, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 135,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Sophia Domokos at the
New York Institute of Technology.

When swarms of tiny particles interact very forcefully and often, new phenomena
emerge: electron seas conspire to let currents flow forever; and elementary
particles called quarks and gluons clump together into the protons and neutrons
at the center of every atom. Predicting what kind of structure emerges in such
strongly interacting systems remains a fundamental mystery in physics. Its
resolution will advance our understanding of a huge array of physical systems,
from atomic nuclei to the cores of neutron stars and to the dense plasma present
in the earliest moments of our universe. In her research, Professor Domokos will
use a phenomenon which emerges within string theory and which is known as
"holographic duality" to categorize and classify clumps of elementary particles
(like protons and neutrons) that emerge in strongly interacting systems. Her
work will not only help to understand these objects better, but it will also
make predictions for new structures we have never seen before. Research in this
area advances the national interest by pushing the frontier of our scientific
understanding of strongly interacting systems, and by developing new mathematics
to describe them. This project will also yield significant broader impacts.
Professor Domokos will involve a diverse group of undergraduate students in her
research activities, providing key research training for students from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM, and helping to launch their scientific
careers. Professor Domokos will also give undergraduate and general-audience
lectures to foster public understanding of cutting-edge physics research, to
spark a fascination with physics in a new generation of students, and to recruit
new students to study physics at the undergraduate level.

More technically, the proposed work expands holographic duality in two important
directions. The first line of work addresses the critically important but
challenging non-perturbative sector of the duality. Using a supersymmetric toy
model will shed light on how non-trivial classical backgrounds enhance the
spectrum of solitonic objects. It will also lead to new insights into recently
identified systems of extended Bogomolny equations for monopoles. The second
program pushes the boundaries of holographic models for hadron physics,
enhancing the applicability of the correspondence to real-world problems, and
providing a set of meaningful undergraduate projects. It will also generate
novel techniques for pushing holographic models beyond commonly-used but
severely limiting approximations, and will identify new effects --- such as the
mixing of meson and glueball states --- that appear beyond this limit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.