* 2310875
* Continued Curation of the Marine Geology and Geophysics Collection in the OSU/CEOAS Marine and Geology Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 806,604.00

This project supports the operation of the Marine and Geology Repository at
Oregon State University. The collection includes more than 25,000 sediment
cores, rocks, deep sea nodules, and sediment trap samples. Samples from the
collection are distributed to scientists, educators, and museums throughout the
United States and around the world. Broader impacts include internships for
undergraduate students and educational programs and tours targeting a wide age
range (K-12, undergraduate, graduate, public).

The College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences at Oregon State University
established the Marine and Geology Repository (OSU-MGR) in 1971 as an NSF-
sponsored community facility. This project supports NSF’s Marine Geology
Collection consisting of approximately 16,000 m of marine sediments from almost
7000 cores, 15,500 rock samples from almost 600 dredges, 570 rock samples from
61 dives (Alvin, ROV), 528 deep-sea manganese nodules, and 1650 sediment trap
samples. Through high quality archiving of rocks and sediment under continuous
refrigeration, these one-of-a-kind materials are preserved for the scientific
community. For more than 50 years the mission of the OSU-MGR has remained, to
archive and distribute geological samples and associated meta data,
predominantly sediment cores, rocks, nodules and sediment trap samples, for
scientific research and education. Over the past 30 years, more than 190,000
samples have been distributed to scientists, educators, and museums throughout
the United States and around the world. 33% of these are from cores/dredges that
are more than 5 years old and 75% go to non-OSU investigators. With more than
32,500 samples taken over the last 7 years the demand remains high. Long-term
goals include: 1) To continue to improve services to the community, including
virtual capabilities, data acquisition, and remote sampling. 2) To collect,
capture, and serve non-destructive data from both shipboard and repository
sources. 3) Support teaching, training, and learning through use of the OSU-MGR
repository in graduate, undergraduate, K-12 classes, REU programs, summer
schools, and employing undergraduate student workers from diverse backgrounds,
as well as by opening the facility to the public for tours, open houses, and
presentations. Products will be disseminated through the OSU-MGR website and
national databases. The online data repository will be made FAIR—Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, Reproducible—by linking data to unique identifiers
including DOI, ORCID, IGSN, and R2R Expedition IDs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.