* 2310185
* Engineering Fuel Cell Electrodes to Overcome Ion Transport Limitations using Low-cost, Efficient Lignin-based Ionomers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shudipto Dishari, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 489,134.00

Eco-friendly, affordable technologies for electric cars are needed to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. One promising solution is the proton exchange membrane
fuel cell (PEMFC), an electrochemical technology that uses hydrogen as fuel.
However, current PEMFCs use an ion-conducting polymer, called Nafion which is
expensive and not eco-friendly. Most importantly, Nafion fails to transport
protons efficiently in thin layers (coating the catalyst and electrode) which
negatively impacts PEMFC performance and limits real world applicability. This
project aims to address these cost, performance, and environmental concerns by
using a new class of eco-friendly, efficient ion-conducting polymers. These
polymers will be derived from lignin, the second most naturally abundant polymer
that is found in plant cell walls and a waste byproduct of agricultural farms,
pulp and paper industries, and biorefineries. In this project, the PI will use
lignin from plant sources to make ion-conducting polymers and examine their
ability to transport protons in thin layers and interfaces, such as those found
in PEMFCs. This project is the first step to enable lignin-based ion-conducting
polymers to replace Nafion, make PEMFC vehicles efficient and cost competitive
to battery-powered vehicles. This project will introduce the energy research
community to a new concept “Green Energy using Green Materials” and enable
training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students for a future
diversified energy workforce. The research will also be complemented by data-
driven outreach programs to support energy literacy across Nebraska, integrate
gamification into courses to stimulate student critical thinking, engage K-12
students and the general public to broaden STEM participation, and facilitate
energy education for people of all ages.

The goal of this project is to overcome ion transport limitation, a major
scientific challenge limiting the adoption of proton exchange membrane fuel
cells (PEMFCs), by utilizing lignin-derived ionomers. The project will
investigate how to boost interfacial ion transport by using lignin-based
ionomers and manipulating the chemical, molecular, and orientational landscape
next to the substrate of sub-micron-thick ionomer layers. The project will open
new pathways to expedite interfacial electrochemical processes by (1)
elucidating interfacial proton transport properties within thin films and
catalyst layer mimicking systems made of a series of lignin-based ionomers; (2)
engineering the interface using lignin-based ionomers to reveal their role on
depth-specific ion transport properties; and (3) examining how proton transport
in lignosulfonic acid ionomer-based electrode-mimicking thin systems is
controlled by interfacial wetting, chemical composition, ionic domain
characteristics, nanostructure, and viscoelastic properties. The gained
knowledge will pave new ways to understand and expedite interfacial
electrochemical processes, empower the design of cost-effective, eco-friendly,
and efficient energy conversion/storage devices, promote innovative ways to
valorize the neglected biomass lignin, and aid in both bio- and energy economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.