* 2310234
* Laser Directed Energy Deposition Processing of Exchange-Biased Bulk Nanocomposite Permanent Magnets Using Tailored Ferromagnetic-Matrix Powder
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Everett Carpenter, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,292.00

Permanent magnets play an indispensable role in enabling clean energy
technologies, including wind turbines, hydroelectric power generators, and
electric vehicle, etc. However, the magnets used in clean energy technologies
require a large amount of critical rare-earth elements (e.g., neodymium)
associated with supply chain complexities, environmentally hazardous extraction,
and energy-intensive production. New materials design paradigms and energy-
efficient processing schemes for creating permanent magnets are thus urgently
needed. This award supports fundamental research to explore material and
manufacturing innovations in making bulk nanocomposite permanent magnets without
using rare-earth metals. The team will synergistically combine computational
material designs with novel metal additive manufacturing and experimental
analysis efforts to examine the relationships between additive processing,
material compositions and microstructures, and functional response in new
nanocomposite permanent magnets. The project has the potential to drastically
enhance the economic and energy security of the Nation via the development of
renewable energy technologies. Research collaboration with the Commonwealth
Center for Advanced Manufacturing will further broaden project impacts and
promote workforce development in the field of advanced manufacturing. In
addition, the team will incorporate project-related materials into ongoing
teaching workshops partnered with the Richmond Math and Science Centers for K-12
outreach.

The overarching goal of this research is to design, fabricate, and investigate
structure-property relations in additively manufactured bulk nanocomposite
permanent magnets that demonstrate anisotropic microstructure with the maximum
energy products in the range of around 15 mega-gauss-oersted. To achieve this,
computational micromagnetic simulation tools will be employed to guide alloy
designs, with the magnetic material fabrications and experimental validation of
magnetic properties performed for down-selected alloy compositions. The
fundamental strategy is to generate "phase-separated" bulk nanocomposite
magnetic alloys consisting of submicron-scale antiferromagnetic precipitates
with acicular geometry dispersed in a ferromagnetic (FM) matrix with
directionally-aligned grains. In this manner, it is hypothesized that alternate
sources of magnetic anisotropy (e.g., exchange-biased anisotropy) that lead to
high coercivity may be harnessed to replace strong magnetocrystalline anisotropy
fields â€“ a characteristic feature of rare-earth permanent magnets. The team will
explore laser blown-powder directed energy deposition (DED) additive
manufacturing for processing nanocomposite permanent magnets, which is a least
explored route. The special DED machine, assisted with a magnetic field, will
use powder feedstock with compositions calculated from computational designs
that include an FM matrix to produce novel directionally-aligned grains,
metastable precipitates, and crystallographic textures, which will be analyzed
in microstructures and magnetic properties. The project will not only achieve
insight regarding the process-structure-property relationships of additively-
manufactured nanocomposite permanent magnet materials, it will also provide a
fundamental understanding of the magnetic-field-assisted DED technology for the
fabrication of complex multicomponent/multiphase magnetic alloys such as high-
entropy magneto-caloric alloys and magnetic shape memory alloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.