* 2310027
* Development of Germanium Ring-Contact Detectors for LEGEND-1000
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dongming Mei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2026
* USD 343,667.00

If neutrinos are indeed their own antiparticles, this could explain the
prevalence of matter over anti-matter in the universe. Investigating this
possibility requires exploring neutrinoless double-beta decay (NLDBD), a
possible but rare nuclear decay process. In this context, large germanium (Ge)
crystals are excellent detectors of NLDBD due to their high volume-to-surface
ratio, which enables effective signal collection and background rejection in the
search for NLDBD decay. This NSF-funded project supports the Principal
Investigator (PI) and graduate and undergraduate students in conducting research
on the development of innovative Ge detectors for the upcoming LEGEND
experiment. LEGEND aims to employ ultra-pure Ge detectors and active ways to
reject background reactions to search for NLDBD. The PI's role includes training
graduate and undergraduate students in novel techniques and equipping them with
skills for competitive careers in high-technology fields. Additionally, the PI
has implemented an engaging outreach program to foster public interest and
understanding in science.

The LEGEND Experiment builds upon the advancements made by the MAJORANA
Collaboration in ultra-pure materials and the GERDA Collaboration in liquid
cryogen active shielding. LEGEND includes a phased deployment of a ton-scale
experiment capable of detecting NLDBD events with half-lives exceeding 10e28
years. To reduce backgrounds, complexity, and cost, LEGEND-1000 favors large-
size detectors (>3 kg per detector). To explore this approach, the PI will
conduct research and development on large-size Ge ring-contact (GeRC) detectors
using high-purity Ge crystals grown by the University of South Dakota (USD).
Notably, the GeRC detectors can potentially reach sizes exceeding 6 kg,
significantly reducing the number of individual detectors required for the
LEGEND-1000 experiment. This reduction in detector count will further mitigate
backgrounds, elevating the overall sensitivity of the experiment. Collaboration
with LEGEND will enable the fabrication and testing of GeRC detectors at USD and
other LEGEND institutions. These large-size Ge detectors, incorporating pulse
shape discrimination capabilities, will be crucial for further minimizing
background events in a ton-scale NLDBD decay experiment like LEGEND. The project
not only contributes to advancing our understanding of neutrino properties, such
as their Majorana nature and extremely small masses, but also opens doors for
exploring new physics at energies beyond the reach of current high energy
colliders. Moreover, it has a broader impact by training students in cutting-
edge techniques and engaging the public through outreach initiatives.

This project is jointly funded by the Nuclear Physics Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.