* 2310307
* Collaborative Research: Deformation Mechanisms in Microstructurally Tailored High Strength Alloys Near the Ideal Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:

Materials with higher and higher strengths are often the target of materials
scientists for structural engineering applications – stronger materials enable
safer structures as well as lightweighting for more energy-efficient
transportation. Several pathways are available for enhancing strength through
control over defects in the material. However, efforts to-date have failed to
bring material strengths anywhere near the holy grail of strengthening, referred
to as the ideal strength. This failure has not come from a lack of materials
engineering, nor would innovations in materials design or processing immediately
solve the problem. Instead, prior approaches have been too limited in scope from
the viewpoint of the material’s deformation physics, which is addressed in this
research by considering novel design pathways for controlling material structure
and, in turn, the defects that govern strength. The findings of this project are
applicable to advanced materials with increased chemical complexity, which are
desired for modern engineering applications. An interactive online learning
module transcending traditional institutional barriers – denoted the Mechanics
Interactive Teaming (MINT) initiative in engineering education – is being
developed to engage students cooperatively at the partnering universities with
new virtual learning modules focused on cutting-edge topics in materials
science. The initial focus on graduate curricula is being broadened to reach
undergraduates through the Women in Science and Engineering Program at Stony
Brook University and further expanded for working professionals using relevant
design problems through collaboration with the Advanced Casting Research Center
at UC Irvine.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:

This research enables materials with near-ideal strength by developing a
fundamental understanding of dislocation nucleation and propagation as rate-
limiting deformation mechanisms in nanostructured alloys where defect
confinement and interaction with grain boundary and lattice solutes act as local
barriers to plasticity. Specific research questions to be answered include: (i)
what are the important transition states and associated energy barriers for
dislocation nucleation at solute-decorated interfaces and for propagation within
a nanoscale alloy crystal, (ii) how does interfacial structure and energy
variation upon doping alter dislocation nucleation/propagation, and (iii) how do
solute atoms inside the grain, which can potentially act as local pinning points
but also alter the properties of the lattice, influence dislocation propagation?
A practical hypothesis of this research is that the strength of nanocrystalline
alloys can be maximized by synergistic doping to stabilize the grain boundaries
against local plasticity and delay defect nucleation while simultaneously
inhibiting dislocation propagation through the nanograin interiors. Using a
combination of atomistic modeling, multi-modal structural characterization, and
unique micromechanical testing, this hypothesis is being tested in
nanostructured aluminum and copper alloys, where their intrinsically different
stacking fault energies will provide access to different confined slip events.
In a broad sense, this research will define new strengthening paradigms in
nanoengineered metallic materials and establish the mechanistic underpinnings of
solute-biased interfacial energy landscapes for understanding fundamental
dislocation physics in confined slip environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.