* 2310859
* RUI: Studying the Strong Nuclear Force at Augustana University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nathan Grau, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 08/31/2026
* USD 176,619.00

This award continues the scientific program at Augustana University in Sioux
Falls, South Dakota devoted to the study of the strong nuclear force, which is
the force responsible for binding protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
and for energy generation in the sun. The very early universe was so hot that
protons and neutrons did not exist. Instead, a dense soup of quarks and gluons,
the fundamental particles that make up the proton and neutron and interact by
the strong nuclear force, existed. This state of matter has been recreated in
the collisions of heavy nuclei, like gold, at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory. As a member of the sPHENIX
collaboration, the Augustana Nuclear Physics group proposes to analyze how high
energy particles emerging from the quark-gluon plasma change their energy and
direction. Such measurement yields information about the plasma's properties as
well as details on the fundamental strong nuclear force interaction. The group
is also a member of the ePIC collaboration that is designing the detector for
the eventual Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) to be built at Brookhaven. The group
will be contributing manpower to studying potential electromagnetic calorimeter
technologies to be used. The proposed work is unique in South Dakota and the
region and provide physics and pre-engineering students opportunities to be
technically trained. They will work with collaborators from around the world and
present at national conferences. The project will fund research for
undergraduates studying both physics and pre-engineering and provide broad
educational benefits. Students will gain practical skills such as computer
programming, analysis of large data sets, electrical engineering application,
and mechanical engineering design. All these skills are transferable to other
vocations of interest to the student, the state, and the nation. Students will
participate in weekly collaboration meetings, present at national conferences,
and visit collaborating institutions. Such opportunities will build their
communication skills, grow their professional network, put them in contact with
potential graduate schools, and prepare them for 21st-century technical jobs.

This award supports the continuation of the only laboratory in the state of
South Dakota dedicated to studying the strong nuclear force. The PI is a member
of the sPHENIX collaboration at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and
ePIC collaboration at the Electron Ion Collider (EIC), both at Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Broadly the PI and his students have focused on using high
momentum transfer (Q2) processes, specifically jets, to understand low-Q2
processes. Using sPHENIX Au+Au and p+p data, hadron-jet azimuthal correlations
will be measured. Depending on how the jets are binned, these correlations can
be sensitive to different aspects of parton energy loss in a quark-gluon plasma
(QGP). These measurements take advantage of the high luminosity of RHIC and high
DAQ rate of sPHENIX to have a large sample of jets to study the transport
properties of the QGP at RHIC. The PI and students plan to increase their
participation in ePIC. The group will work alongside collaborators doing
research and development work for homogeneous electromagnetic calorimeters for
the central rapidity barrel or the electron-going "backward" rapidity arm. The
group plans to participate in the Jefferson Lab test beam campaign. Deep
inelastic e+A collisions at the EIC can probe a region which may be where gluon
saturation dominates gluon kinematics. The group will continue working on ways
to increase the sensitivity of two-particle azimuthal correlations to the
photon-gluon fusion process. Beyond the physics deliverables, this project has
additional broader impacts. Being the single strong-force physics laboratory in
the state of South Dakota, students from the region have unique access to this
kind of physics. Students that have worked in the group have gained valuable
experience in mathematics, computer science, electrical engineering, and
mechanical engineering. There are former students who are either completing
their engineering degrees or in the work force in a technical job in and around
South Dakota. The proposed analysis and detector testing work will provide
current students with the same opportunities to be ready for current and future
technical jobs.

This project is jointly funded by Nuclear Physics Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.