* 2310261
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: Towards Effective Detection and Mitigation for Shortcut Learning: A Data Modeling Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Mengnan Du, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 400,000.00

Generalization of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has become a challenging problem.
Many DNNs do not remain predictive when the distribution of data changes or
there are small disturbances in the input. A major reason for this challenge is
shortcut learning, which refer to decisions based on relationships in the data
that exist, but which are not causal. These decisions fail when the model is
transferred to real-world scenarios because of spurious correlations. This
project is to investigate shortcut identification and mitigation in deep
learning. The successful outcome of this research will lead to advances in
providing theoretical understandings, and developing robust and generalizable
DNN algorithms to analyze datasets with various types of shortcuts. The
education program that integrates machine learning, industrial engineering, and
health informatics is to train students with essential data analytics tools in
information systems, to attract, mentor and retain members from underrepresented
groups.

The primary goal of this project is to systematically investigate the
identification and mitigation of shortcut features from a data-centric
perspective to facilitate the generalization of deep learning. The developed
data-centric mechanisms could be directly adopted in real-world data analytics
systems. Specifically, this project studies shortcut identification and
detection at different levels, including instance-, feature-, and task-levels,
and then performs shortcut mitigation through data augmentation and training
regularization. This project also demonstrates how the proposed research
innovations could be embedded in two DNN based real medical informatics systems.
The proposed frameworks uncover the intrinsic properties of shortcut learning by
calibrating shortcut features from different categories of distribution shift,
and enable their comprehension and adoption for researchers and practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.