* 2310450
* Statistical Models and Methods for Complex Data in Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 335,849.00

Big data in the form of random objects are increasingly encountered across
sciences and society. Adequate and principled approaches for their analysis are
important to extract relevant information, to make predictions, and to assess
whether there are differences between samples. However, the complexity of such
data poses major challenges for statistical analysis and traditional methods
cannot be applied. In this project, these challenges will be addressed and
overcome through the development of advanced nonparametric statistical
methodology that can handle the complexity of object data. Specific objects that
will be studied include networks and distributions, with applications for brain
imaging and genomics data, climate change data and data from other areas of
current interest. For situations where random objects are repeatedly observed
over time, such as repeatedly observed MRI brain scans for the same subject,
quantifications of the underlying time dynamics will also be developed. The
research will include methods for testing and estimation, theory, efficient
computational implementation, and data applications, which are expected to lead
to substantial new insights. The project will provide training for the next
generation of data analysts and research statisticians and user-friendly code
implementing the methods will be made available.

The project will contribute to the foundations of the emerging field of metric
statistics as a comprehensive framework for statistical methodology and theory
for samples of random objects, which are random variables/data that take values
in a metric space. Random objects encompass data in the form of distributions,
networks, trees, covariance matrices and surfaces, and data on Riemannian
manifolds such as spheres. The statistical analysis of such data is challenging
as one cannot apply traditional statistical methods due to the absence of a
vector space structure. Specifically, for random objects that are situated in a
geodesic space, a general class of regression models for transports from the
barycenter to specific objects will be developed. In these models both
predictors and responses are transports and specific examples are regression
models for spherical data and distributions. The project will also include the
study of regression models for multivariate distributions as responses, paired
with Euclidean predictors, using slice-optimization in Wasserstein space. This
approach will be illustrated with applications in climatology and life sciences
data. Another goal is the development of transport processes in a geodesic
space, constituting a new type of stochastic process. For such processes, anchor
point representations for general types of random objects and latent Gaussian
process representations for distributional objects in Wasserstein space will be
obtained. Additionally, a random effects model for Frechet regression will be
developed, providing the first such model for longitudinal object data, with
applications in brain imaging and distributional data analysis. Throughout, the
challenges resulting from the absence of Euclidean and algebraic structures will
be addressed with empirical process theory and other tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.