* 2310015
* Characterization of Systematic Effects in Ultracold Neutron Tests of Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Adam Holley, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 229,999.00

One of the most-successful and best-studied physical theories is the Standard
Model (SM), which describes how the universe functions at very small scales.
This model has been verified in many different ways over the course of five
decades. In principle, such a fundamental theory should be able to predict
observations about the universe at large scales, but in a number of notable
cases it fails to do so. This suggests an exciting possibility, that there are
fundamental features about the universe of which we are unaware. Since these
unknown properties have so far evaded detection, discovering them requires
experiments with a new level of sensitivity, requiring innovative approaches.
Two such experiments leverage recent progress in the production of very low
energy “ultracold” neutrons. They are UCNtau, which measures the average time
required for a free neutron to decay, and nEDM, a measurement of the charge
distribution in an isolated neutron. This project focuses on the development of
three techniques designed to enhance the sensitivity of these experiments. The
research effort will assemble a cross-disciplinary team to strengthen the
synergy between science and technology and will target early undergraduates and
pre-college students to more effectively connect practical research experience
with the students’ academic work.

The first of three primary research activities to be carried out in this project
is the inclusion of empirically-determined magnetic field maps of the UCNτ
Halbach array and ab initio simulations of the loaded ultracold neutron (UCN)
phase space distribution into a semiclassical spin-tracking Monte Carlo model
developed to account for entanglement between spatial and spin degrees of
freedom. This goal will ensure that the characterization of systematic effects
associated with spin dynamics (depolarization) keeps pace with anticipated
improvements in statistical precision. The second core activity is to develop a
real-time monitor for the UCNτ effort that will place run-by-run empirical
limits on the depolarization rate and serve as a cross-check of the
computational model. The third objective is to develop a quantum sensor, based
on Nitrogen-Vacancy defects in diamond, optimized to aid in the control and
characterization of magnetic and electric fields for nEDM experiments, thereby
enhancing the sensitivity with which the neutron electric dipole moment can be
measured.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.