* 2310588
* String Compactifications: From Geometry to Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Eric Sharpe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 834,444.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Lara Anderson, James
Gray, and Eric Sharpe at Virginia Tech.

String theory is a proposal for a fundamental theory of how nature operates in
which the roles of physics and geometry are intrinsically intertwined. While the
questions that string theory attempts to answer are physical, the path to those
answers frequently involves cutting-edge challenges in modern mathematics. This
award funds a collaborative program of research to explore the physics that
arises from string theory. Because string theory predicts extra unseen
dimensions beyond length, width, and height, these extra dimensions must be
"curled up" in ways that render them too small to be detected with current
experiments. However, the physics that string theory predicts depends crucially
on the geometric properties of these curled-up dimensions. The goals of this
work include strengthening the links between string theory and current progress
in particle physics, in part by bounding and characterizing the geometries
associated with these curled-up dimensions. Experience shows that when strong
physical requirements are expressed in the language of geometry, they can open
the door to new and unexpected results in both physics and mathematics. As a
result, research in this area advances the national interest by providing new
insights into fundamental physics. Professors Anderson, Gray and Sharpe will
also involve junior scientists in this project, including a postdoctoral
researcher and several graduate students. Their efforts will include the
organizing of conferences and workshops that will increase dialog between
physicists and mathematicians on pressing problems at the boundary between both
fields. In all of these aspects of student training and professional dialog,
Professors Anderson, Gray and Sharpe are committed to actively encouraging the
inclusion of members of under-represented groups into the frontline of progress
in the sciences.

More specifically, Professors Anderson, Gray, and Sharpe will investigate a new
class of symmetries (known as higher-form symmetries), and two of the most
flexible frameworks for four-dimensional compactifications of string theory,
namely heterotic string theory and F-theory. They will also investigate a
striking application known as decomposition. This is an observation that quantum
field theories with certain higher-form symmetries are equivalent to disjoint
unions of other quantum field theories. Within heterotic string theory, novel
geometric tools will be used to compute previously undetermined aspects of the
effective theory, including the N=1 matter field Kahler potential and physically
normalized Yukawa couplings (including non-perturbative contributions). The goal
of this study will be to understand the masses and interactions of particles
within string compactification. Furthermore, new tools will be developed to
study the physics of topology-changing transitions within heterotic string
theory. In the context of F-theory, new results in the geometry of elliptic
fibrations will be used to study the possible boundedness of the set of smooth
Calabi-Yau varieties, heterotic/F-theory duality and the explicit four-
dimensional field dependent form of flux contributions to the superpotential.
Finally, Professors Anderson, Gray and Sharpe will also apply some of their
recent insights into the global structure of moduli spaces of SCFTs to study
possible swampland conjectures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.