* 2310036
* Three-Body Amplitudes from Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Doering, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Strong forces are responsible for the formation of known matter in the Universe,
but the detailed mechanisms of how this happens remain a mystery. Strong forces
bind nucleons (protons and neutrons) together in atomic nuclei, and the
properties of the nucleons are studied at state-of-the-art accelerator
facilities such as the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. This
project aims at closing the gap between experiment and theoretical calculations
using lattice QCD. Due to current limitations of classical computers Lattice QCD
calculations are performed in a small cubic volume instead of infinite space.
This project provides the translation from the former to the latter, so that
fundamental calculations of QCD can be compared to Nature. The PI and his
students will focus on properties of systems involving three particles
interacting with each other. To help develop a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce, the outreach component is dedicated to developing material for
computational aspects of quantum mechanics (QM) and animations of time-dependent
QM problems.

Finite-volume effects for the case of three particles are poorly understood. In
this project, the PI and his students will develop and apply three-body methods
to map lattice QCD results to the physical world and to help answer fundamental
questions regarding QCD predictions for the properties of excited mesons and
baryons. For this, the principle of unitarity is efficiently used as the guiding
principle to construct three- or more particle amplitudes. A conceptual upgrade
of previous work concerns the introduction of more coupled channels and
extensions to half-integer spin. Three-body dynamics is not only difficult on
the theory but also on the phenomenology side. Therefore, three-body amplitudes
in infinite volume will be developed and compared to experiment in a
complementary effort, such as the Roper resonance and its multi-channel three-
body dynamics, or the various decay channels of the A1(1260) axial meson. An
extended analysis of new lattice QCD results from the GW group at two different
pion masses is planned, that will allow to map out the chiral trajectory of the
A1(1260) axial meson.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.