* 2310028
* WoU-MMA: Exploring the Extreme Universe with VERITAS and CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jamie Holder, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Advanced studies of high-energy gamma-rays make it possible to probe the sites
of relativistic particle acceleration and the underlying mechanisms. Gamma-ray
observations with the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope System
(VERITAS), located at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory in southern Arizona,
provide the opportunity for a diverse research program to study Galactic and
extragalactic particle accelerators. This award renews support for researchers
at the University of Delaware to conduct studies of supernova remnants, newly
identified petaelectronvolt (PeV) gamma-ray emitters, and precision measurements
of bright nearby active galactic nuclei. The team will continue providing
leading contributions to the VERITAS operations, calibration, and data analyses,
and to the development of the next generation Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA).
The group will continue education and outreach activities through mentoring
programs of undergraduate students, engagement of high school students through
Masterclasses, and co-leading the two-week high-energy astrophysics Fermi Summer
School.

VERITAS and the future CTA utilize imaging Cherenkov telescopes to provide high-
sensitivity to very high-energy (100 GeV â€“ 30 TeV) gamma-ray observations of
Galactic and extragalactic sources. Gamma-ray emission has been used to reveal
where relativistic particle acceleration occurs, but the underlying acceleration
mechanisms and the connections between the accelerators and the origin and
properties of cosmic rays remain unclear. Observing targets include supernova
remnants (SNRs) as sources of multi-messenger events (gamma-rays, cosmic rays,
and neutrinos), and searches for Galactic PeV accelerators (PeVatrons).
Improvements in the treatment of off-axis images in VERITAS will optimize high-
energy analyses of PeVatron targets and extended source searches. Applying these
new techniques will make it possible to study TeV-bright, extended SNRs where
the measured spectrum, or upper limit, will test leading models for leptonic or
hadronic acceleration scenarios. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.