* 2310666
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Snapping of Tethers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Paul Vouga, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 202,500.00

This grant will fund research that enables accurate design for performance,
reliability, and safety of flexible ropes used in parachutes, mooring lines,
towing cables, safety harnesses, and energy harvesting devices, thereby
promoting the progress of science, and advancing the national prosperity.
Whether free-ended or tethered to payloads, the behavior of flexible ropes in
engineering applications can be properly understood only by accounting for
potentially damage-inducing snapping-like dynamics whereby a slack object is
suddenly pulled taut. Even mild yanking at one end of a cable can easily amplify
accelerations and tensions by several orders of magnitude, as kinetic energy is
focused on a small region near the cableâ€™s other end. The temporal brevity of
the snapping process and the corresponding strong spatial localization of energy
may lead to structural failures but can also be a way to manipulate a payload.
To allow researchers and engineers to quantify, explain, and predict snapping
phenomena across a range of applications, this project will build theoretical
and computational models that are informed by experimental observations and
validated against physical tests. To encourage participation in STEM, an
educational module on bungee jump dynamics will be developed for summer camp
programs for high school students at the University of Nevada and the University
of Texas at Austin.

This research aims to develop the foundations of a modeling method for rapid,
nonlinear, slack-taut transitions between effectively inextensible inertial
motion to stretching and elastic wave generation of flexible objects, and to
translate this method into efficient simulation techniques. It will accomplish
these outcomes by deriving new boundary-layer asymptotics and scaling analyses
that capture a sudden onset of large spatial gradients in tension and rapid
exchange of kinetic energy to elastic potential energy and back again. It then
builds on such techniques in the development of reduced order models and
asynchronous time integrators that overcome unique numerical challenges
associated with the nearly singular snapping dynamics. Finally, experiments on
gravity-driven snapping will be performed to explore different regimes of
behavior and to obtain data for comparison with theory and simulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.