* 2310334
* CAREER: Understanding Negation in Positive Terms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Eduardo Blanco, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2024
* USD 310,982.00

The expression of negation is an important feature of all human languages.
However despite the pervasiveness of negation, current intelligent systems have
great difficulty comprehending its effects, whereas people rarely do. One of the
most important of these is the fact negation generally conveys some positive
meaning. For example, a natural interpretation of "John never leaves the house
in the morning without a coffee in his hand" suggests that John does leave the
house in the morning and that he always does so with a coffee in his hand. This
project builds novel resources and algorithms to enable intelligent systems to
understand the numerous positive interpretations hidden in sentences containing
negation. These resources and algorithms have the potential to empower dialogue
systems to carry on more natural conversations, improve machine translation, and
benefit virtually any end-user application requiring text understanding. Beyond
fundamental research, this project will support a diverse cohort of PhD and
undergraduate students as well as an interdisciplinary seminar at University of
North Texas, international research stays for PhD students, workshops, and
industry outreach activities.

The technical aims of this CAREER project are divided into three thrusts. The
first thrust creates a comprehensive corpus of negations and their positive
interpretations, including all negations types in several domains and genres. To
this end, the research team explores strategies to account for degrees of
granularity, to minimize the annotation effort and to score and rewrite
potential positive interpretations. The second thrust is to develop
computational algorithms to automatically generate positive interpretations from
negation, and to learn representations of context and discourse, and then
leverage them to identify the foci of negation and rewrite them with positive
counterparts. The third thrust consists of extrinsic evaluation, by
incorporating negation into the tasks of recognizing entailments and inferring
spatial timelines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.