* 2310920
* IUCRC Phase II+ Colorado School of Mines: Center to Advance the Science of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining (CASERM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Elizabeth Holley, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2028
* USD 150,000.00

Mining is essential to modern society's transition to a sustainable future.
Meeting the global demand for earth resources is a grand challenge. The
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) to Advance the Science
of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining (CASERM) is a collaborative effort
between Colorado School of Mines, Virginia Tech, industry partners, and
government agencies. The Center is interdisciplinary. It strengthens and
promotes cross-disciplinary discoveries in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy,
computational science and statistics. Knowledge transfer to all areas of the
mining and related geoscience sectors is a core Center mission. The Center's
activities transform the way geoscience data are used in the exploration and
mining industry sector beginning with the mineral exploration stage and
continuing through mine closure and environmental remediation. Center research
activities focus on dramatically improving the way global mineral exploration
and mining of ores and other natural resources are done, replacing industry
experience- and empiricism-based decisions with innovative science and
technology-based solutions that inform decision making, increase the chances of
exploration success, and reduce financial risk. Center goals include promoting
socio-economic prosperity and helping reduce the environmental impact of mining.
Broader impacts include workforce development, an essential element of Center
activities. It includes not only graduate and undergraduate students training
and involvement in industry-relevant research but also invites industry
participation in university research activities focused on advancing the state
of the mining sector of the economy; and not simply responding to the needs of a
single company. The Center also engages with community college instructors and
students who work with university faculty and students on projects of mining
sector importance further advancing its workforce training goals by engaging
students working toward two-year degrees or certificates.

The Center to Advance the Science of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining
(CASERM) is focused on advancing the exploration/mining industry sector through
the establishment of a cooperative partnership with industry that conducts pre-
competitive research and workforce development of benefit to the mining
industry, academia, and society. The purpose and long-term vision of the Center
is for addressing serious research challenges and providing an engine of
knowledge creation in the development of 3-D subsurface geologic models for
mineral deposits; integrating diverse geoscience data to inform decision making
and minimize geological risk; devising new, faster, and more accurate
assessments of the economic potential of drill core and other geological
specimen taken from the field; advancing the science of mineral exploration; and
improving mining operations and safety. It has five industry-driven research
thrusts: (1) mineral exploration and mineral system models; (2) geological
modeling and resource characterization; (3) advanced technology solutions; (4)
mine development and operations; and (5) social and environmental impacts of
mining. The Center's vision requires collaborations across a broad range of
disciplines. For the Colorado School of Mines Site, the intellectual foundation
stems from its unique, cross-disciplinary collaborations and outstanding faculty
across the mining value chain. Its collaboration with its partner Site, Virginia
Tech, brings expertise in AI and machine learning, mining engineering, novel
geophysical techniques to increase mine safety, and mining operations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.