* 2310253
* Conference: Envisioning Developmental Biology For the Future
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Siobhan Brady, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 180,057.00

Developmental biology research focuses on studying how living organisms are
formed and change across time, space, and scale. The questions asked in the
field are crucial to understanding life and the mechanisms that drive it.
Despite this importance, the field is in danger of being left behind if it is
unable to incorporate more innovative and technologically advanced approaches.
Conversely, those that use these approaches have not necessarily been trained in
fundamental developmental biology concepts and findings. These issues exist in
both animal and plant model systems and are reflected as decreased impactful
publications, buy-in with students and support from funding institutions. As
such, the field is in danger of becoming less relevant compared to related
fields like stem cell research, bioengineering, and systems and synthetic
biology. This NSF-funded workshop will bring scientists in the field together to
identify problems holding the field back and define actionable solutions to
these problems. The overall goal of the workshop is to bring community
stakeholders, innovators, and leaders together to identify ways to incorporate
new technologies and innovative approaches into this crucial field of research.
Further, the workshop aims to define opportunities for the field to provide more
significance, build upon the vast knowledge generated by developmental biology
and positively impact society. The opinions of American developmental biology
researchers nationally will be collected and then workshop recommendations
publicly disseminated.

An identity crisis in the developmental biology community has developed over
many years creating inequity in discovery and opportunity. Specifically,
scientists who have access to significant funding and infrastructure are able to
ask technologically advanced questions, but have strayed from the traditional
tenets of the field. Those who have less access to resources or who focus on
traditional developmental biology questions are being left behind in the race to
generate big data. This conference/workshop will bring scientists in the field
together to identify problems holding the field back and define actionable
solutions. The 2.5-day event includes presentations and small group discussions
with a focus on defining and discussing 1) New Technology in Developmental
Biology, 2) Foundational/Traditional Approaches in Developmental Biology, 3)
Current Funding Opportunities, and 4) Creating Interdisciplinary Teams in
Developmental Biology. Participants will become a “think tank” of scientists
from multiple developmental biology-related disciplines. The intellectual merit
of the workshop is that the think tank will 1) identify specific problems in the
field that have inhibited innovation and impactful discoveries and will 2)
define tangible solutions to the problems in slowing the progress in
developmental biology. The expected products will be white papers published in
open access journals that detail developmental biology community needs, holes in
funding apparatuses, frameworks for interdisciplinary innovative collaborations,
pedagogical recommendations and creative solutions to create equity of resources
and maximum impact across the community. With regards to the broader impacts of
the workshop, researchers across multiple institutions and career stages with
diverse backgrounds and life experiences, and who study plant and animal models,
will come together to synthesize ideas that will create interdisciplinary
opportunities in the field of developmental biology. The participants will also
identify gaps in funding, paths to interdisciplinary collaborations, and will
gather ideas from the stakeholders that will guide the community to a more
inclusive, equitable, and innovative place. After the workshop, the broader
developmental biology community will provide their input via a public open-
access survey. Perceived problems and proposed solutions will be disseminated to
the wider community via peer-reviewed perspective papers and editorials in
established journals and in social media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.