* 2310195
* Dynamics of crystal mush: Insight from 2D and 3D analysis of drill cores from Kilauea Iki lava lake, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Josef Dufek, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2026
* USD 166,303.00

Drilling hot lava sounds like science fiction, but it is not only a suggested
source of clean energy but was actually done multiple times between 1960 and
1988. Then scientists at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory probed a lava lake
that formed during an eruption in 1959. The goal was to ‘watch’ the lake cool
and solidify by collecting drill core samples. Early drill cores sampled only
the upper crust of the lake, which comprised both fully crystalline rock and
crystal ‘mush’ comprising crystals with up to 45% melt (quenched to glass by
water during coring). Later cores were drilled through the entire lake, sampling
both upper and lower solid crust as well as interior mush. Chemical analysis of
the resulting drill cores showed that during solidification, melt, bubbles and
crystals were moving around within the lava lake. Knowing what processes control
those movements could improve our understanding of how, when and why melt,
bubbles and crystals are rearranged in magmatic systems under volcanoes. It may
also reveal how the movement of bubbles and crystals prepare for and trigger
volcanic eruptions. The team will use x-ray scanning technology to get 3D images
of the cores that will show the spatial distribution of glass plus crystals plus
bubbles as a function of position in the lake and time since 1959. Individual
core images can be used to model properties - such as melt percentage,
connectivity and permeability - that control melt movement. Tracking these
processes through space and time will not only provide an unprecedented look
into a volcano but also aid future drilling efforts.

For a century, conceptual models of (1) melt evolution in magmatic systems and
(2) formation of eruptible (melt-rich) magma bodies were framed around the
concept of large, long-lived, melt-dominated magma chambers. However, both
geophysical imaging and petrologic analysis of magmatic systems suggest that
they dominated by crystal ʻmushʻ that contains lenses of melt. Reconciliation of
these two perspectives is key to improving our understanding of the magma
systems that feed volcanic eruptions and requires improved understanding of the
physical processes that control, and the chemical consequences of,
redistribution of melt, crystals and volatiles within mush-dominated systems.
This project will address this problem using µCT scans of a suite of cores
obtained by drilling into the solidifying Kilauea Iki lava lake, Hawaii. 18
cores collected between 1960 and 1988 include samples with up to 45% melt (now
glass), track the initial growth of a cooling crust and later transected both
the upper and lower crust as well as intervening crystal mush. Petrologic
studies of the cores have documented complex and diverse movements of melt,
crystals and bubbles within the lake. New 3D data will be used to map the
physical properties of crystal mush in space and time. Additional 2D analysis
will examine the chemical consequences of melt and crystal distribution and,
specifically, look for evidence of reactive flow associated with different types
of melt channels. Accompanying 2D analog experiments and modeling will track
particle-particle interactions when gas is fluxed through suspensions of viscous
liquid + photoelastic solid particles. The results of the combined work will
improve understanding of lava lake (and sill) solidification and aid
interpretation of geophysical signals from partially molten systems. The idea of
drilling into volcanoes also captures the public imagination and has practical
applications to the development of “clean” hydrothermal energy. The researchers
will develop these themes in a virtual exhibit for the Smithsonian Institution
on the topic of Drilling Hot Lava.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.