* 2310413
* Conference: Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum/Interdepartmental Hurricane (76th TCORF/IHC); Miami, Florida; March 7-9, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The 2023 Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum (TCORF), the 76th
Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference (IHC) will be held on March 7 - 9, 2023
at the Florida International University, Miami, Florida. Topics will include
research addressing operational imperatives, challenges in observing and
forecasting during the 2022 hurricane season, Hurricane and Ocean Testbed and
Joint Technology Transfer Initiative activities, along with other research
projects. A meeting of the Working Group for Tropical Cyclone Operations and
Research, which supports the annual update of the National Hurricane Operations
Plan, will be a part of the forum. The forum is sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, NOAA’s National Weather Service and Office of Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research, and the Office of Naval Research.

Intellectual Merit: At the TCORF/76th IHC, representatives from Federal agencies
and the academic research community will have the opportunity to discuss the
latest research into tropical cyclone observing, forecasting, and warning such
as: 1. 2022 hurricane/typhoon season challenges and the opportunities for
research that they offer; 2. Research priorities of the operational centers; 3.
Observations and observing strategies; 4. Tropical cyclone model development; 5.
Transitioning research to operations; 6. Advances in tropical cyclone forecast
and warning products and services.

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important to the United States because it
brings the academic research community together with Federal agencies, to
prepare for the upcoming hurricane season and make improvements to the US’s
hurricane forecasting and warning program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.