* 2310908
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Climate-Induced Migration in Africa and Beyond: Big Data and Predictive Analytics
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Weihe Guan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2026
* USD 149,891.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary projects to identify and understand how climate-
related events, both slow and rapid onset, are linked to human migration and
mobility.

The project aims to develop a predictive model of climate-induced migration
based in theory and informed by spatially explicit data to better understand the
climate-migration nexus. Importantly, the project examines how climate migration
intersects with other hardships from conflicts to poverty and epidemics. The
project will use cell phone data to provide real-time data on migration within a
given country, something that is often not captured by global datasets. High
resolution mobility patterns will be examined by leveraging satellite, social
media, survey, and statistical data. These analyses will inform a framework to
estimate the likelihood of displacement within country (using Senegal as a case
study) and map locations of “climate shocks.” These mapping exercises will be
complemented by social media data and on-the-ground surveys, to understand the
public opinion and discourse around climate migration. Building off the case
study, the research team plans to build a predictive model using Big Data
sources in concert with simulated future scenarios, to help inform public
policy. The CLIMB project team is multinational and multi-institutional and
includes members who bring expertise from ecology, earth sciences, data
sciences, sociology, and economics, representing five countries (Sweden, Turkey,
Senegal, Austria, and USA).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.