* 2310707
* How Orb-Weaver Spiders Use Leg posture to Modulate Vibration Sensing of Prey on Webs
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrew Gordus, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2026
* USD 395,000.00

Substrate-borne vibrations are a ubiquitous modality of information that animals
employ for sensing and communication. It is more sensitive to physical
constraints than other sensory modalities, since vibrations must propagate
through an often-heterogeneous physical environment and the animal itself before
reaching the sensors. Many animals display active behavior or even interact with
their target during sensing using this modality, yet the physical principles
governing these processes are not well understood. In this award the
investigators will study a model extended sensory system composed of a spider, a
web, and a target (prey, mate, invader, etc.), and address the benefits of
active behavior for modulation of vibration sensing. Orb-weaver spiders are one
of the largest family of spiders (3000+ species) and use sensors on their legs
to sense vibrations from the target propagating through the web and their own
legs. Despite their vast evolutionary diversity, many orb-weaver spider species
display common behavioral strategies of modulating web building and adjusting
leg posture when a target is present to enhance vibration sensing, suggesting
the crucial role of underlying physical principles in shaping the evolution of
their behavior.

The investigators will explore in a model organism (Uloborus diversus) how
active modulation of leg posture by the spider can affect its vibration sensing
of the target on orb webs. The approach to the problem will integrate biological
experiments, which will quantitatively characterize leg posture behavior and web
vibrations, with robophysical and simulation modeling, which will vary system
parameters systematically to discover physical principles. The research will
uncover in a model system how animals can take advantage of the physics of
vibrations in both the physical environment (web) and biological media (spider
itself) using active behaviors. This research will advance the physics of
behavior by discovering the physical principles that govern behavior in
naturalistic environments. This research will also expand the field of
biological active sensing by adding understanding of how animals actively use
behaviors to modulate a built substrate as part of the sensing system. This
project will provide interdisciplinary, integrative training for students across
all levels from PhD to high school in engineering and biology labs. The PIs will
also convert research results into outreach materials and activities for K-12
education. The PIs will collaborate with a local high school and Baltimore
Science Center (which offers free access to all Baltimore Public School
students) to help broaden participation in STEM in Baltimore, a city with a
primarily under-represented, disadvantaged population. The fundamental
understanding from this work will inform the creation of robots equipped with
vibration sensors capable of active vibration sensing for remote monitoring of
targets (e.g., damage, foreign objects, debris) in suspended structures (e.g.,
suspension bridges, powerlines, and in-orbit space tethers on satellites and
space stations). These robots could help replace humans from dangerous tasks
that are required for maintaining the health of the Nation’s infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.