* 2310142
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Security of FPGA-as-a-Service Reconfigurable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,003.00

Commercial cloud computing services are widely used today. Advances in cloud
computing have enabled integration of field-programmable gate-arrays (FPGAs) in
high-end platforms for domain-specific customization. However, such FPGA-as-a-
service systems are vulnerable to malicious attacks and countermeasures are
needed to ensure that these systems can be deployed with high assurance. Today's
security solutions are not sufficient for next-generation platforms in which
intellectual property (IP) blocks from different providers are integrated on the
same FPGA fabric; they access shared computational resources and incorporate
applications from potentially untrusted sources.

This research is based on a combination of authentication methods, information
flow tracking, shadow logic, formal methods, and the monitoring of on-chip
sensors. Machine learning is utilized to detect malicious FPGA bitstreams.
Authentication methods are being used to secure FPGAs against denial-of-service
attacks due to greedy tenants, task-redirection, task-hiding, and temporal-
instance attacks. Shadow logic and information flow tracking are used to secure
the FPGA and other IPs against data-sniffing and data-modification attacks.
Evaluation is being carried out using a Digilent Genesys 2 board with an
embedded Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA, and a ZedBoard Zynq-7000 development board.

Threat modeling, attack prediction, and proactive countermeasures will
contribute to trust assurance in FPGA-as-a-Service systems. Benchmarks of
malicious FPGA bitstreams are being developed for the evaluation of
countermeasures. A web-based countermeasure-effectiveness assessment platform is
being designed to assist researchers in evaluating the effectiveness of
countermeasures and compare between different solutions. Collaborations are
underway with partners in Intel and IBM. Research findings are being integrated
in a new hardware security course and a new cybersecurity curriculum at the
graduate level. High-school students from the North Carolina School of Science
and Mathematics are being engaged in the ongoing research.

All data related to this project are being disseminated through the DukeSpace
repository, https://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/. DukeSpace is a digital
collection that captures and preserve Duke’s intellectual output on a server
operated by the University’s Library. Source code for testing, input/output
files, and documentation will be released as the project matures. All data and
software will be available in a Duke website
(http://people.ee.duke.edu/~krish/), and this data will be available for 5 years
after the project is completed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.