* 2310620
* Efficient Quantum State Preparation Algorithms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Dean Lee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 256,000.00

Quantum computing has the potential to address many of the unsolved problems of
quantum many-body physics. However, there are serious inefficiencies that must
be addressed. In this project, several methods are explored to improve the
performance of quantum computing algorithms for quantum state preparation. These
include preconditioning methods that increase the probability of success,
sampling methods for the density of energy levels, and the reduction of
systematic errors due to time step size. As part of the broader impacts of this
research proposal, inspiring and diverse public speakers in the field of quantum
computing and applications will be invited to present public talks in the
Advanced Studies Gateway series.

The rodeo algorithm is an efficient quantum computing algorithm that can prepare
general eigenstates of quantum Hamiltonians. In this project, the 2D Heisenberg
model is used as a benchmark system to develop several methods to accelerate and
improve the performance of the rodeo algorithm. The block partition method and
the variational rodeo algorithm, two different methods for preconditioning the
initial state, will be tested. Stochastic methods with finite energy resolution
will then be used to determine the full energy spectrum. Trotter step adiabatic
evolution will be used to perform extrapolations to small Trotter step size.

This award by the Quantum Information Science program is jointly supported by
the Theoretical Nuclear Physics in the Division of Physics within the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.