* 2310279
* Research in Novel Symmetries of Quantum Field Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nikita Nekrasov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 35,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Nikita Nekrasov at Stony
Brook University.

The research of Professor Nekrasov aims to improve our understanding of the
Universe large and small by studying the laws governing the behavior of the
building blocks of matter and their interactions at subnuclear distances. As
part of this research, Professor Nekrasov will develop and use modern
mathematical tools that permit exact calculations of the outcomes of physical
processes. These tools are often referred to as "localization" techniques.
Another line of research to be investigated concerns the connections between the
dynamics of quasi-one-dimensional particle systems, such as quantum wires, and
the low-energy states associated with elementary particles in our three
dimensional space. This research advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical law. This is both exciting intellectually and
interesting for the advancement of technology and security. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor Nekrasov will involve
graduate students and postdocs in his research, and thereby provide critical
training for junior physicists beginning research in the field of elementary
particle physics. They will also give public lectures on their research results
and develop new course curricula based on the results of their research.

More technically, Professor Nekrasov and his students will study extended
observables in theories exhibiting a novel type of symmetry relating particles
of different spin, with the goal of gaining insight into the behavior of the
interactions believed to be responsible for the structure of nucleons and
nuclei. They will also study models of statistical physics relevant for strongly
coupled phenomena and the small-scale nature of space-time; low dimensional
strongly correlated electron systems which are relevant for quantum information
on the one hand and superconductivity on the other; and applications in
mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.