* 2310927
* CNS Core: Medium: Privacy-Preserving and Censorship-Resistant Domain Name System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 750,000.00

The Domain Name System (DNS) is the phonebook of the Internet which maps human-
friendly domain names to IP addresses. Without DNS, the Internet itself would
not function. Despite the decades-long efforts to protect user privacy on the
Internet, privacy remains an open issue for DNS. In general, access to a DNS
resolver enables traffic snooping, i.e., realizing who is looking for what.
Moreover, DNS is a perfect vehicle for censorship: preventing users to resolve
domain names is one of the simplest, and often utilized, way to censor free and
open access on the Internet. The key question this project aims to answer is
whether a truly privacy-preserving and censorship-resistant DNS can be
developed.

The key thesis of this project is that the only way to guarantee full user
privacy would be for the DNS server to do its job in the blind, i.e., by
resolving domain names without knowing what they are. The latter statement seems
counter-intuitive, but in reality several techniques exist which allow such
operations. These techniques fall in the branch of Private Information Retrieval
(PIR), which is achieved by various cryptographic tools such as homomorphic
encryption. PIR protocols have long been considered impractical due to
performance bottlenecks. The preliminary research and performance benchmarks
demonstrate that the PIR performance is moving towards the practically usable
territory in terms of query timescales, traffic overhead, and supported database
size. The main goal of this project is to make PIR applicable to DNS by
leveraging inherent features of the DNS systems and co-designing novel PIR
protocols, thus making the full DNS privacy and censorship resistance a reality.

This project has the potential to make a significant impact by enabling a
scalable, incrementally-deployable, privacy-preserving, and censorship-resilient
DNS system. The PIs plan to design and disseminate, as open-source,
implementations of the system. It is expected that popular browsers will support
the proposed privacy-preserving system by showing an icon, similar to the one
for HTTPS, for the websites that support the single-server PDNS. The proposed
research has societal impacts beyond the computing discipline because results
from this project could lead to fundamental enhancements in terms of user
privacy on the Internet. Moreover, it can make an important step towards
thwarting network-level censorship, thus leading to free and open Internet and
society.

All the data associated with this project, including measurement data, code, and
results, will be made publicly and openly available at
http://networks.cs.northwestern.edu/PDNS/. This website will be maintained for
the duration of the project, and all the data will remain available for download
from the website for at least 5 years after the project is completed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.