* 2310013
* WoU-MMA: Research &amp; Development for the Southern Wide-Field Gamma-Ray Observatory (SWGO)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Juan Santander, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,150,000.00

Earthbound observatories collect data to investigate some of the most
challenging and fundamental questions in physics and astronomy today. They
identify cosmic particle accelerators, study the interstellar medium, search for
signs of dark matter in distant galaxies, and test the limits of Einstein's
theory of special relativity. Wide field-of-view, high-duty-cycle instruments
like the NSF-funded High-Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Observatory in Mexico
and the Large High-Altitude Air Shower Observatory (LHAASO) in China have
recently had tremendous successes in surveying the sky for gamma-rays - high
energy rays of light beyond the visible spectrum. Their observations have led to
discoveries in all the areas just mentioned. These breakthroughs underscore the
crucial role that ground-based facilities play in physics and astronomy. This
project gathers scientists from eight US institutions to perform research and
development (R&D) for a next-generation ground-based survey instrument for
astrophysics research: The Southern Wide-Field Gamma-Ray Observatory (SWGO). The
SWGO will be located in the Southern Hemisphere, where it will have an
unprecedented wide-field view of the center region of our Galaxy for gamma rays.
The U.S. institutions are part of a global collaboration involving more than 70
institutions in 14 countries that are working to make the SWGO a reality. The
project will ensure U.S. leadership in this field of ground-based astrophysics.
The project team is committed to increasing inclusive excellence in physics and
astronomy and will leverage the fact that the SWGO will be built in a Spanish
speaking country in South America, to enhance outreach to Hispanic communities
in the U.S.

The SWGO will almost continuously survey the gamma-ray sky in the space and time
domain and provide synergies with observatories like the IceCube Neutrino
Observatory, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), the
Virgo interferometer, the Fermi Space Telescope and the Cherenkov Telescope
Array (CTA). The facility will provide daily unbiased monitoring for variable
sources and near-real-time alerts to other instruments. Its archival data set
will enable regions of the sky to be studied both before and after alerts from
other experiments are reported. Excellent sensitivity to the most powerful
particle accelerators in the local Galactic neighborhood is one of the greatest
strengths of SWGO and will enable an unprecedented study of PeVatrons toward the
Galactic center region. To achieve this, the optimal observatory site and
detector design need to be identified. Supported by this SWGO R&D award the team
will investigate Southern Hemisphere sites and perform end-to-end prototype
tests of water Cherenkov detectors including electronics and DAQ systems at the
existing HAWC Observatory and the ultimately selected SWGO site. The production
of high-level simulation outputs that are informed by realistic benchmark tests
will allow optimization of the science output of the future SWGO.

The award is aligned with the NSF Big Idea of Windows on the Universe: the Era
of Multi-messenger Astrophysics as it coordinates the use of multi-messenger
observations of very high energy gamma rays using a wide-field detection
approach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.