* 2310363
* Physics at the Frontier: From Colliders to Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 255,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Will Kinney, Dejan
Stojkovic, Doreen Wackeroth, and Ciaran Williams at the University at Buffalo,
The State University of New York.

The PIs will conduct a wide-ranging research program which aims to provide
answers to key open questions at the frontier of particle physics, cosmology,
and gravity research. Research topics include the physics of cosmological
inflation, the physics of black holes, Dark Energy, the properties of the Higgs
boson, and precision predictions for the Large Hadron Collider and future
accelerators. This research aligns with NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and advance the national welfare as it is aimed at extending our
understanding of the origin and structure of the universe, and the properties of
fundamental particles and fields. The group will also involve students in their
research, and thereby provide training for junior physicists beginning research
in this field. The PIs will continue to conduct public outreach, including
public lectures, planetarium shows, interactions with the press and other media,
and engagement with the Science & Art Cabaret series, now in its twelfth season.

More technically, Professor Kinney's research will involve investigation of so-
called "swampland" criteria within the context of early universe physics. He
will constrain the physics of inflation with new observations of the Cosmic
Microwave Background and Large-Scale Structure, and explore resolutions to the
Hubble constant tension. Professor Stojkovic will continue the development of
the comprehensive event generator BlackMax which is currently used by the LHC
collaborations in searches for exotic physics. He will also investigate
observable consequences of cosmological phase transitions, and establish quasars
as standard candles. Professor Wackeroth will focus on providing improved
predictions for a variety of processes involving electroweak (EW) gauge bosons
at the LHC in order to increase the sensitivity of precision tests of the SM to
signals of new physics. This will be achieved by calculating higher-order
electroweak and QCD radiative corrections and by working on conceptional
problems such as the treatment of the heavy quark (Q) mass in Q-initiated
processes. Professor Wackeroth will also study the impact of EW corrections on
low-energy neutrino-Nucleon scattering processes relevant to future neutrino
experiments. Finally, Professor Williams will develop new techniques for multi-
loop calculations which will allow for the calculation of the Mixed QCD-EW
corrections to di-photon production. Professor Williams will compute both the
quark initiated and gluon initiated channel at two-loop order. The gluon channel
will allow for a determination of the EW corrections to the Higgs-continuum
interference at this order, thereby yielding the most precise possible studies
of Higgs interferometry at the LHC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.