* 2310255
* Conference: SaTC 2.0 Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Murat Kantarcioglu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 99,811.00

NSF SaTC (Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace) program has enabled the funding of
the many innovative research, education and transition to practice projects over
the years. Still, the recent developments in internet of things, artificial
intelligence, social media, quantum computing in a post-covid world require
reconsidering the future directions and priorities of the NSF SaTC program. The
University of Texas at Dallas will host the NSF SaTC workshop (titled SaTC 2.0
workshop) to enable discussion among different stakeholders to arrive at
recommendations for future research, education, and transition to practice
directions for the SaTC program. The workshop’s broader significance and
importance are: 1) The future investment in cybersecurity, and privacy projects
by the NSF would be critical in advancing the state of art and enhancing
national security. Hence, aligning the NSF investments with the emerging
cybersecurity and privacy landscape would be critical to address immediate
societal needs. 2) the workshop includes a series of activities primarily
targeted to educating the future workforce and engages in developing activities
that will increase the future participation of traditionally underrepresented
groups, hence, contributing to creating a more diverse and inclusive atmosphere
in the SaTC program and strengthening the ability of the future workforce to
address problems of national importance.

The workshop 1) allows interdisciplinary researchers, educators, practitioners
from academia, industry, and government in all areas of cybersecurity and
privacy, to come together and determine the strategic direction recommendations
for the future of the SaTC program; 2) provides an open interdisciplinary forum
for cross-fertilization of ideas and enhancing cohesion between experts on all
areas of cybersecurity, policy and social sciences; 3) encourages debate to
bring together a productive mixture of interdisciplinary perspectives on the
future of the SaTC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.