* 2310663
* IUCRC Planning Grant Carnegie Mellon University: Center for Materials Data Science for Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* John Kitchin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This project proposes to plan a new site in the Center on Data Science for
Materials Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely) by garnering industry support
and feedback on applying data science-informed research to understand
reliability and lifetime of materials, and use this feedback to ensure the
Center is responsive to industry needs. Reliability of materials, parts and
products are essential for US infrastructure in energy, defense, and national
health and welfare. MDS-Rely will recruit potential industry partners interested
in conducting research with the Center to apply data science to materials
development. The planning grant will then garner feedback from these industry
partners on the following objectives of the Center: (1) Enhance reliability
testing, (2) Develop degradation models, (3) Apply degradation models, and (4)
Develop educational programs. Together these efforts will enhance national
interests.

MDS-Rely will harness relationships between industry and academia to make
headways in applying data science to applied materials development, design, and
reliability. There will be three intellectual thrusts: (1) Soft and biomaterial
formulation; (2) Natural language processing for data science of materials; and
(3) Data-driven design of catalytic materials and processes. The soft and
biomaterial formulation thrust will encompass machine-learning augmented design
of experiments and automated science. The natural language processing thrust
will focus on leveraging the existing literature more effectively in the area of
materials reliability and degradation. Finally, the data-driven design of
catalyst materials and processes will combine automated simulation with process
systems engineering to discover materials and processes that are robust to
degradation. The new site will leverage strengths at the intersections of
computing, data science and machine learning with domain expertise in soft and
biomaterials as well as catalysis at Carnegie Mellon University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.