* 2310967
* IUCRC Phase II Georgia Institute of Technology: Building Reliable Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Jaydev Desai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2027
* USD 45,893.00

Disability is becoming a leading cause of healthcare concern because of the
increase in survivable trauma and an aging population. Millions of adults live
with neurological disorders,brain injury, mental illness, limb loss or
paralysis. There is a need for accessible technologies that can more effectively
address the care and rehabilitation needs of these patients. However, innovation
in neurotechnology faces several challenges: The pace of innovation exceeds the
rate of evaluation for acceptable performance; standards for the validation of
safety, efficacy, and reliability of neurotechnology are lagging; current
technologies are costly, limiting their deployment for treatment of
disabilities; and the need to train new generations of physicians and engineers
in emerging technologies steadily increases.

The Industry University Cooperative Research Center for Building Reliable
Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN) will address the above
challenges. The Center's vision is built on a convergent research approach to
the design and validation of reliable, ethical, patient-centered
neurotechnologies and their use in understanding neural systems. BRAIN leverages
wide-ranging expertise from neural, cognitive and rehabilitation engineering to
neurorobotics, neuromodulation, and ethical artificial intelligence to enhance
the rate of development and empirical validation of new neurotechnologies
through partnerships with industry and other strategic partners while developing
a highly skilled workforce; evaluating the impact of these technologies on
quality of life; and integrating knowledge across disciplines, such as the
humanities, with neurotechnologies to understand collective intelligence, and
augment physical and cognitive capabilities.

The Center's mission is multifold: to accelerate the progress of science and
advance the national health by transferring neurotechnology to end users and to
promote access for underrepresented minorities in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) by broadening new participation and retaining
current participants. BRAIN will address problems in the neurological space that
disproportionately affect underrepresented groups. BRAIN will become a
neurotechnology hub by creating a pipeline from discoveries to solutions, while
helping students, scientists, and engineers solve one of the greatest unmet
medical and healthcare needs of our time.

The Georgia Tech site, a Partner Site of the BRAIN Center complements existing
strength and expands research into new areas such as brain injury, neurovascular
engineering, and cell based systems. As a leading public institution for
training of underrepresented groups, Georgia Tech will expand existing programs
to include a neurotechnology focus. The Center will maintain a project
repository (https://nsfbrain.org/) comprised of products and services for 10
years after the completion of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.