* 2310626
* Dynamic hypothalamic facilitation of group cohesion
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Aubrey Kelly, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,265,579.00

Some animals live in large communities comprised mostly of individuals that are
not related to them. In these cases, animals will interact daily with unrelated
individuals (e.g. friends, acquaintances, or strangers) across various social
settings. Individuals that successfully navigate group living are considered
prosocial compared to antisocial individuals that do not navigate group living
with great success. Despite the importance of successful group social
interaction, little is known about how the brain promotes prosocial behavior to
allow individuals to enter a new social group and maintain group cohesion. The
answers to these questions remain unknown because most neuroscience studies
examine social behaviors between just two individuals that are either related
(e.g. parent-offspring) or mates. For most animals, however, social interactions
often occur in complex settings. This project uses a unique animal model, the
spiny mouse, which lives in large mixed-sex groups comprised of related and
unrelated individuals. This research will determine how the brain promotes
initiation of contact with a new group, facilitates positive interactions with
new groups members, and reinforces positive behaviors that enable group
stability. Insights gained from this research will be foundational for examining
how the brain promotes successful navigation of complex social environments and
how individuals are able to thrive in groups, maintaining healthy relationships
leading to stable communities. The studies will also incorporate outreach
programs to work with children and adults at science festivals and develop a new
outreach program called "After Dark" which will be a museum-based program that
highlights group living animals.

The brain can organize adaptive behavioral responses to complex social
environments, yet we know little about how this is achieved, particularly when
the social environment is a complex society of numerous interacting individuals.
Indeed, within the realm of social neuroscience, most studies probe neural
circuits underlying dyadic interactions. As a result, we know very little about
how the brain modulates behavior in group contexts. To respond to an ever-
changing social environment, central brain “hubs” are likely necessary for
organizing systematic responses to dynamic inputs. The paraventricular nucleus
of the hypothalamus (PVN) is a multifunctional region that modulates
physiological processes and behaviors that range from affiliation and parental
care to aggression and anxiety. Although we know the PVN can produce numerous
outputs, the downstream targets that the PVN acts on to produce them is less
well understood. This project will test the hypothesis that hypothalamic
suppression of fear neural circuitry facilitates indiscriminate social approach
behavior to allow for the formation of new groups, and that hypothalamic
promotion of reward circuit-mediated behavior reinforces affiliation in complex
social environments to facilitate group cohesion. The researchers will use
chemo- and functional-genetic approaches, along with a novel organism – the
highly social spiny mouse – to identify neural circuits that promote social
cohesion in complex groups. DREADDs and fiber photometry will be paired with
machine learning and social network analysis of complex groups that will produce
a neurobehavioral dataset that will provide insight into the brain mechanisms
that make group living possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.