* 2310497
* Refining Searches for Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kirtimaan Mohan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Kirtimaan Mohan at
Michigan State University.

Several experiments around the world, such as the Large Hadron Collider at the
CERN Laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland, are collecting large volumes of data to
study how the building blocks of matter --- namely fundamental particles such as
quarks and leptons --- interact and behave. Our current understanding of these
fundamental particles and their interactions is deficient and new physical laws
are needed in order to explain several observed phenomena, such as the existence
of dark matter. Greater precision from both theory and experiment is necessary
in order to test and discover such new physical laws. Professor Mohan’s research
will help implement modern tools and methods to improve our search for new
physics laws by using modern machine learning methods, refining theoretical
calculations, and designing novel search methods. This research aligns with and
supports the mission of the National Science Foundation to promote the progress
of basic science. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Mohan will involve graduate students and postdocs in his
research, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists beginning
research in this field. Additionally, Professor Mohan will engage in outreach
activities and help improve undergraduate education in physics using research
based pedagogical practices.

More specifically, the search for new physics requires more precise theoretical
calculations and predictions as well as novel ways to explore and test the
phenomenology of different new physics scenarios. Professor Mohan’s research
will touch upon all of these aspects. For example, Professor Mohan will use
modern machine learning techniques to provide a more accurate estimate of
uncertainties in Parton Distribution Functions. Additionally, Professor Mohan
will explore novel ideas and signals for new physics scenarios as well as refine
calculations in new physics models to provide more accurate theoretical
predictions of such models. Professor Mohan will also engage in broader-impact
activities which involve service to the larger physics community, mentoring with
an explicit goal of promoting diversity, engaging in outreach activities, and
improving undergraduate education and curriculum using evidence-based practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.