* 2310756
* Developing Conjugate Models for Exact MCMC free Bayesian Inference with Application to High-Dimensional Spatio-Temporal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Bradley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 227,251.00

The massive expansion in the production of data has led to natural computational
challenges in uncertainty quantification. In particular, Bayesian methodology
can account for sources of uncertainty, but requires techniques known to be
computationally demanding. These difficulties are exacerbated when data are
spatially and/or temporally correlated. The current solutions predominantly use
either approximations or inefficient iterative methods such as Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC). This project resolves the computational challenges in
uncertainty quantification with novel statistical methodology that does not
require approximations and MCMC. Big data has impacted nearly every area of
science, and as a result, methodological development and software for scalable,
exact, MCMC free Bayesian methodology will have a substantial effect. Not only
will the proposed methodology and software be an advancement in statistics, but
it will be useful across a broad range of disciplines that deal with complex
spatio-temporal processes such as neuroscience, climatology, demography,
econometrics, ecology, meteorology, oceanography, and official statistics. The
investigator will educate and train graduate students, and disseminate project
findings through journal publications, public-use software, and conference
presentations.

The objective of this project is to develop conjugate distribution theory for
scalable Bayesian hierarchical models that create a larger framework for
statisticians and subject matter scientist to perform MCMC free Bayesian
inference without approximating the posterior distribution. In particular, this
project will develop and extend the generalized conjugate multivariate (GCM)
distribution, which allows one to simulate directly from the exact posterior
distribution for a particular large class mixed effects models. This exact
sample is referred to as Exact Posterior Regression (EPR). In Aim 1, the
investigator will develop extensions of GCM and EPR to new settings including
ordinal and nominal data, exact MCMC free inference for certain hyperparameters,
and theoretical connections to existing statistical models. Aim 2 involves
extensions of EPR to multivariate spatio-temporal and multiscale spatial data,
allowing one to leverage several sources of dependence to improve predictions
and perform spatial change of support (COS) without the use of MCMC or
approximate Bayesian methods. To achieve scalability, in Aim 3, the investigator
will develop an exact Bayesian hierarchical model that repeatedly subsets the
data in an informative manner that does not impose additional assumptions on the
data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.