* 2310457
* Travel Support for Student Participation at the 2023 ASME Energy Sustainability (ASME-ES) Conference; Washington, DC; 10-12 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Pei Dong, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2024
* USD 24,000.00

This award provides student travel and registration support to attend and
participate in the 2023 The American Society of Mechanical Engineers - Energy
Sustainability (ASME-ES) Conference. ASME is a professional engineering
organization that enables collaboration, knowledge sharing, career enrichment
and skills development across all engineering disciplines. Its goal is to help
the global engineering community develop solutions to benefit society. The ASME-
ES conference brings together scholars and practitioners in a wide range of
energy sustainability fields. The conference highlights advances in research,
design and manufacture of sustainable and innovative energy technologies from
building to utility scales as well as society-level energy analyses and
solutions. Advanced manufacturing plays a key role in pursuing energy
sustainability from materials synthesis to system design to manufacturing. ASME-
ES 2023 promotes tracks with an emphasis on advanced manufacturing. The
conference offers participants an opportunity to share their scientific
discoveries, interact with peers and colleagues from academia, government labs,
and industry, extend their network, and foster new collaborations within the
broader advanced manufacturing community. Consistent with NSF's goal to broaden
the participation of groups underrepresented in science and engineering, the
conference allocates travel funds to students from underrepresented minorities,
women, and persons with disabilities. This approach promotes greater diversity
in STEM fields and benefits the nation by educating and training a skilled
workforce better prepared to provide transformative solutions to overcome
challenges in their chosen fields. The conference meets the national priorities
of advancing energy sustainability and achieving diversity, equity and
inclusion.

ASME-ES presents a unique platform for the mechanical engineering and other
engineering communities to focus on approaches to energy sustainability. The
engineering community has close collaboration with manufacturing industries,
which facilitates prompt transition of fundamental research to industry and
useful commercial products. The conference committee has identified synergistic
opportunities and platforms for energy sustainability, covering materials
science, advanced manufacturing, integrated systems design and education and
training. Support of this conference aligns with NSF’s mission of fostering
fundamental research in science and engineering, translating the research
outcomes to industry and applications and advancing education and workforce
development. The conference provides a forum for emerging scientists and
engineers to showcase their scientific accomplishments, interact with peers and
extend their network within the broader engineering and academic communities.
This activity facilitates future career opportunities in academia and industry
for participating students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.