* 2310668
* Feature selection in several challenging directions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jiashun Jin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,000.00

Feature selection plays a crucial role in many statistical problems, such as
cancer classification and analysis of text and network data. This project will
study feature selection in several challenging, understudied directions. First,
MDAStat is a recent large-scale data set on the publications of statisticians
between 1971 and 2015, which provides a rich resource for research on network
analysis and text analysis. The project will expand the scope of data set to
1971-2025 by collecting new data. Second, the project will develop a family of
correlation metrics, which provide a better way to measure the nonlinear
relationship between the response and predictive variables. The metrics provide
more accurate feature selection results in many application problems in cancer
and biomedical study. Last, the project will develop new approaches to
extracting features from social networks and text documents and generate better
results in applications such as analysis of health care data and author
attribution (i.e., identifying the right authors of a possibly ancient text
document). The research will generate new ideas and methods to address many
challenging problems in modern statistical research, and will substantially
increase the understanding of many problems in science and engineering, such as
cancer and biomedical research, network analysis, text analysis, and natural
language processing.

Feature selection is an important approach in high dimensional data analysis.
The project will study feature selection in several challenging directions and
will make contributions on the following topics. First, despite many studies on
the rare/strong signal regime, the property of the lasso remains largely unknown
in the more challenging rare/weak signal regime. The project will develop new
techniques and use them to derive sharp rates of the Hamming selection errors of
the lasso, especially for the rare/weak signal regime. Second, a challenging
problem in feature selection is how to measure the nonlinear relationship
between the response and predictive variables. The project will develop a family
of nonlinear correlation metrics and use them to derive sharp phase transitions
in nonlinear rare/weak models for cancer classification and cancer clustering.
Third, despite that there are more than a handful of models for social networks,
it remains unclear which model fits the best with real networks, partially
because network goodness-of-fit is a challenging problem. The project will
develop a novel goodness-of-fit approach and use it to identify the most
appropriate models for social networks. Last, feature extraction and embedding
with text documents and networks is a challenging problem. The project will
develop novel approaches for feature extraction and embedding and using them for
predicting future citation counts of a published paper and for author
attribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.