* 2310874
* Eco-evolutionary dynamics of parasitism mediated through variance in host fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Robert Cox, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,004,225.00

Nearly all animals and plants are infected by parasites that can reduce health
and performance. In addition to these overall effects, parasites are predicted
to increase variation among individual hosts in health and performance.
Parasites are therefore predicted to shape the ecology and evolution of the host
species. These predictions apply to any plant or animal host-parasite
interaction but testing them requires a species in which (1) parasites can be
manipulated and (2) health and performance can be measured across the entire
lifetime for thousands of individuals. This project uses a custom drug delivery
method to remove several different species of parasitic worm from a wild
population comprised of thousands of individual lizard hosts. These hosts are
short-lived and occur on small islands where the entire population can be
accurately censused several times per year. Genetic methods have recently been
developed to match parents to offspring each year, so lifetime survival and
reproduction can be measured for thousands of individuals, in both de-wormed and
untreated treatments. The project will test whether and how parasites influence
variation in host health and performance. The results will increase
understanding of the ecology and evolution of infectious disease while also
testing fundamental evolution theory. The project will impact science education
by supporting the professional development of science teachers through summer
workshops. The workshops focus on building skills in data collection, analysis,
and graphing, and in transmitting those skills to K-12 students. Postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate researchers will be mentored in this project, with a
focus on undergraduates in the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation.

Although it is well known that parasites reduce the mean fitness of their hosts,
few studies have tested whether parasites influence variance in host fitness or
explored the resulting evolutionary dynamics for host populations. This is
particularly true when considering total lifetime fitness, which is notoriously
difficult to measure in most wild populations. This project will combine new
high-throughput techniques in ecological molecular genetics (GT-seq) with
established approaches in quantitative genetics (animal models) to provide a
detailed, multi-generational characterization of total lifetime fitness and its
quantitative genetic architecture in a wild population with both experimental
and natural variation in parasite burdens. The nature of the dataset will also
allow total lifetime fitness to be decomposed into its components (juvenile
survival, adult survival, mating success, reproductive success), and for
evolutionary dynamics of disease and parasitism to be considered separately for
females and males, thus providing additional insight into key evolutionary
hypotheses about sex differences in selection and in parasite resistance and
tolerance. The Summer Teacher Workshop will be done in collaboration with makers
of educational technology that teaches data skills to middle- and high-school
students using authentic statistics combined with “ready- to-teach” modules
featuring curated real datasets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.