* 2310610
* Tuning and Assessing Bacterial Predation Efficiency in Complex Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Steve Presse, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2027
* USD 189,860.00

Predatory bacteria prey on a range of other bacterial species and are poised to
serve as important biocontrol agents. For example, the bacterial predator to be
investigated with this award, Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus (Bb), is known to
degrade microbial biofilms, including antibiotic resistant ones, plays a role in
wastewater treatment, and shows potential to curb infections in animals and
plants, earning it the title of “living antibiotic”. Understanding both Bb’s
hunting strategy and life cycle are prerequisites toward exploiting Bb as a
biocontrol agent. What is more, the ability to leverage bacteria as antibiotics
has clear advantages as compared to small molecule antibiotics as bacterial
predators provide us with many more tunable knobs to help potentially activate,
modulate, or turn off their hunting at will.

In recent work, the investigators explored how Bb use fluid motion around
themselves as they propel through their fluid environments to passively push
themselves towards surfaces where their prey, such as the bacterial species E.
coli, are in abundance. This motion in search for its prey requires the predator
to expend energy and begs the following four questions:

1) How do Bb use cues from their surroundings to determine whether it is worth
expending their limited resources to swim in order to locate prey? 2) Under
starvation conditions and other extreme environments, how do Bb, depending on
chance encounters with their prey to replicate, adapt their speed to efficiently
locate their prey? In other words, do they swim at constant speed or alternate
between rapid and slow motion to explore their environment while preserving
their energy resources as much as possible? 3) How does confining Bb in tight
environments (as would be the case if Bb were hunting in a crevasse or a crack
characteristic of the environments they live in) amplify the fluctuations in the
levels of predator? In other words, can we maintain a steady population of Bb in
an environment if we eventually use Bb as a biocontrol agent downstream or will
their populations always undergo major variations? 4) How can we determine the
rate at which these bacterial predators hunt in environments (such as within
living animals) where we cannot see them? In other words, how can we monitor
their predation efficiency when we cannot use microscopes to observe Bb hunting
for prey as Bb may be hunting too deep within a sample in regions inaccessible
to microscopes?

Put together, answers to these questions form the basis of this award's goals.
The longer term national interest of this work is therefore the ability to tune
bacterial predators poised to become resilient, and adaptable, tools in
wastewater treatment, the fight against harmful bacteria, both natural and
introduced by terrorist threat, as well as to degrade microbial biofilms.

This award will also contribute to STEM education. In Arizona, minority students
overwhelmingly begin their academic path by attending community and other public
colleges which are ∼70% minority. While minority students are slightly more
interested in STEM fields than their white peers, this interest doesn’t
translate into college graduation in STEM. To help ASU’s large incoming
community college demographic acclimate to STEM, we propose a two-week Summer
Data Analysis Program (SDAP). SDAP will cover a broad range of topics on the
treatment of data and uncertainty and is directly inspired by the data-driven
efforts of this project. Student attendees of SDAP will be recruited from
programs already aimed at integrating community college recruits and other
minority students into the university community (such as ASU’s SUNDIAL Program
and IDEAs program). Students will be offered a full stipend over the 2 week
bootcamp to help reduce economic disincentives associated with cutting back on
summer work to attend SDAP. Each day in SDAP will consist of two parts: mornings
will include a 2-3 hr tutorial followed by assigned computational projects (on
laptops provided by the PI). ASU’s College Research and Evaluation Services Team
(CREST) will help evaluate both short and long term impact of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.