* 2310664
* Statistical Methods for Response Process Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xueying Tang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 46,877.00

The development of technology allows for the collection of diverse data but also
poses challenges in statistical analysis. This research project aims to develop
methods for analyzing response process data generated from recent computer-based
educational assessments. Such data provide detailed information on test-takers
behaviors that traditional item response data cannot capture. However, the
complex format of the data and the diversity of human behaviors make it
challenging to utilize the information systematically and efficiently. This
project will develop innovative methods to understand and identify individual
differences in learning and problem-solving. The resulting information will be
valuable for designing individualized instruction or intervention strategies to
support student success and advocate inclusiveness and equity in education.
Additionally, user-friendly software will be developed for practitioners' use,
and this project will provide research training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students.

Response process data are an emerging type of data that tracks a respondent's
interaction with computer-based items. This project aims to provide innovative,
scalable, and interpretable statistical methods for utilizing rich information
in response process data. Specifically, this project will focus on developing 1)
a data-driven method for extracting features from process data, 2) a latent
variable model for understanding how response process dynamics are driven by
respondents' latent traits, and 3) a scalar-on-process regression model for
describing statistical relationships between response process and other observed
variables. Novel computational algorithms will be designed for statistical
inference. The strong interpretability of the models will open the black box
created by previous machine-learning-based approaches for process data, making
it easier to validate the results and gain a deeper understanding of students'
problem-solving behaviors. The outcomes of this project will enable educators to
better evaluate students and design effective educational strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.