* 2310515
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Diaspora, Agriculture, &amp; AI: Community-based Integration of Smart Technologies into Black Diasporic Agricultural Practices
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2026
* Daniela Rosner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 11/30/2026
* USD 1,660,000.00

Black diasporic farming communities are important sites of sustainable food
production for millions of people in the US and worldwide. As tight-knit
agricultural collectives, they generate food throughout cities, promote
diasporic values of ecological well-being, resource conservation, and
interdependence, and foster the possibility of social and political
transformation for black, indigenous, racialized and marginalized groups. While
advancements in food security, nutrition, and environmental health have the
potential to feed nearly twice as many people per year, particularly among
historically marginalized groups, black diasporic urban farming communities face
several hurdles to efficiency that remain largely under-addressed. Activities
such as risk management, soil health monitoring, and crop harvesting rely on
repeated, time-consuming work that is challenging to support on limited budgets,
resources, and labor. The field of artificial intelligence (AI) promises
solutions to many of these challenges, making the case for an emerging market
around AI-driven agricultural technologies. This project aims to (1) advance
understanding of sociotechnical ecosystems involving AI to support diasporic
urban farming; (2) collaboratively develop AI-based technologies that better
integrates and sustains technological gains with diasporic knowledge, and (3)
systematically assess the impact of AI-based farming technologies on diasporic
communities and industrial partners.

In particular, our research seeks to advance the field of smart agriculture for
diasporic urban farming communities along three urgent axes: (1) Labor:
Addressing labor needs, decreasing bias within weeding, and ensuring access to
affordable services for farmers who need them; (2) Ecosystem: Advancing care for
a farm’s ecological conditions by supporting synergistic relationships with the
land and surrounding organisms, training novice farmers, and monitoring
greenhouse conditions; (3) Health: Innovating mechanisms for healthy soil
conditions, reducing toxicity, and increasing the quality and quantity of
nutrients. This work unfolds across three phases. Phase 1 begins with an
ethnographic case study involving participant observation of urban agricultural
practices and semi-structured interviews with partner organizations and
identified stakeholders. Phase 2 complements this empirical work with an
evaluation and design study that identifies sociotechnical solutions for
agricultural decision-making informed by black diasporic needs. Phase 3 involves
technical implementation that mindfully integrates black diasporic knowledge
with AI-based technologies towards a smart and connected diasporic farming
infrastructure. This work relies on our interdisciplinary team’s close
collaboration with three farming organizations, three industry partners, and
sustained partnerships across wider diasporic farming networks, and oversight
from experts in AI, HCI, critical geography, urban studies, and community-based
inquiry.

This project is partially funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which is committed to funding research and practice with continued
focus on investigating a range of informal STEM learning (ISL) experiences and
environments that make lifelong learning a reality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.