* 2310684
* BRC-BIO Structural regulation of cap-independent translation in eukaryotic mRNAs.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Arnab Sengupta, Georgia College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 501,868.00

Messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) molecules carry the genetic code used to make
proteins and can fold into intricate structures. mRNAs can also bind to proteins
that control their function. The translation of mRNA in higher organisms,
requires a series of complex, tightly regulated initiation steps. However, under
cellular stress (low oxygen, low nutrients, DNA damage) when most mRNA
translation is blocked, some mRNAs can bypass regulatory checks. These leads to
elevated levels of certain proteins compared to normal levels. It is unclear how
the same mRNA molecule operates differently with and without stress. This
project aims to bridge this critical gap in knowledge by investigating the
patterns of mRNA folding and interactions under cellular stress conditions.
Undergraduate researchers at Georgiaâ€™s designated public liberal arts college
located in Milledgeville, GA will conduct these investigations. Students will
utilize cutting-edge biotechnology tools including next-generation sequencing
and computational analysis. Students will also gain from interactions with
collaborators at research-intensive universities. To broaden the number of
students participating in this project, portions will be conducted as a course-
based research experience, where students enrolled in a Molecular BioTechniques
course will be guided through hands-on, scaffolded projects over a semester.
High school students from neighboring counties will be engaged via workshops in
cell and molecular biology to break some barriers among future undergraduate
researchers. First-year students will also be directly engaged research
opportunities, a high-impact practice that is designed to boost retention and
student success.

For cellular mRNAs, switching from the standard cap-dependent translation to
stress-induced cap-independent translation is poorly understood. In a subset of
such mRNAs, internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) have been reported which
engage in RNA-structure mediated initiation of translation. For many reported
cellular IRESs no reliable structure data is currently available, and
furthermore investigation of structures under in-cell conditions is lacking.
This project aims to bridge this critical gap in knowledge starting with a small
selection of putative IRES-containing mRNAs from human cell lines. Structural
changes during the switching mechanism from cap-dependent to cap-independent
translation will be detected by probing IRES-region in stress-induced live human
cell lines. Chemical probing reagents such as 2A3, NAI, and 5NIA will be applied
that can probe RNA structure reliably within live cells. Furthermore, RNA-
protein interactions will be detected using crosslinking reagents. Patterns of
protein interaction sites on target RNA regions will be compared under stress
conditions. Collectively, this data will provide a mechanistic framework based
on structural changes in regulatory RNAs under stress. Data validation will
apply western blots, reporter assays using engineered mRNA transcript
constructs, and CLIP-based strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.