* 2310909
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: A multi-fidelity computational framework for vascular mechanobiology in SimVascular
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Alison Marsden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,599,783.00

Simulations of blood flow in the cardiovascular system are crucial for
fundamental research in treatment planning, medical device design, and
increasing understanding of how cardiovascular diseases develop and progress in
adults and children. The project team developed SimVascular
(www.simvascular.org), a widely used open-source software package providing a
complete pipeline from medical image data to patient specific blood flow
simulation and analysis. Now the aim is to extend and enhance SimVascular to
include mechanobiology: how biological responses are influenced by mechanical
forces from flow and blood pressure. These features will allow modeling of the
long-term mechanistic adaptations of the body in ways that were not previously
possible. Such methods are critical for assessing long-term outcomes and the
underpinnings of disease progression in the circulatory system. While
SimVascular has primarily impacted clinical applications in the past, inclusion
of mechanobiological models has huge potential to broaden the impact on basic
science communities in vascular and developmental biology, tissue engineering,
and bioprinting.

This Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) project will
develop and publicly release a novel suite of multifidelity simulation tools for
modeling vascular biomechanics and mechanobiology in the open source SimVascular
project. The team has grown SimVascular into a vibrant and modernized open-
source suite, with demonstrated impact in research, education and training. In
this project, SimVascular will be expanded to include software and
cyberinfrastructure that links biomechanics with mechanobiology. This will
enable the research community to study longer-term mechanistic adaptations of
the circulatory system. Such methods are critical for assessing long-term
outcomes and the underpinnings of disease progression across multiple scales.
Specifically, a suite of new capabilities to SimVascular will be added linking
blood flow and tissue biomechanics at multiple fidelities with models of
mechanobiology across scales in organ-to-microscale vascular networks. To
facilitate software adoption, accompanying educational and training materials
will be provided, and a sustainable software ecosystem to increase the user
community and ensure continued availability and evolution will be maintained.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation and
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
within the NSF Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.