* 2310312
* NSF-BSF:  Theory of Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Steven Kivelson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2027
* USD 155,276.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research on atomic scale models of interacting
electrons and ions in so-called "quantum materials". Some examples of quantum
materials include high-temperature superconductors, two layers of carbon atom
sheets on top of each other with a relative twist angle, and materials in which
the electron-electron interaction energies are comparable or much larger
compared to their kinetic energies. A major focus of this project is to unravel
the mysterious properties of superconductors through which electrons flow in
unison without losing any of their energy below a certain critical temperature.
While quantum mechanics has allowed scientists to understand and predict most
properties of "conventional" superconductors, achieving a fundamental
understanding of unconventional superconductors, which include high-temperature
superconductors and twisted layers of carbon atoms, has remained elusive. In
this project, the PI and his team will study an array of atomic scale models on
material systems and topics, including unconventional superconductors, that are
at the heart of contemporary condensed matter physics.

The quantum many-body problem that is the topic of this project has diverse and
deep connections to other fields of physics, from string theory to quantum
information. In addition, quantum materials have had a tremendous impact on both
fundamental science and technology, and hence, an increased understanding of the
problems to be investigated in this project has the potential to influence
broader developments in science and technology. This award will also contribute
to the development of the scientific workforce, as it will support the research
training of graduate students and postdocs, who are likely to take leading
positions in academia and industry in the future.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research on microscopic models of interacting
electrons and phonons in quantum materials. Particular attention will be paid to
the intermediate coupling regime, where interactions and kinetic terms are of
comparable magnitude. Interactions are generally minimized when the constituent
particles form suitable real-space structures, such as a Wigner crystal, while
kinetic terms are diagonal in momentum space. Hence, the intermediate coupling
regime is where quantum frustration is maximal. The PI will also apply a Landau-
Ginzburg-Wilson effective field theoretical approach to study problems in which
multiple distinct ordering tendencies are present, and the effective frustration
reflects the competition between them. Specific problems of this general sort
that will be the focus of study are (i) Solvable models of unconventional
metallic regimes, particularly focusing on lessons for cuprate superconductors,
(ii) Phenomenological and microscopic theories of systems with multiple
intertwined ordering tendencies, including multiple possible uniform
superconducting orders, pair-density-wave order, charge and spin density wave
order, and electron nematic order, (iii) Correlated phases of multi-valley two-
dimensional electron gases, and (iv) Generalizing the classification of distinct
phases, especially unconventional superconducting phases, to quasi-periodic
systems including Moir√© materials in which Bloch's theorem does not apply and
conventional symmetry classifications at the very least must be reconsidered.

The quantum many-body problem that is the topic of this project has diverse and
deep connections to other fields of physics, from string theory to quantum
information. In addition, quantum materials have had a tremendous impact on both
fundamental science and technology, and hence, an increased understanding of the
problems to be investigated in this project has the potential to influence
broader developments in science and technology. This award will also contribute
to the development of the scientific workforce, as it will support the research
training of graduate students and postdocs, who are likely to take leading
positions in academia and industry in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.