* 2310483
* EAGER: Pilot Comparative Research on Adoption of Digital Agricultural Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Glenn Stone, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 29,038.00

This award is made under NSF's EAGER funding mechanism, which supports Early-
Concept Grants for Exploratory Research. Some data-intensive digital agriculture
technologies have been in use in farms and other food production operations
since the 1990s. The range of digital agricultural technologies is now expanding
rapidly and some of these technologies are being introduced more widely.
Historically most agricultural technologies have brought impacts beyond the
obvious realms of yield and farmer profits, including impacts on technical
knowledge, on dependencies, and relations among farmers. Given the diversity in
emerging digital technologies and in the settings into which they are being
introduced, such indirect impacts will be highly diverse and difficult to
predict. To date, most research on digital agriculture has focused on a narrow
set of issues, with scant attention to indirect impacts and little analysis from
a comparative perspective. This EAGER project will conduct exploratory pilot
research in diverse settings to collect data to allow investigators to develop a
comparative, multi-sited study of this range of impacts. The project is
appropriate for EAGER funding because it aims to collect data to test and
evaluate questions as a step towards developing a proposal for the larger
comparative project.

Interviews will be conducted by a team of researchers with local knowledge of
agriculture across multiple sites and scales. While the specific digital
technologies and farmer characteristics will, by design, vary greatly across
sites, researchers will investigate four sets of related questions in each
setting. The first concerns identifying the recipients of information about farm
operations and farmer behavior. Potential recipients include private companies,
government offices, extension agents, CGIAR researchers, and academic analysts.
Each of these has distinct expertise and sets of interests. The second concerns
the social dynamics of adoption and non-adoption. Farmer decisions on adoption
may be driven by various factors other than simple bottom-line profit
expectations. The third concerns effects on farmer behavior. The last concerns
effects on social relations among farmers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.