* 2310451
* Professional Development for Molecular Life Science Educators to Increase Retention and Success of Undergraduate STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Joseph Provost, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,650.00

Preparing faculty to teach the next generation of STEM students is as essential
as ever. Indeed, the higher education STEM enterprise has seen decreasing
student interest in science, due in no small part to the pandemic; and these
circumstances have brought new challenges in the classroom related to student
performance. Faculty must adapt and learn how to address students' changing
learning patterns. After several years of working remotely, faculty are eager to
network and learn exciting and effective methods to teach their students. They
will have the opportunity to do this at a three day in-person conference,
supported with funding from this project. An essential part of this project is
to impart best practices to capture and retain student interest in science.
Speakers will share approaches to help shape the next generation of science
students through engagement in both the classroom and teaching laboratory.
National experts at the conference will guide and develop up-and-coming faculty
leaders on how to address the needs of a diverse generation. As a result of this
project, a diverse group of faculty will have increased access to the experts
and tools to help students succeed and persist in STEM.

This project will support and promote the participation of faculty and post-
doctoral fellows from marginalized groups and individuals from under-resourced
institutions to attend a transformative educational conference organized by the
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. The conference seeks to
1) develop leaders in education, 2) introduce current and prospective faculty to
ongoing NSF-funded projects to encourage broader participation, and 3) promote
effective approaches to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives that
result in positive and impactful changes. There is a need to retain students
from all backgrounds in the life sciences, and while the field of inclusive
pedagogy has developed some best practices, the work has not been disseminated
to all life science educators. At this meeting, faculty will hear from leaders
in the field about growth mindset and discipline-specific education research.
Secondly, for faculty to continue to grow professionally, they need to have
leadership skills and develop their networks, and the conference will have a
session on this topic. Faculty will also learn from seven NSF-funded high-impact
projects supporting learning and engaging students. The intellectual merit and
the general expected outcomes are an increase in faculty involvement in one or
more of the high-impact practices, self-reflection on their personal and
professional development, and support of their integration of DEI approaches to
help engage and retain all students. The broader impacts of the project are the
potential to drive institutional change in the context of STEM student and
faculty support. The approaches presented by the NSF-funded groups will help
disseminate their work and encourage further engagement with new participants.
Each participant will have the opportunity to be an agent of change in their
department and institution with the skills learned at the conference, bringing
about an impact beyond a single classroom. The meeting will be evaluated with a
pre- and post-survey and a long-term follow-up survey asking the faculty about
the impact of the meeting. The results of the meeting have already been approved
to be disseminated in the peer-reviewed journal, Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology Education. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.