* 2310751
* Mechanical Intelligence of Locomotion and Intrusion in Slender Organisms in Terradynamically Rich Terrain
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2026
* USD 629,951.00

Most organisms navigate complex, heterogeneous, and unpredictable environments
to survive. While the genes and cellular networks that regulate navigation,
growth, and other exploratory behaviors differ, diverse living systems face
common physical challenges. This suggests the possibility that at the organismal
level, common control strategies (and hence general principles of movement)
exist across living systems despite dramatic differences in the underlying
biological mechanisms. In contrast to insights gained into movement in hydro and
aerodynamics environments, principles by which organisms interact with complex,
heterogeneous “terradynamically rich” environments are less understood. In such
environments, organisms respond to ever-changing and unpredictable local
interactions with limited sensory information; the strength of the interactions
implies that the organism and its environment are highly coupled and cannot be
regarded as independent systems. The centrality of the physical dynamics and
incompleteness of environmental information suggests that terradynamically rich
environmental locomotion requires both closed-loop, active sensory feedback
(commonly associated with neural control in animals or decentralized chemical
cues in plants) and open-loop, passively controlled, and purely physical
processes. These latter processes, in which body-environment interactions are
tuned to produce adaptive exploratory behaviors without the aid of active
feedback control, constitute a mechanical intelligence.

In this award the team of investigators seek to discover where, when, and how
active closed-loop control and passive, mechanically intelligent control
mechanisms interact to create goal-oriented organism movement in
terradynamically rich environments. To do so they will use model systems that
face similar challenges within their physical environments: 1) O. sativa (rice)
and A. thaliana roots which must navigate complex soil environments; 2) C.
elegans nematodes which undulate in soil and dense, rotting vegetative tissue;
3) limbless robots in dense, heterogeneous terrains, such as those encountered
in agricultural areas and search and rescue operations. The investigators will
study the kinematics, forces and genetics responsible for effective function.
More broadly, their findings can give insight into the role of mechanics and
control in evolution and organismal behavior, and at the same time, allow us to
develop robots which can traverse natural environments with performance
comparable to living systems. The studied biological and robotic systems are
also natural subjects of popular interest and the scientific insights gained
will be leveraged for educational and outreach purposes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.