* 2310925
* Travel: CIF: Student Travel Support for the 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the premier
international conference on information theory, the scientific discipline that
studies the mathematical foundations of efficient, reliable, and secure
communications, with applications in telephony, television, wireless, optical,
and data storage systems. The performance benchmark provided by information
theory has successfully guided engineers in the design of ever more efficient
coding systems that leverage the technological advances to closely approach
fundamental limits. The Symposium focuses on the presentation of previously
unpublished contributions in all areas of information theory, including big data
analytics, communication theory and systems, cryptography and security, and
various emerging applications. The pandemic in years 2020 to 2022 resulted in
significant disruption to international conference travel. ISIT-2023 is expected
to be the first edition after the pandemic that will be fully back to normal
with the travel restrictions from around the globe being lifted. Attendance by
student researchers to the Symposium is especially crucial to the continued
vitality of the field of Information Theory, which, if history is to serve as an
indicator, is the basis for US competitiveness in the fields of data
transmission, storage, compression and security. In addition, an outstanding
benefit of the Symposium is the close personal interaction between senior and
junior workers in information theory, which encourages the free exchange of
ideas and critical comments. The opportunities for cross-fertilization are
immense and it is vital that those who are new to the field and bring fresh
ideas be present to discuss their work with those who are more experienced. The
travel support from NSF will significantly ease the burden of the attending
students, given the expected higher-than-normal cost of international travel in
the summer of 2023.

In the past few years (pre-pandemic), the attendance at IEEE ISIT has varied
between 750 and 925, typically including over 300 students. Among them, 40% are
students enrolled in graduate or undergraduate programs in the United States,
who will benefit directly from this travel support grant. In the last few years,
ISIT has had significant participation from women engineers, with about 40%
female student participation. The student travel grant will be administered to
ensure that no less than 45% of the awards are women recipients, which will
continue promoting a healthy and diverse study participation that is key to the
vitality of the community. While the travel support will be given mostly to
student authors who will present technical papers during the conference, a
portion of the US NSF Student Travel Grant will be reserved for US
graduate/undergraduate students who will attend the conference for the first
time and may not have a paper/ presentation/poster/demo at the conference.
Preference will be given to students from under-represented groups (e.g., women,
minorities and people with disabilities). The introduction of this new category
will ensure a broader, more diverse student participation and also promote
student interest in the broad STEM areas in general.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.