* 2310662
* Open Quantum Systems Research for Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Sarah Shandera, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 165,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sarah Shandera at Penn
State University.

There are still many puzzles in understanding the origin, content, and evolution
of the universe. At a fundamental level, the theory of the universe must be
quantum-mechanical and must be able to describe what any one observer sees. Such
a description is challenging when interactions enable quantum information to
move back and forth between observable and unobservable regions. Such models
must therefore be capable of describing what are called "open quantum systems".
Modeling such systems may play a key role in understanding the properties of the
very early universe. As part of her research, Professor Shandera will apply our
understanding of open quantum systems to cosmological problems. This work serves
the national interest by promoting the progress of science within the arenas of
quantum science and studies of the universe. Cosmology's quest to understand the
universe also provides an inspiring context in which to communicate science to a
broad range of audiences. As part of this work, Professor Shandera will meet
with citizen groups and undergraduate students in a variety of venues that
promote conversation and two-way engagement. She will also continue to
incorporate research insights into an active-learning undergraduate quantum
mechanics sequence. Finally, Professor Shandera will support the training of
graduate students in order to grow the network of researchers in this area.

More technically, Professor Shandera will study how the dynamics of open quantum
systems changes when degrees of freedom move from system to environment, and
when symmetry-breaking interactions occur in the environment of the open system.
Cosmological open systems, including those that arise in the era of primordial
inflation, tend to be quite complex and often cannot be accurately treated by
Markovian or perturbative assumptions. Professor Shandera will study non-linear
interactions typical in theories for cosmology beyond the standard model and use
dynamical maps rather than master equations to study exact dynamics. She will
explore systems with emergent, local interaction structures and out-of-
equilibrium dynamics, modeling the observed rich thermodynamic structure of the
universe. It is expected that this open systems and thermodynamics-based
approach will provide a new perspective on the space of viable models for the
primordial universe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.