* 2310322
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Towards Understanding and Handling Problems Due to Coexistence of Multiple IoT Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Qiang Zeng, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 264,849.00

There are over one hundred Internet-of-Things (IoT) platforms. Each has its own
strengths and limitations. To get the best of each, a smart environment may use
multiple IoT platforms. However, when multiple IoT platforms coexist in the same
physical space, many unique problems arise, which are referred to as Multi-
Platform Coexistence (MPC) problems. The objectives of the project are
systematically to describe, categorize and measure MPC problems and design and
build effective solutions to address them.

Multiple platforms for a smart environment do not necessarily share consistent
observations about IoT device states. As a result, automation applications
installed on these platforms may issue incorrect and even conflicting commands.
In addition, the assumption made by existing work that a single platform has a
complete view and control of all IoT devices does not hold true. Thus, the
project is to uncover, measure, and formalize unique problems due to coexistence
and interaction of multiple IoT platforms in the same physical space, and
propose novel designs, techniques, algorithms and build systems to resolve them.

The project can benefit numerous smart-environment users and related industries
by revealing and handling MPC problems and supporting harmonious coexistence of
IoT platforms. The proposed research will be integrated into curriculum
development. These efforts will meet the growing national need for professionals
in IoT. The project will promote the participation of students from
underrepresented groups in IoT research. Furthermore, it will involve
collaboration with professionals from IoT industries for assessment of the
systems and technology transfer.

Data, code, system designs, documentations, and experiment results will be
released through a publicly accessible GitHub repository:
https://quz105.github.io/MPC/. The repository will be maintained for at least
five years after the project ends.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.