* 2310382
* Transitions: Evolving our Understanding of Dynamic RNA Folding and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julius Lucks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

RNA molecules, close chemical cousins of DNA molecules, play central roles in
enacting the genetic instructions of life in all organisms, and are playing
increasingly important roles in biotechnologies. This research will uncover new
fundamental principles that explain how the sequence of an RNA molecule
determines its function. A deeper understanding of how the function of RNA
molecules can be programmed through changes to their sequence promises to
enhance our ability to engineer RNA-based biotechnologies that address global
challenges in sustainability, biomanufacturing, and health. Additional benefits
of this project include training and integrating graduate and undergraduate
students in this research and creating new curriculum that teach concepts of
this research within cutting-edge synthetic biology pedagogical approaches that
are being disseminated nationally.

A major goal of this project is to provide the PI and research team applied
training in the concepts and tools of directed evolution and non-equilibrium
statistical physics to create new perspectives to studying how RNA molecules
function through folding into specific shapes within biological systems. A focal
point of this research is to investigate how the dynamics of RNA folding
processes can evolve through RNA sequence changes to meet specific functional
goals such as regulating gene expression. The project is divided into three
objectives. The first will take place during a professional development period,
where the PI will learn the background theory, experiments, and data analysis
approaches in the field of directed evolution, as well as non-equilibrium
statistical physics approaches to model dynamic molecular folding, through a
combination of hands-on mentoring, coursework, laboratory training and
collaborative interactions. The second will use this training to perform
research to uncover mechanistic and evolutionary principles that link RNA
sequence, to dynamic RNA folding processes that occur during RNA synthesis, to
RNA function in biological systems. The third will use these principles
discovered, in combination with directed evolution, to engineer synthetic
biology systems that address societal challenges such as the global water crisis
through the development of RNA-based diagnostic technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.