* 2310470
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Socio-Technical Approaches for Securing Cyber-Physical Systems from False Claim Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Matthew Weber, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,947.00

The fragility and vulnerability of cyberspace has exposed society to risks of
disruption with severe consequences. Although direct attacks on cyberspace with
tools such as viruses and ransomware have been extensively examined, much less
attention has been focused on preparing for an emerging, over-the-horizon
threat: adversaries who attack cyber-physical systems (CPS) indirectly by
altering consumption behavior of unwitting users influenced through false claims
such as of traffic jams or gasoline shortages. This project is exploring socio-
technical approaches that integrate social science with systems engineering to
protect and defend CPS against harmful actions by adversaries who deploy such
indirect attacks.

This idea is represented with two layers: (i) an information layer being formed
from social media and other social interactions, and (ii) a physical layer
representing the physical components of a networked CPS (e.g., critical
infrastructure network, Internet of Things). This work imagines an attack
through the information layer that causes emergent human responses that
adversely alter performance in the physical layer. The research objective of
this proposal is to understand the effects of false claims in exposing and
exacerbating the fragility and vulnerability of CPS and their performance. To
combat such attacks and ensure the security and trustworthiness of cyber-
physical systems, this project is developing knowledge across four research
components that can (i) model and control the spread of influence on humans by
false claims in the information layer through survey-driven agent-based models,
(ii) relate this spread to the performance and vulnerabilities of the physical
layer and develop protection-interdiction-reaction optimization models across
layers, (iii) test and evaluate the model with a concrete example of false
information spread on social networks and its effects on power networks, and
(iv) offer a plan for the integration of research with classroom learning and
outreach.

This project is jointly funded by SaTC and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.