* 2310100
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms driving positive and negative tree-fungal feedbacks across an abiotic-stress gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Joseph LaManna, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2027
* USD 115,524.00

Understanding how species interactions affect biological diversity has long been
of interest to ecologists. Ecological theory and observations have shown that
negative interactions between adult trees and seedlings of the same species
stabilize populations, prevent local extinction, and maintain biological
diversity. Alternatively, adult trees can increase the growth and survival of
younger seedlings of the same species, particularly in stressful environments,
which in turn can lead to lower levels of biological diversity. However, the
role of pathogens and mutualists in mediating these interactions and giving rise
to variation in plant diversity across environmental gradients remains unknown.
This research funds a collaboration between plant and fungal population and
community ecologists to uncover the role of positive and negative above and
below ground plant-microbial interactions in the maintenance of species
diversity. It will further explore how changes in environmental stress might
impact tree diversity in forest ecosystems. This research will inform and engage
local and regional land managers and stakeholders of the role of above and below
ground mutualists in the growth and survival of key tree species in the Pacific
Northwest.

As the global climate shifts, research into how populations and communities
adapt to environmental changes has become increasingly critical. Microbes and
their interactions with plants, both positive and negative, play a underexamined
role in determining species distributions, abundances, and their expected
responses to climate-induced stress. As a result, we lack a comprehensive
understanding of how microbially mediated interactions, and in particular above
and below ground conspecific feedbacks within and among plant species, change in
their strength and direction across environmental stress gradients. The research
funded by this award will investigate how fungal symbionts contribute to tree
species abundance, distribution, and diversity along stress gradients, both
directly and indirectly, by influencing density-dependent interactions and
feedbacks among adult and juvenile trees. Researchers will test the hypothesis
that the net effect of fungal symbionts on plant performance is correlated with
the level of abiotic drought and nutrient stress in the environment, with
conspecific feedback shifting from negative to positive as abiotic stress
increases. First, in a field experiment at the HJ Andrews Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site, investigators will reciprocally transplant three focal
tree species beneath the canopies of adult conspecific or heterospecific trees
along natural moisture and soil-nutrient stress gradients, manipulating fungal
mutualists to evaluate their effect on conspecific density-dependent feedback.
In greenhouse experiments, trees, microbes, and soil nutrient and drought stress
will be manipulated. Finally, this project will integrate host-symbiont dynamics
into regional models of forest community dynamics to assess how tree
population/community dynamics might be altered under conditions of abiotic
stress. Overall, the proposed work will test multiple hypotheses regarding how
fungal symbionts contribute to the direction and strength of feedback for
dominant tree species in forests of the Pacific Northwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.