* 2310003
* RUI: Investigating Phases of Cosmic Matter with Neutron Star Seismology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Prashanth Jaikumar, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Studying the properties of neutron stars helps us to better understand
microscopic nuclear forces that govern the structure of sub-atomic matter.
Neutron stars can also contain new forms of matter, such as dark matter, which
is thought to make up about 27% of the matter in the Universe, and matter that
displays unique collective behavior like superfluidity. This project will help
in the discovery of such new states of matter, whose distinct features can be
revealed by close examination of multi-messenger astronomical signals from
neutron stars. Specifically, the PI will use mathematical and computational
methods to quantify how neutron star composition affects observables such as
gravitational waves. In addition to discovering new states of matter and energy,
which is one of the biggest unanswered questions in Science, the PI will mentor
several graduate students from diverse backgrounds and conduct synergistic
outreach activities in local high schools to promote STEM learning from an early
age.

Just as helioseismology has proven to be a powerful tool to constrain
theoretical models of the Sun and uncover beyond standard model physics, the
growing field of neutron star seismology can reveal novel forms of strongly or
weakly interacting matter and their behavior under extreme conditions. The PI
and his students will quantify the spectrum of certain non-radial modes of
neutron stars, called g-modes, that are particularly sensitive to temperature
and composition, with the aim of establishing the link between manifest dense
strongly interacting matter and its signature in gravitational waves resulting
from neutron star mergers or core-collapse supernovae. In addition, the PI and
his students will study the impact on neutron star oscillations of Bose
condensates and dark matter admixtures, with the aim of constraining the
condensate fraction, dark matter particle mass and its interactions with the
strong force sector.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.