* 2310806
* Conference: Support for Student Participation at the 16th International Conference on Mid-infrared Optoelectronics: Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Michael Santos, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 03/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The 16th International Conference on Mid-infrared Optoelectronics: Materials and
Devices will advance the state of knowledge in this area by providing a
prominent international forum for bringing together pioneers, experts, junior
researchers, and students to interact and exchange ideas. The topics of the
technical program include materials growth, infrared device technology,
interband and intersubband physics and modeling, novel architectures based on
new materials and low-dimensional structures, non-linear technologies, THz
materials and devices, infrared optoelectronic systems, and applications of
infrared optoelectronic devices. The technical program will integrate oral
sessions, poster presentations, and social activities, in a way that provides
numerous opportunities for discussion and interaction between researchers at all
levels, from world leaders to student researchers.

The conference will benefit society by advancing the development of materials
and devices needed for several engineering grand challenges, including infrared
emitters and detectors for homeland security, pollution detection, information
and communication technology, and sustainable energy conversion. The conference
will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning by bringing together students and researchers with broad areas of
expertise to focus on infrared materials and the novel devices enabled by these
materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.