* 2310939
* IUCRC Phase II+ West Virginia University: Center for Building Reliable Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Radhey Sharma, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 47,713.00

Disability is becoming a leading cause of healthcare concern because of the
increase in survivable trauma and an aging population. Millions of adults live
with neurological disorders, brain injury, mental illness, limb loss or
paralysis. There is a need for accessible technologies that can more effectively
address the care and rehabilitation needs of these patients. However, innovation
in neurotechnology faces several challenges: The pace of innovation exceeds the
rate of evaluation for acceptable performance; standards for the validation of
safety, efficacy, and reliability of neurotechnology are lagging; current
technologies are costly, limiting their deployment for treatment of
disabilities; and the need to train new generations of physicians and engineers
in emerging technologies steadily increases.

The Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Building Reliable
Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN) will address the above
challenges. The Center’s vision is built on a convergent research approach to
the design and validation of reliable, ethical, patient-centered neurotechnology
and their use in understanding neural systems. BRAIN leverages wide-ranging
expertise from neural, cognitive and rehabilitation engineering to
neurorobotics, neuromodulation, and ethical artificial intelligence to enhance
the rate of development and empirical validation of new neurotechnology through
partnerships with industry and other strategic partners while developing a
highly skilled workforce; evaluating the impact of these technologies on quality
of life; and integrating knowledge across disciplines such as the humanities
with neurotechnology to understand collective intelligence, and augment physical
and cognitive capabilities. The Center’s mission is multifold: to accelerate the
progress of science and advance the national health by transferring
neurotechnology to end users and to promote access for underrepresented
minorities in science, technology, engineering, and math by broadening new
participation and retaining current participants. BRAIN will address problems in
the neurological space that disproportionately affect underrepresented groups.
BRAIN will become a neurotechnology hub by creating a pipeline from discoveries
to solutions, while helping students, scientists, and engineers solve one of the
greatest unmet medical and health care needs of our time.

The West Virginia Site of IUCRC BRAIN will focus on bringing clinical testing of
multi-scale, multi-modal, and trans-disciplinary approaches to the overall IUCRC
team. WVU has expertise in neural engineering and first-in-human testing of
novel neurological devices. The Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute provides a
unique environment of clinical trials and testing of high-impact neurological
treatments. Statler College of Engineering supports the engineering technology
and applications development of new biotechnology applications. This multi-
disciplinary WVU team will work with other BRAIN sites and industry partners to
translate discoveries in neurotechnology for implanted brain-computer
interfaces, treating human disability, clinical data sharing, and the use of AI-
connected virtual reality applications for improved medical treatments. The WVU
site will provide support to maintain a project repository
(https://nsfbrain.org/) at University of Houston Center, comprised of products
and services for 10 years after the completion of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.