* 2310285
* NSF-BSF: Electrical mitigation of radiation-induced defects in InAs/GaSb structures for infrared sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Leonid Chernyak, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2026
* USD 415,350.00

Infrared (IR) photodetectors have many security-related applications ranging
from night-vision and large-scale fire alarm systems to IR-sensing in the hither
cosmos for interceptor seekers and early missile warning systems. As a threat of
terrorism is a part of every-day reality for the US and other countries,
availability of efficient and radiation hard IR detector arrays will help
protecting countries from terrorism, thus saving lives and assets. Damage by
energetic particles degrades the sensitivity of IR photodetectors in harsh
radiation environments. This project will lead to a dramatic recovery of
photodetectors based on InAs/GaSb structures. This outcome will be achieved by
electrical tailoring of a fundamental property of the material, the electron
diffusion length, by in-situ charge injection under applied voltage.
Photodetector sensitivity will recover completely and return to the original
state prior to irradiation or even exceed it. The project will advance the
fundamental understanding of the nature of point and extended defects in
InAs/GaSb-based semiconductors and devices. The project will integrate research
and education at the graduate and undergraduate levels and features an active
international partner from Tel Aviv University in Israel.

This project focuses on electrical mitigation of irradiation-induced defects by
charge injection into infrared photodetectors based on InAs/GaSb superlattices.
The ultimate aim is to produce radiation hard and efficient devices. The project
hinges on the PI's previous findings that charge injection into InAs/GaSb type-
II strained-layer superlattices leads to considerable changes in the material's
electronic properties, particularly the carrier diffusion length. These changes
result in a several fold enhancements of the photodetector quantum efficiency.
It is therefore possible to improve performance of photodetectors, affected by
radiation, using short pulses of solid-state forward-bias charge injection into
InAs/GaSb p-i-n devices. The project will lead to a better understanding of the
interaction between InAs and GaSb semiconductors and highly energetic particles,
including electrons, gamma-ray photons, and protons, as well as of the nature of
radiation-induced defects. Charge injection will result in enhanced minority
electron diffusion length in the p-type absorption layer of a photodetector,
thus increasing the quantum efficiency for the device and "healing" the adverse
impact of gamma-rays, protons, electrons, and other radiation types. A unique
combination of electrical and optical studies in the PI’s lab will shed light on
the mechanism, which is responsible for the effect of interest. Studies of
minority carrier diffusion length will be conducted using electron beam-induced
current technique at various temperatures. Deep level transient spectroscopy
will allow studies of radiation-induced point defects. Spectral photoresponse
measurements will assess the impact of charge injection on device quantum
efficiency. The ultimate goal is to correlate charge injection regimes (current;
voltage; duration) and irradiation doses, thus proceeding towards control of
photodetector performance and recovery from radiation damage by purely
electrical means.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.