* 2310717
* New and Refurbished Directions Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Lisa Randall, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of a postdoctoral research associate
working in the research group of Professor Lisa Randall at Harvard University.

Recent decades have seen significant advances in particle physics. Yet many
issues stubbornly remain that seem to require new ingredients or new ways of
thinking. Among these problems is the so-called "hierarchy problem" of particle
physics --- i.e., the question of why gravity is as weak as it is. There are
also problems concerning the energy density of the Universe --- problems which
directly affect how quickly the universe expanded immediately after the big bang
and how quickly it appears to be accelerating in its expansion today. As part of
her research, Professor Randall considers theories in which there are extra
spacetime dimensions beyond those of width, height, and depth. Such extra
dimensions provide a new arena in which these and other issues may be addressed.
Research in this area thus serves the national interest by enhancing our
understanding of the fundamental operation of the universe. This research is
also expected to have significant broader impacts. Studies of extra dimensions
not only provide deeper insights into current ideas of particle physics but also
offer a rich territory ideal for the training of junior physicists entering the
field, such as postdoctoral fellows and students. This research will also
provide ideas that the public enjoys learning about, and which Professor Randall
will include in her ongoing public lectures. More technically, this research
will involve new features that appear within the context of theories with extra
spacetime dimensions. In particular, how does the stabilization mechanism
essential to achieving the cosmology of the three observed spatial dimensions
change the low energy theory that describes what we see? Already there exist
examples, ultimately based on a string theory model, where gravitational
constraints from an extra dimension were essential and needed to be included in
the analysis. As part of this project Professor Randall and her colleagues will
study how this extra ingredient can be relevant for achieving the consistency of
the theory and fixing the size of an extra dimension.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.