* 2310372
* SHINE: Faster Boundary-Conforming Simulations of Solar Convection on Unstructured Grids
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Chunlei Liang, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2026
* USD 399,374.00

Faster and more accurate predictions of space weather require model development
of solar conditions. This project develops a computational model for turbulent
solar convection by advancing the Compressible High-Order Unstructured Spectral
difference (CHORUS) code. This interdisciplinary project will support two
graduate students including a female Ph.D. student as well as an undergraduate
research assistant. The PI will collaborate with NOAA’s Space Weather Prediction
Center as well as NCAR’s High Altitude Observatory for broader dissemination of
CHORUS++ as open-source code.

This project accelerates the computational efficiency of CHORUS code and
improves its accuracy for studying solar convection with an unprecedented
capability to capture its hierarchical and inhomogeneous nature, and further
exploits the capabilities of CHORUS to shed new light on multi-scale solar
convection, and by extension, the fundamental physics of turbulent thermal
convection under the influence of density stratification and rotation. The
excellent parallel efficiency of CHORUS allows it to achieve the high
computational resolution necessary to capture the intensely turbulent nature of
the Sun’s convection zone (SCZ). In this project, CHORUS will be improved in
three aspects: 1) a boundary- conforming transfinite mapping will be designed to
completely remove numerical errors induced by iso-parametric mapping; 2) the
order of accuracy in space will be improved from third-order (p2 elements) to
sixth-order (p5 elements); and 3) p-refinements and local time stepping
capabilities will be equipped for higher resolution in both space and time. The
resultant CHORUS++ code will be over 100 times faster than CHORUS. Turbulence in
the solar atmosphere is driven by thermal convection which transports heat from
the deep solar interior to the surface layers where it is radiated into space.
Turbulent convection in turn establishes mean flows and hydrodynamic dynamo
action that regulates solar variability. An essential factor in establishing
inhomogeneity is the extreme variation in gas density of order 1 million across
the convection zone, which produces a commensurate disparity in the dynamical
length and time scales. Small thermal plumes driven by radiative cooling in the
upper boundary layer merge into larger-scale coherent structures deeper down.
This vast dynamical range poses formidable modeling challenges that push the
limits of computational fluid dynamics that require local mesh refinements and
local time stepping for parallel computations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.