* 2310205
* Untangling Photoreactivity of Oxide Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lisa Fredin, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 447,870.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Lisa Fredin of Lehigh University is
exploring the photochemical and photophysical properties of titanium dioxide
nanoparticles using computational methods. While surface structure is known to
have a fundamental impact on the properties of photocatalysts, most current
models cannot capture the complexity of real experimental systems. In
particular, nanosized photocatalysts are widely used but new models that can
predict the reactivity at corners and edges of these particles are needed. Dr.
Fredin and her students will build systematic nanotitania models and then use
them to directly explore photophysics and reactivity of this industrially
important material. Their discoveries could lead to a better understanding of
the chemistry and physics of nanotitania interfaces and transform how models of
photocatalysts are developed. In addition, their efforts could increase
diversity and computationally literacy in the STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) workforce through providing immersive research
experiences for early career undergraduates and students from underrepresented
groups and dedicated hands-on scientific computation and coding workshops.

This project focuses on computational studies of photophysics and reactivity of
nanotitania particles. The proposed work will build large cluster models of
nanostructured titania with both faceted and amorphous surfaces. By
systematically comparing various shaped particles, the proposed research has the
potential to provide a more complete understanding of how to model the
photoresponse and reactivity of nanoscale oxides before running an experiment.
Using density functional theory (DFT) methods and large cluster models, this
work aims to provide the first systematic calculation of photocatalytic barriers
on oxide facet edges and amorphous nanoparticle surfaces. This study will likely
improve first principle models of photocatalysis by providing in depth insights
into important materials used in a wide variety of applications and reactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.