* 2310919
* IUCRC Preliminary Proposal Planning Grant UC Merced: Center for Memory System Research (CEMSYS)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Dong Li, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 05/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The memory system has been evolving at a fast pace, driven by applications and
advance of hardware technology. The trend of memory-consuming applications and
new hardware technology is calling for the birth of new memory systems with
larger capacity, higher performance, and even with computing capabilities.
Aligned with the trend, memory systems research must be carried out to integrate
the new memory systems into the existing software and hardware ecosystems. Such
research is critical to the industry, because the industry is looking for
solutions to develop new business and deploy their applications with
increasingly larger datasets and faster data-generation rate.     CEMSYS aims to
address the unmet industry research needs on (a) integrating and evaluating
emerging memory systems and (b) evolving its applications to make the best usage
of emerging memory systems. CEMSYS will work on the following areas: (1)
heterogeneous memory; (2) disaggregated memory; (3) big memory systems; (4)
processing in memory; (5) memory reliability and security; (6) memory profiling
and optimization; (7) emerging cache coherent interconnect (such as CXL); and
(8) persistent memory.    Memory is the foundation of computer systems. The
performance of almost all computer programs relies on memory for information
storage and retrieval. Increasing capacity, performance, reliability, and energy
efficiency of memory systems can benefit a number of applications. Hence, CEMSYS
research is highly economically important, and will generate a high societal
impact. By establishing CEMSYS at UC Merced (a minority-serving institute), we
bring unique research and development opportunities to those minority students.
CEMSYS will leverage demographic diversity in Merced (and the Central Valley in
general) to mentor and develop a diverse, highly skilled, globally competitive
engineering workforce. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.