* 2310856
* CAREER: Long-Range Near Field Communication for Ultra-Dense Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Hongzhi Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2027
* USD 276,326.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) can improve the quality of life by connecting
everyday things and providing essential information for intelligent management
of our daily life. However, the deployment of ultra-dense IoT devices is
constrained by the spectrum scarcity. The Near Field Communication (NFC) using
high-frequency (HF) band magnetic signals has a short communication range which
generates negligible interference with existing wireless applications. Also, NFC
signals can efficiently penetrate through various materials and provide a
reliable communication channel. Nowadays, NFC tags have been used in retail,
medical, clothing industry, and agriculture among others. However, due to the
limited communication range, these tags are usually scanned manually, which
cannot support automatic IoT applications. This project aims to develop a long-
range NFC system that can read ultra-dense NFC tags autonomously using mobile
robots. Localization and various sensing algorithms will be designed to fully
leverage the potential of ubiquitous NFC tags to improve the quality of life and
working efficiency. This project also supports education by integrating research
activities with existing undergraduate and graduate curricula at Norfolk State
University, which is one of the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs), and sharing research outcomes and outreach materials with other
Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) in the Inclusive Engineering Consortium.

The following four research directions will be pursued to achieve the objective
of developing a framework for ultra-dense IoT with networking, sensing, and
localization capabilities. First, this project will design long-range NFC
readers using coil arrays, self-interference cancellation, and magnetic blind
beamforming to extend the communication range of existing NFC systems. The
existence of high-permittivity and high-conductivity materials that are close to
the reader or tags will be considered, and their impacts on wireless
communication performance will be studied. Second, anti-collision protocols for
strongly coupled tags will be designed. The Orientation Division Multiple Access
will be developed and analyzed to allow multiple NFC tags to access the wireless
channel and reduce the misreading ratio. Third, tag orientation sensing and
localization algorithms will be developed under the constraints of tag coupling
and random orientation. Last, the security and privacy issues created by the
long communication range will also be considered and addressed by developing
near field secure transmission strategies. Reconfigurable testbeds will be
developed to verify the proposed approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.