* 2310438
* Increasing STEM Diversity through Engaging Undergraduate Student Research in Experiential and Innovative Forensic Science Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Michelle Rippy, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 12/31/2025
* USD 349,934.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by utilizing experiential and
innovative research in forensic science to increase student engagement and
success in STEM. The Forensic Science Research Center at California State
University East Bay is uniquely positioned to enable undergraduate students to
gain experience, knowledge, and skills in forensic science required for most
entry-level forensic science positions. California State University East Bay is
a Hispanic-Serving Institution and Asian American and Native American Pacific
Islander Serving Institution, where most students identify as first-generation
college students. The project goals are to engage diverse undergraduate students
in forensic science and investigations through research with faculty and
practitioners while providing the skillsets and experience needed for entry-
level positions in forensic science and STEM. The project will also enhance
partnerships with local criminal justice agencies to allow practitioners to work
with students on research and create mentorship and networking opportunities. To
create a continued interest and empower youth to consider STEM careers, students
will also complete outreach to K-12 and community colleges through science fairs
and community events promoting forensic science with age-appropriate experiments
and hands-on activities.

Forensic science is a unique, intersectional field that requires background and
education in multiple areas of sciences including criminal justice. Classroom-
based training, alone, is often not enough to prepare students for entry-level
careers, as research and experiential learning, if present, do not equate to a
year of experience needed to be hired. This project will fill a current gap of
practitioner-involved forensic science research by providing undergraduate
student researchers with real case experience prior to graduation. Twelve
undergraduate student researchers will be exposed to cold cases, forensic
science related research, conference attendance, and academic publications to
ensure they are well-prepared for future careers or graduate school, ultimately
diversifying the forensic science workforce and reducing evidence backlog.
Evaluation of the project will include student success and retention of
undergraduate student researchers, the expansion of institutional capacity to
provide STEM education, the improvement of qualifications for students when
entering the workforce, and the impact of outreach on enrollment to STEM majors.
Foundational forensic science coursework will be developed for K-12 students
that will be provided open-source to educators, allowing schools nationwide to
incorporate vetted forensic science material into their classrooms. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is also supported
by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.