* 2310991
* Collaborative Research: HSI-Hubs: Intersectionality as Inquiry &amp; Praxis: Race, Class, Gender &amp; Ethnicity for Student Success in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Ramona Hernandez, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2028
* USD 604,088.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this HUB Project aims to convene The University of
New Mexico (UNM), New Mexico State University (NMSU), Central New Mexico
Community College (CNM), City College, The City University of New York (CCNY-
CUNY), Lehman College (Lehman-CUNY), Hostos Community College (Hostos-CUNY) to
re-envision data and equity metrics, convene communities of practice and
transform narratives about advancing equity in STEM. Institutions of higher
education define underserved students using one-dimensional status metrics
(e.g., first-generation college, PELL, gender, Native American, African-American
and Hispanic/Latinx, etc.). Yet, research shows this is insufficient for
documenting and eliminating inequities (McCall 2001; Irizarry 2015; López,
Erwin, Binder & Chavez 2018). There is an urgent need to operationalize
intersectionality as a new angle of vision for strategic planning and equitable
distribution of resources (e.g., admissions, degrees earned,
department/institutional culture shift, state-level funding
formulas/distribution of resources, federal data collection and accountability
metrics/IPEDS, etc.). Intersectionality (attention to the mutual constitution of
race, gender, class, ethnicity and other axes of inequality as analytically
distinct and simultaneous systems of power, oppression, resistance in a given
sociohistorical and institutional context) is a powerful tool for making
inequities visible and helping institutions of higher education create effective
actions for advancing undergraduate student success in STEM and beyond.

Our HSI-hub is a multi-faceted resource, connector and catalyst for enduring
system-wide equity transformations that incubate the promise of
intersectionality for knowledge production and policy for equity impact. Our
synergistic and phased deliverables include: 1.) HSI STEM Data and Policy
Network for Action; 2.) HSI STEM Communities of Practice: Faculty Fellows and
Stakeholders Advancing Equity Through Intersectionality; and 3.) HSI STEM
Centering Intersectionality as Equity through Narrative Change, Communication
Strategies and Publications. Our deliverables include a dedicated website,
policy briefs, and academic. Project products will be archived in the UNM
digital repository, tagged under the following subjects: “Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs),” “Intersectionality,” “Equity,” “Higher Education,”
“Student Success,” and “Metrics.” The repository is accessible to anyone with
internet access. In order to increase visibility and impact, select data and
project materials, will be converted to a format suitable for upload to JSTOR-
FORUM and OMEKA databases and catalogued in WorldCat. Acknowledging the
importance of intersectionality for advancing equity, without a strategic plan
to remove barriers and redistribute resources for advancing student success, is
a missed opportunity. “Taking a truly intersectional approach will enable us to
think and act differently to remove systemic barriers to education” (Harpur,
Szucs & Willox 2022:14). The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.