* 2310094
* Broadening the Discovery Potential of the LHC: Instrumentation, Algorithms, and Training for Physics with the ATLAS Experiment and Direct Axion Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Oreglia, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award will allow the University of Chicago particle physics group to
develop, commission, and operate new instrumentation for the ATLAS experiment at
the Large Hadron Collider that will enable novel searches for new physics as
well as key measurements of Standard Model processes. By combining their
expertise in instrumentation, physics analysis, and data-intensive computation
with novel ideas in machine learning and electronics design, they will extend
sensitivities to groundbreaking discoveries. The proposed instrumentation
efforts enable the group to have a long-lasting impact on research in physics
more broadly. The group also aims to have an impact on workforce development,
K-12 education, and enhanced public scientific literacy. They will incorporate
new programs and activities based on group members' successful experiences and
alignment with best practices. These activities comprise a comprehensive
approach to training, educating, and increasing scientific literacy as they
advance scientific knowledge. At the same time, the group will train graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers in a broad range of methods, experimental
design, leadership, and communication.

Specifically, the group will: (a) Conduct searches for new physics, including
axion-like particles, and conduct detailed measurements of the Standard Model
(SM) involving electroweak (EW) processes and hadronic final states; (b)
Continue and strengthen their roles in commissioning and operating the Tile
calorimeter and global Feature Extractor (gFEX) calorimeter trigger system; (c)
Deliver three detector upgrades for the High Luminosity LHC Run 4: ATLAS TileCal
Main Board electronics, the calorimeter Global Event Processor (GEP) trigger,
and the Event Filter Tracking (EFTrack) trigger system. The Chicago group's
physics analysis activities include exploration of the electroweak/Higgs sector;
exploration of the dark sector; and exploration of the hard QCD sector. Each has
the potential for transformative discoveries and insights in particle physics.
The group will expand its roles in several areas as the ATLAS physics program
and the HL-LHC upgrade program progress, including calibrating, operating, and
upgrading the Tile Calorimeter and commissioning the trigger system for Run 3,
as well as upgrading the Global Event Processor (GEP) and Event Filter Trigger
systems, and the associated computing paradigms, for the HL-LHC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.