* 2310072
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Morris Swartz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

The Standard Model of particle physics describes many of the micro-physical
phenomena that have been observed since it was proposed over 50 years ago. In
particular, one of the most spectacular predictions was the prediction of the
Higgs boson, which was observed in 2012 at the CERN Large Hadron Collider. For
all of its success, the Standard Model is likely incomplete. It does not
describe the dark matter, which is the dominant part of the mass density of the
universe. It does not explain why ordinary matter dominates over antimatter. The
theory with a single Higgs boson is mathematically unstable, which suggests that
there are Higgs siblings or new physical processes occurring at larger mass
scales. One of the goals of this project is to improve our knowledge of the
Higgs couplings, which can deviate by small amounts from the predictions of the
Standard Model when heavier siblings exist. There can also be non-standard
couplings that violate the Charge Conjugation Parity symmetry, which could
explain the matter domination of the universe. Other goals are to search
directly for the heavier states that could be produced at the LHC and to search
for their possible effects on high mass Standard Model processes. This project
advances our understanding of one of the key directions in particle physics and
of our understanding of the basic physical laws of the universe. It exposes
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to state of
the art detector technologies, computing technologies, and data analysis
techniques. Those highly trained students and postdocs pursue careers in both
academic and non-academic fields. The project also hosts a very successful
Quarknet center that provides professional development opportunities for a
community of about 25 Maryland area high school STEM teachers.

This project is a program of experimental particle physics research within the
CMS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The project builds upon
an ongoing program of research that led to the discovery of the Higgs boson and
the characterization of its properties. The focus of the Higgs program is on the
golden four-lepton decay channel, but also incorporating other decay channels
into production mechanism related measurements. Kinematic information in both
on-shell and off-shell production is used to make precision measurements of the
Higgs boson mass, width, quantum numbers, CP properties, and more generally, the
tensor structure of Higgs interactions with vector bosons and fermions within
the framework of effective field theory. The project includes searches for
heavier siblings of the observed state and other look-alike states such as top
quark resonances, W' and Z' bosons, exotic gravitons, leptoquarks, and excited
quarks and gluons. These are predicted by many extensions of the Standard Model.
The techniques needed to identify and reconstruct the decays of these states
were developed by the proponents using previous NSF support. In particular, the
searches would use tracking enhancements, jet substructure techniques, machine
learning techniques, and sophisticated likelihood variables. Finally, this
project supports technical contributions to the operation of the CMS detector
and to the study of new detector technology for high luminosity upgrades of the
LHC. The operational contributions are based on techniques that are currently in
use or are derived from those currently in use. The contributions to the study
of detector upgrades are based on tools that were developed to support the
present operation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.