* 2311323
* Elements: The TARDIS radiative transfer framework - A modeling toolkit for transients
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wolfgang Kerzendorf, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 565,501.00

Supernovae are powerful cosmic explosions and are vital for studying galaxy
evolution, heavy element production, and the dynamics of the universe. The
TARDIS project aims to advance our understanding of supernovae. TARDIS is an
open-science radiative transfer code, that allows scientists to model and
simulate various types of supernovae, unlocking insights into their physics.
With the number of supernova discoveries rising exponentially, TARDIS provides a
valuable tool to comprehend these phenomena. The TARDIS project actively
supports scientific education and diversity through training programs and an
open-science approach. Thus TARDIS provides opportunities for individuals from
varied backgrounds to engage in cutting-edge research and contribute to the
scientific community. By utilizing its open-science radiative transfer code, the
TARDIS project facilitates scientific progress, benefits society, and promotes
inclusivity and diversity within the scientific community.

The rapid increase in observational capability has led to vast increases in
discovery space in the field of astrophysical transients. Theory has made large
leaps due to the widespread availability of supercomputing resources enabling
simulation at unprecedented detail. TARDIS is an open-science radiative transfer
code that has been used to model a large variety of astrophysical transients
(supernovae, superluminous supernovae, kilonovae). The transparent governance
structure and equitable access have brought roughly one hundred developers to
the project and earned the TARDIS community a fiscal sponsorship from the open-
science foundation NUMFOCUS. TARDIS uses state-of-the-art industry-standard
techniques based on the GitHub ecosystem. For ease of development and use (with
a specific emphasis on including new contributors), the PYTHON language is used,
enhanced by its scientific stack (including NUMPY, PANDAS, ASTROPY). The
necessary computational speed for TARDIS – without sacrificing the ease of
development – is achieved by using a novel Just-In-Time compiler technique
provided by the NUMBA package. The distribution of TARDIS is handled via the use
of industry-standard package managers for Python packages such as CONDA and PIP.
This project uses a two-step approach to restructuring and adding a new time-
dependent mode that will enable the use of TARDIS in an order of magnitude more
science cases than the current version. It will modularize the TARDIS code base
by separating it into state objects and plasma/transport solvers, then adds
full-time dependence to the model solver, transport solvers, and plasma steps.
These additions to TARDIS will increase the applicability of this open-science
code to many more science cases and will also faciliitate a more rapid approach
to adding new microphysics directions.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Division of Astronomical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.