* 2311919
* Sustainability: Long-term Deployment Sustainability Strategy for Argovis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Donata Giglio, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 722,547.00

Argovis is a website and database (argovis.colorado.edu) which allows, for the
first time, easy access to user-selected regional and temporal subsets of ocean
and weather data relevant for the study of Earth’s climate and ocean
biogeochemistry, enhancing co-location capabilities across these data and
accelerating climate science workflows, outreach, and education. Data in Argovis
can be visualized on the browser or can be imported directly in the programming
environment of choice for scientific analysis. With its emphasis on facilitating
data access and co-location capabilities across datasets, Argovis is well
positioned to facilitate multidisciplinary research, support community efforts
that benefit society, and play a key role towards increasing use of ocean
knowledge and understanding by increasing ocean literacy across diverse
stakeholders, which is one of the desired outcomes of the 2021-2030 United
Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development.

This project implements a sustainability strategy for Argovis that ensures the
long-term stability of the tools and resources Argovis provides users with,
leveraging long-term computational and maintenance resources at different
institutions. Also, working with educators, Argovis creates and disseminates
educational activities that utilize data in support of teaching and diversity in
science, allowing students with different backgrounds to participate in
activities that leverage large and complex dataset relevant for the study of
Earth’s climate, including from regions with low bandwidth internet connections
(as Argovis provides targeted searches). These educational activities are also
useful to spin up outreach efforts and new research projects (hence promote the
progress of science). Argovis can be useful to communities looking to organize
and share data beyond those relevant for climate science and physical
oceanography, by providing a template for the structure and distribution of any
geolocated data.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education (RISE), Division
of Ocean Sciences (OCE), and Office of Polar Programs (OPP) within the
Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.