* 2311110
* Conference: Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Kim Ruane, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 16,000.00

This award provides support for the U.S.-based participants of the conference
“Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications 2023” that will take
place July 17-21 at the Erwin Schroedinger Institute, Vienna, Austria. The
conference is organized by the PI Kim Ruane in collaboration with Christopher
Cashen (University of Vienna), Sangyun Kim (Korea Advanced Institute of Science
& Technology), and Yash Lodha (University of Hawaii). This is the 16th edition
of an annual series, previous iterations of which have been held in ten
different countries on four continents. The goal of the conference is to bring
together both early career and established researchers in combinatorial,
asymptotic, and geometric aspects of infinite group theory together with
researchers in dynamics and discrete probability, to consolidate recent advances
based on the interplay between these subjects and to spark new interactions. The
conference will feature plenary talks and a discussion session of open problems.
Organizers plan a targeted recruitment process to broaden participation among
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in these fields.

The topics of the conference include random walks and boundaries, ergodic-
theoretic methods, and groups of dynamical origins. The conference will feature
three plenary talks. The first will focus on interactions between geometry and
discrete probability with applications to random walks, percolation, and the
Ising modeling of statistical mechanics. The second involves applications of the
geometry of buildings and group actions on cell complexes with climate
scientists, in the implementation of the computer package that is used in
climate simulation and weather prediction. The third talk will cover
applications of combinatorial curvature to analyze the structure of geometric
networks. Probabilistic properties of random walks on groups reveal a close
relationship between geometric and algebraic properties. This relationship has
been made explicit for the class of hyperbolic groups via the equivalence of the
Martin and Gromov boundaries. Exploring this relationship outside the class of
hyperbolic groups has resulted in the construction of new notions of boundaries
that will be discussed at this conference. Ergodic-theoretic notions and
theorems from the classical setting of manifolds have just begun to be
understood for more general spaces and groups. Much work remains in relating
ergodic-theoretic, group-theoretic, and geometric invariants even in the
hyperbolic case. Finally, groups of dynamical origin have recently provided new
examples of infinite groups that settle long-standing open problems in the area.
Those examples as well as future directions for study will be discussed at the
conference as well. The event webpage is at
https://sites.google.com/view/gagta2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.