* 2311141
* A shape-constrained approach for non-parametric variance estimation for Markov Chains
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hyebin Song, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 82,440.00

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods have become one of the most important
methods in modern statistics practice, as they provide straightforward
computational approaches in a wide variety of statistical settings, such as
Bayesian parameter estimation, uncertainty quantification for the estimated
parameters, and model fitting while allowing uncertainties in model
specifications. Despite widespread use, practical and theoretical difficulties
remain for quantifying the uncertainty of estimates from MCMC simulations. This
project will develop novel estimators for quantifying uncertainties in various
MCMC sampling settings. In addition to making technical contributions, the
project will result in the development of practical methods and open-source
software packages that will enable practitioners to quantify uncertainty in MCMC
estimates more accurately and make more efficient use of computational
resources. This project integrates active research topics from multiple areas
including statistical machine learning, MCMC, and nonparametric statistics, and
therefore will provide an opportunity to train graduate students in these
important areas of statistics. In this project, we combine ideas from the fields
of MCMC sampling and shape-constrained estimation to propose novel non-
parametric estimators for uncertainty quantification in MCMC sampling. In doing
so, the investigators aim to advance various aspects of statistical inference
related to variance estimation in Markov chains, and to improve understanding of
shape-constrained estimators. Novel asymptotic variance estimators for Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based on shape-constrained inference will be developed,
which will aid in uncertainty quantification for computer simulations based on
MCMC. Additionally, the investigators will develop new technical tools to
analyze non-parametric least squares estimators for functions with discrete
supports with non-iid inputs. These findings will be used to establish the
theoretical properties, including consistency, convergence rate, and bias-
variance tradeoff characterizations, of the new estimators. New variance
reduction methods will be developed for Monte Carlo methods, and efficient
algorithms for computing shape-constrained estimators will be developed and
implemented in open-source software packages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.