* 2311259
* Marine Geological Samples Laboratory: Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island (support of marine sample curation)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2028
* USD 488,378.00

The Graduate School of Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island hosts the
Marine Geological Samples Laboratory (MGSL). This is an open-access community
facility that preserves and archives seafloor geological samples. The mission of
the MGSL is to make these samples available for research, outreach, and
education. The MGSL has been in operation since 1976, and houses a global
collection of ~2,000 marine sediment cores and ~4,000 rocks collected from the
seafloor. These materials were collected from the seafloor at a significant
expense. The long-term archiving of these materials delivers continuous returns
on the original investment as the existing samples are used for new research.
The MGSL samples are used by researchers and educators globally to expand
knowledge of the Earth. Research topics span plate tectonics, submarine
volcanism, the history of the ocean and climate, and marine mineral resources.
This project will support ongoing activities to take in new materials, preserve
existing collections, and fill requests. It will also enable support for growing
the digital presence and improving the quality and accessibility of the data.
Finally, the project will support continued outreach, education, and training
activities at the MGSL.

This project supports the Marine Geological Samples Laboratory (MGSL) at the
Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island (GSO/URI), which
conducts description, curation, and distribution of marine geological samples
collected by researchers at GSO/URI and elsewhere. This project will provide
support for curatorial and organizational activities of the facility that will
be carried out by one part-time assistant curator and two graduate student
assistants under the direction of the PIs. Specific activities include 1)
describing and storing new NSF-funded core and rock samples following best
practices, 2) fulfilling sample requests from the broader scientific community,
3) maintaining and improving open-access collections metadata (IMLGS and SESAR)
and actively promoting the collections to the scientific community, 4)
conducting outreach and education activities that utilize the facility and its
collections, including providing materials and space for hands-on education for
URI classes, workforce training using facility equipment and samples, and K-12
outreach both within the facility and off-site, and 5) expanding current storage
capacity and transitioning to the expanded facility. The MGSL enables new
scientific advances on the collections by eliminating the expense of new sample
collection and by preserving and making available materials for which valuable
data sets already exist. Additionally, the MGSL facility provides a key venue
for public education and outreach by engaging ~3,000 visitors annually, for on-
site tours with school groups and the general public and for off-site outreach
at local and regional events, providing educational experiences and materials
focusing on Earth science, methods of seafloor observation and sampling, and the
samples themselves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.