* 2311297
* Novel Analytical and Computational Approaches for Fusion and Analysis of Multi-Level and Multi-Scale Networks Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wenxuan Zhong, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2026
* USD 245,404.00

COVID-19 has claimed nearly 6.6 million lives and made many prosperous nations
with well-run healthcare systems weaker. One important lesson learned from this
pandemic is that non-pharmaceutical public health interventions are critical to
suppress the epidemic curve at the beginning of the epidemic breakout. Mild
interventions with minimal impact on normal life that are still capable to
effectively reduce the epidemic spread are highly desirable. Such interventions
as, for example, social distancing and case isolation are very effective
strategies to suppress the pandemic. However, in the U.S., such mitigation
measures rely on individuals' self-reporting mechanisms, which are time-
consuming to collect and error-prone. The current project aims to develop more
accurate and computationally efficient statistical tools to enhance efficiency
of mitigation measures at a broader front. This project offers multiple unique
opportunities for students to participate in cutting-edge and interdisciplinary
research at the interface of statistics and bio-surveillance.

In this project, by analyzing mobility data, the investigators aim to develop a
suite of analytical and computational approaches that enables the early
detection of the epidemic outbreak and accurate identification of infected
individuals. Compared to self-reporting mechanisms, mobility data contains non-
continuous individualized information and can be easily obtained from the public
domain. Both the contact and mobility data can be naturally represented as
networks (graphs), where the individual node is a location or a person (or a
group of people), and its edges (connections) correspond to measures of contact
or mobility between the nodes. The project will develop a series of novel
statistical and machine learning methods for reconstructing pseudo-transmission
time, identifying the infected individuals, detecting potential connections
related to transmission pathways and infectious individuals using large-scale
mobility data, as well as hypothesis testing for the differences between
networks under various interventions. The results of the project will be
applicable to a wide range of bio-surveillance tasks and will contribute to the
wellbeing of our society as a whole.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.