* 2311762
* Elements: Science-i Cyberinfrastructure for Forest Ecosystem Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Rajesh Kalyanam, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2026
* USD 588,985.00

Forests, which have been sustaining food, water, energy security, and human
well-being throughout history, are increasingly threatened by climate change,
biodiversity loss, deforestation, and forest degradation. Central to tackling
these global challenges, collaborative forest research requires massive forest
inventory data collected from around the world, high-performance computing
facilities, as well as international and interdisciplinary expertise to provide
evidence-based forest conservation and restoration practices. However, a lack of
research data, computing capacity, and expert support for framing research
questions poses a major obstacle to collaborative forest research, especially
for research scientists from under-represented communities. To overcome this
obstacle, this project creates a cyberinfrastructure “Science-i” with a
customized data governance framework around which data contributors,
researchers, and communities including indigenous stakeholders are connected in
a secure, findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable platform to co-
produce knowledge for saving the world’s forest ecosystems. Science-i leverages
a growing community of 343 registered research scientists from 57 countries who
will contribute data and expertise to support collaborative forest research,
climate adaptation planning, and community decision-making. Science-i also
enables high-value scientific inquiries with a framework that integrates forest
inventory data from local data contributors with various levels of data-sharing
restrictions, and allows shared use of advanced analysis tools, research codes,
and high-performance computing resources by the under-represented researchers.
The project incorporates Native American experience and expertise into the co-
production of globally consistent and locally relevant knowledge.

The objective of this project is to develop Science-i cyberinfrastructure to
provide essential and timely support for data-driven collaborative forest
research that addresses scientific questions central to saving the world’s
forest ecosystems. Science-i is based on an innovative dynamic data governance
framework that enables multi-source data management with dynamic policy
enforcement. Customized to address the data-sharing challenges in collaborative
forest research, this framework supports and incorporates multiple data-sharing
policies, pre-defined by data contributors of local raw datasets, in a dynamic
system so that these policies are enforced throughout the data lifecycle.
Science-i collects local raw forest inventory datasets from all over the world,
and integrates them into global datasets of different confidentiality levels so
that they can be utilized by a number of ongoing research projects. The team-
wide collaboration is supported by a secure project sandbox that enables project
members to utilize a machine learning toolkit and built-in community
collaboration functions to co-produce globally consistent and locally relevant
knowledge that will advance our understanding of the ecological processes of
global forest systems, and elucidate fundamental principles that identify and
explain terrestrial biodiversity and its interactions with the environment over
space and time. This project engages communities with various knowledge co-
production, education, and outreach activities, and supports twelve research
projects in Science-i led by female PIs, graduate students, postdocs, and/or
other early-career researchers. Science-i also engages diverse audiences and
communities through collaborative outreaching events such as annual global
webinars co-hosted with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO). Several Science-i research projects are aimed at promoting
climate-resilient forest management and conservation among rural and indigenous
communities. Native American stakeholders, coordinated by the National Indian
Carbon Coalition will take a leading role in co-producing policies and practical
guidelines based on the research results. Two virtual and two in-person
workshops will be organized to engage users, stakeholders, and developers,
including 25 participants from under-represented communities who will be
supported to attend in-person workshops.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure (BIO/DBI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.