* 2311178
* Advances in High-dimensional Time Series Modeling and Its Interface with Deep Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yao Zheng, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 55,603.00

In time series, big data typically refer to high-dimensional time series (HDTS).
Instead of analyzing individual series separately, the focus is on building a
single framework to learn from time series of many interdependent variables
simultaneously. Advances in statistical and machine learning methods for HDTS
have attracted enormous attention from economists, financial analysts,
engineers, and scientists in various fields. This project aims to develop new
statistical models, inference tools and theory for HDTS while also exploring
their interface with deep learning. The broader impact of this research on
scientific communities and society will be promoted through interdisciplinary
and collaborative research as well as efforts in course development and
mentoring at different academic levels.

This project has three main objectives. The first objective is to develop new
HDTS models that are more flexible, computationally scalable, and/or
interpretable than existing ones, while filling the critical gap between finite-
and infinite-order vector autoregressive frameworks in high dimensions. The
second objective is to develop easy-to-implement inference tools, along with
rigorous theory and efficient algorithms, that can address empirically important
goals in HDTS analysis, such as Granger causality tests and dynamic factor
inference, by blending state-of-the-art theory and techniques from HDTS modeling
and tensor learning. The third objective is to explore and exploit the intrinsic
connection between HDTS models and recurrent neural networks (RNN) to develop
new algorithms and statistical theory for nonlinear deep learning-based HDTS
models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.